IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALI  
MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
 
S.M.C. NO. 16 OF 2011 ETC  
(Suo moto action regarding law and order 
situation  in Karachi)  
 
In Attendance:   Mr. Salman Aslam Butt, Attorney General  
    Mr. Waqas Qadeer Dar, DAG  
    Mr. Aslam Butt, DAG  
    (On Court Notice)  
 
    Mr. Abdul Fateh Malik, A.G. Sindh  
    Mr. Sher Shah, P.G. Sindh  
    Mr. Adnan Karim, AAG Sindh  
    (For G overnment of Sindh)  
 
    Mr. Shahid Hayat, Addl. I.G. Sindh  
    Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, DIG  
    (For Police)  
 
Mr. Nazar Muhammad Leghari, 
Consultant BOR  
Mr. Zulfiqar  Ali Shah, Member BOR(IT)  
Mr. Yawar Ali, ASC  
Mr. Ahmed Pirzada, ASC  
(For BOR)  
 
 
Date of Hear ing:  24.02.2014  
 
ORDER  
 
REGARDING LAND GRABBING  
  Mr. Zulfiqar Shah, Member (Technical) Board of Revenue, 
Sindh, has submitted a detailed report in CMA No. 834/2013 wherein 
he has inter alia  submitted that with the assistance of satellite 
imagery of GIS Section , illegal occupancy of Government land has 
been identified and verified of an area of 52,1032 acres by various 
institutions and 7672 acres by private persons. Adds that action is 
being taken to remove the illegal encroachments and Anti 
Encroachment Police Force headed at present by Mr. Arif Aziz has 
been entrusted with the task.  SMC 16/2011 etc  2 
2.  Mr. Nazar Muhammad Leghari, Consultant, Board of 
Revenue has also submitted a report and adds that there is a law in 
place in Sindh called the Sindh Public Property (Rem oval of 
Encroachment) Act, 2010 which provides issuance of notices to illegal 
occupants before an action is taken. Adds that notices have been 
issued. However, he was not in a position to give details of the 
number of notices issued and whether those have been challenged in 
courts of competent jurisdiction and a stay order has been issued 
against those notices or not.  
3.  Let Member, Board of Revenue submitted a detailed 
report about the notices issued in terms of the above and the fate of 
those notices. M r. Arif Aziz who heads the Anti Encroachment Police, 
Board of Revenue shall also appear and submit a progress report on 
the next date. To come up on 26.2.2014.  
C.R.P. NO. 2 -K/2014 IN CMA NO. 589 -K/2013  
3.  Let this review petition be fixed before a 5 Membe rs 
Bench on 26.2.2014. All other cases of 5 Members Bench shall also 
be taken up on 26.2.2014.  
 
4.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan submits that in 
terms of paras 3, 4 & 5 of the order dated 29.11.2013, Attorney 
General and Advocate General Sindh had  submitted in writing the 
names of technical, judicial and accounting members for the 
proposed Commission. So far as para 3 is concerned, he submitted 
that the PTA was to submit a report. Mr. Ali Akbar appearing for PTA 
submits that the report shall be sub mitted during the course of the 
day today. Let this matter be taken up on 26.2.2014 because it is a 5 
Members Bench’s order.  
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 84/2013  SMC 16/2011 etc  3 
5.  Petitioner submits that a gruesome incident took place in 
Abbas Town as a result of whi ch about 50 persons lost their lives and 
this Court while taking suo moto notice of this case had expressed 
dismay over the fact that immediately after the incident no police 
officer reached the spot rather the media persons reached the spot 
before any off icer was there. The incident prima facie  reflected not 
only inaction on the part of the concerned police officers but also 
demonstrated their inefficiency. That being so, the Court had directed 
that “ in the circumstances, we direct the Chief Secretary, Gov ernment 
of Sindh, being the head of the Executive that immediately suspend 
SSP, DSP and SHO and issue such notification during the course of the 
day. The also be directed to join interrogation on account of their 
criminal negligence in not providing the as sistance to the inhabitants .” 
Petitioner makes a grievance that though the afore -referred order, Rao 
Anwar Ahmed who was then posted as SSP Maleer where the incident 
took place was suspended in terms of this Court’s order. However, 
without any departmental  inquiry he was not only reinstated but 
given another posting. Let notice be issued to Inspector General of 
Police, Sindh, to personally appear on 26.2.2014 to explain the 
factual position.  
6.  The rest of the case will be taken up on 26.2.2014.  
 
CHIEF JU STICE  
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
Karachi, the  
24th of February, 2014  
Not Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  
 