THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
 (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:  
Justice Munib Akhtar  
Justice Athar Minallah  
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.888 OF 2024  
(Against the judgment dated 01.2.2024  of the 
Lahore High Court , Rawalpindi Bench passed in 
Writ Petition No.3692 of 2022 ) 
 
Muhammad Safee r and others     … Petitioners  
   Versus  
Muhammad Azam and others    … Respondent s 
 
For the petitioners : Mr. Taimoor Aslam Khan, ASC 
 
For respondent  No.1: Ch. HafeezullahYaqoob , ASC  
    assisted by Sarang, AHC  
Date of hearing:  12.06.2024     
ORDER  
 
 Athar Minallah, J. - The petitioners have invoked the 
jurisdiction of this Court conferred under Article 185(3) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (‘ Constitution ’) 
and they have sought leave against  the judgment , dated 01.02.2024 , 
passed by the High Court whereby the p etition  filed under Article 199  
was dismissed solely on the ground of maintainability.  
2. An application was filed by Muhammad Azam (‘ respondent 
No.1’) before the revenue officials for demarcation of the property 
described therein. The Gardawar  Halqa ( ‘respondent No.6 ’), after 
completing the demarcation proceedings , vide report dated 13.10.2021  
had concluded that encroachment s were made by the petitioners. The 
latter preferred an appeal before the Assistant Commissioner 
(‘respondent No.4’ ) and it was dismissed vide order dated 17.1.2022. 
The petitioner s invoked the revisional jurisdiction and their petition 
was dis missed by the Additional Commissioner (Revenue) 
[‘respondent No.3 ’] vide order dated 13.4.2022. The petitioners then 2 
CP 888/24  
 
 
assailed the orders before the Member (Judicial -IV), Board of Revenue , 
Punjab (‘ respondent No.2 ’) and their revision petition was also 
dismissed vide order dated 06.12.2022. The petitioners  ultimately  
invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court , vested under 
Article 199 of the Constitution , but the petition was dismissed on the 
sole ground of maintainability . The learned  High Co urt was of the view 
that the remedy provided under section 8 of the Punjab Board of 
Revenue Act  1957 (‘ Act of 1957 ’) was adequate and efficacious  and, 
therefore, the petition under Article 199 was not competent . 
3. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The 
petitioners had challenged the orders passed by the respective revenue 
officials before the High Court by invoking the jurisdiction vested in it 
under Article 199 of the Constitution . They had raised m ultiple 
grounds in their petition  for challenging the said orders . However, the 
High Court was of the opinion that since  the remedy by way of review , 
provided under Section 8 of the Act of 1957 , was adequate and 
efficacious, therefore, the petition under A rticle 199 of the Constitution 
was not maintainable.  
4. We have noted that the High Court , without adverting to the 
grounds expressly taken by the petitioners in their petition , concluded 
that the remedy by way of review provided under section 8 of the Ac t of 
1957 was adequate and efficacious for the purposes of entertaining the 
petition under Article 199 of the Constitution. It is settled law that the 
rule that the High Court will not ordinarily entertain a petit ion under 
Article 199 when an  adequate reme dy is available  and such remedy 
only regulates the exercise of constitutional jurisdiction and does not        
affect its existence. When the law provides an adequate remedy, 
constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 will ordinarily only be 
exercised in  exceptional circumstances. The exceptional circumstances                 3 
CP 888/24  
 
 
which may justify exercising jurisdiction when  an adequate remedy is 
available are when the order or action assailed before the High Court 
is palpably without jurisdiction, manifestly  malafide , void or corum non 
judice . The tendency to bypass a statutory remedy is ordinarily 
discouraged so that the legislative intent is not defeated. The High 
Court , while exercising its discretion , must take into consideration the 
facts and circumstanc es in each case in order to determine whether 
the remedy provided under the statute is illusory or not . These 
principles have been consistently highlighted by this Court.1 
5. The power of review stems from the statute and , therefore, it is 
to be exercised by a court or an authority having regard to the 
conditions and limitations  expressly prescribed by the legislature . The 
scope of review is distinct from that of an appeal. In case of an appeal 
all question s of fact and law are to be considered but the scope of  a 
review i s limited to the conditions and limitation s expressly provided 
under the relevant s tatue which confers the power. Sub -section (1) of 
section 8 of the Act of 1957 sets out the scope and the gr ounds for 
exercising the power of review. The three grounds expressly stated in 
section 8(1) of the Act of 1957 are: (i) discovery of new and important 
matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not 
within  the knowledge or could not be produced by the person seeking 
review at the time when the decree was passed or the order was made , 
(ii) some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record and lastly , 
                                                             
1Commissioner of Income Tax v. Messrs Eli Lilly Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd. ( 2009 SCMR 1279), 
Collector of Customs, Customs House, Lahore and 3 others v. Messrs S.M. Ahmad and 
Company (Pvt.) Limited, Islamabad  (1999 SCMR 138), Khalid Mehmood v. Collector of 
Customs, Customs House, Lahore  1999 SCMR 1881), Ch. Muhammad Ismail v. 
FazalZada, Civil Judge, Lahore and 20 others (PLD 1996 SC 246 ), Income -Tax Officer 
and another v. M/s. Chappal Builders   (1993 SCMR  1108), Commissioner of Income 
Tax, companies -II and another v. HamdardDawakhana (Waqf), Karachi  (PLD 1992 SC 
847), AbdurRehman v. Haji Mir Ahmad Khan and another  (PLD 1983 SC 21), The 
Murree Brewery Co. Ltd. v. Pakistan through the Secretary t o Government of Pakistan, 
Works Division and 2 others  (PLD 1972 SC 279), Col. Nawabzada Muhammad Amir 
Khan v. The Controller of Estate Duty and others  (PLD 1961 SC 119), Tariq Transport 
Company, Lahore v. The Sargodha -Bhera Bus Service, Sargodha and others  (PLD 1958 
SC 437). 4 
CP 888/24  
 
 
‘for any other sufficient reason ’. The review jurisdiction conferred 
under sect ion 8 of the Act of 1957 is, therefore , confined and limited to 
the said three grounds. This Court has held in the case of Muhammad 
Din2 that the expression ‘for any other sufficient reason ’ does not 
extend to every cause which would make the remedy by way of review 
available but such cause must be relatable to the circumstances as 
discovery of new and important matter or some mistake or error 
apparent on the face of the record. The expression , therefore , is to be 
read ejusdem generis with the preceding  expressions or grounds . Any 
other interpretation would change the nature of  the review contrary to 
the legislative intent , because t he legislature had indeed not intended 
to provide the remedy of an appeal. The scope of the review jurisd iction  
under section 8 of the Act of 1957 is , therefore , restricted  to the 
grounds expressly prescribed by the legislature.  
6. We have gone through the impugned judgment and it is obvious 
from its plain reading that the High Court , without adverting to the 
grounds taken by the petitioners , had dismissed the petition solely on 
the ground that the remedy of review under section 8 of the Act of 
1957 was adequate. This conclusion , without examining the grounds 
taken by the petitioners , was not sustainable. T he High Court could 
only have formed an opinion whether the remedy under section 8 of 
the Act of 1957 was adequate and efficacious in the light of t he facts 
and circumstances of the matter before it , particularly having regard 
to the grounds taken by the petitioners in their petition. Any ground 
taken and not covered within the scope of the jurisdiction of review 
provided under section 8 of the Act of 1957 would have rendered the 
remedy illusory and definitely not adequate for the purp oses of 
exercising jurisdiction under Article 199 of the Constitution.  This 
                                                             
2Muhammad Din and others v. Muhammad Amin and others (PLD 1994 SC 288)  
Riaz Hussain and others v. Board of Revenue and others (1991 SCMR 2307)  5 
CP 888/24  
 
 
Court , in the case of Syed Asad  Hussain3 has observed that the 
expression adequate remedy represents an efficacious, reachable, 
accessible, advantageous and expeditious remedy. The  High Court , 
therefore, misdirected itself by excluding from consideration the 
grounds taken by the petitioners so as to determine whether the 
review jurisdiction was adequate in the context of exercising 
jurisdiction vested in it under Article 199 of the Constitution. 
Moreover, the expansive interpretation given to the expression 'for any 
other sufficient reason' amounted to changing the scope of the review 
jurisdiction not intended by the legislature. If the High Court , after 
examining the grounds taken by the petitioners and the facts and 
circu mstances of the case in hand  was satisfied that they were covered 
within the scope of the remedy expressly provide d under section 8 of 
the Act of 1957 then it would have been justified in deciding the 
question of maintainability of the petition under Article 199 of the 
Constitution.  We are afraid  that this was not what the High Court did 
in the case before us.   
7. For the foregoing reasons, we convert this petition into an appeal 
and the same is allowed by setting aside the impugned judgment . 
Consequently , we remand the matter to the High Court for deciding 
the question of maintainability in the light of the principles highlighted 
above.  
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad the  
12th June 2024 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
Aamir  Sheikh /Rameen Moin  
                                                             
3Syed Asad Hussain and others v. Syed Ghulam Khatib (2023 SCMR 325)  
 