IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
MR. JUSTICE YAHYA AFRIDI  
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO.71-P & 864 /2014  
(Against the judgment dated 22.04.2014 
passed by Peshawar High Court, Mingora 
Bench, Dar ul Qaza, Swat i n CR No.737 -
M/2012)  
 
Principal Public School Sangota (in CA No.864/14)  
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhawa through Chief 
Secretary and others (in CA No.71 -P/14) 
 
…Appellants  
     Versus  
Sarbiland and others  
      …Respondent s 
 
For the appellants in CA No.71 -
P/2014:  Mr. Muhammad Shumail Butt, 
AG Khyber Pakhtunkhawa  
Mr. Muhammad Suhail, Addl: 
AG 
  
For the appellant in CA No.  
864/2014:  Representative of the Principal 
of the Public School, Sangota  
  
For the contesting respondents 
in both appeals:  Mr. Muhamma d Arshad 
Yousafzai, ASC  
  
Date of hearing:  26.11.2021  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, J . The respondent No s. 1 to 4 (‘the plaintiffs ’ or 
‘the contesting respondents ’) filed a representative suit on 2 
November 2002 alleging that land measuring 7 3 kanal s and 11 
marlas  in Khasra  No. 557 (‘the land ’) was shamilat , that is village 
common land , but its ownership was wrongly shown in the 
settlement record s as that of the Provincial Government , and 
possession was shown to be with and was with  the Sangota  Public 
Schoo l, situated in Mouza Sangota , Tehsil Babuzai , District Swat  
(‘the School ’). The School is being run by the Presentation Sisters 
since 1965. T he School was also arrayed by the plaintiffs as a 
defendant  in the suit . The suit was decreed by the learned Civil CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  2
Judge, Swat. Both the School and the  Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkh wa (‘the Government ’), which was also arrayed as a 
defendant , filed separate appeals and both these appeals were 
allowed by the learned Additional District Judge, Swat . Thereafter , 
the cont esting respondents filed a civil revision before the High 
Court , which was allowed vide impugned judgment dated 22 April 
2014.  
 
2. The School and the Government have  filed separate appeals  
assailing the judgment of the High Court . Civil Appeal No.  71-
P/201 4 has been filed by the Government , but belatedly with a 
delay of 19 days.  However, Civil Appeal No.  864/2014 filed by the 
School is filed within the prescribed period of 30 days. An 
application ( CMA No.660 -P/2014 ) has been filed by the 
Government to condo ne the delay in filing its appeal on the ground 
that the Government was under the mistaken impression that a 
civil petition for leave to appeal  (which may be filed within 60 days ) 
was required to be filed . The Government and its different 
department s are a rrayed as respondent Nos.  5 to 8 in the appeal 
filed by th e School and they support the School’s appeal . 
 
3. We have heard the representative of the School , the learned 
Advocate -General and the learned Mr. Muhammad Suhail , learned 
Additional Advocate -Gener al, of Khyber Pakhuntkhwa.  They 
submit that the preparation of the first settlement of the area 
commenced in the year 1981 and was completed by the year 1986 
and, consequently, the revenue record was prepared. T he first  
entry in the property ownership reco rd, Register  of Haqdaran -e-
Zamin  or Jamabandi , of the area is of the year 1985 -86 (Exhibit P-
3/1) and it showed the Provincial Government to be the owner of 
the land and that the land was under the possession/ occupation  
of the School. The learned Advocate -General submits that the land 
was given in the year 1964 to the School by the former ruler of 
Swat , the Wali of Swat  State . By referring to MLR No.  1181 (‘MLR 
118’) he states that it stipulates that from 1 September 1972 all 
                                                
1 PLD 1972 Central Statutes pages 441 to 443, Martial Law Regulation No. 118, 
dated 1 April 1972.  CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  3
privately -managed colleges and schools shall vest in the Provincial 
Government and that its paragraph 14 ousts the jurisdiction of the 
courts , therefore, the said suit was not maintainable . 
 
4. Reliance is also placed by the learned Advocate -General  on 
MLR No.  1222 - The Devolution and Distribution of Property (Dir 
and Swat) Regulation  - (‘MLR 122 ’) and MLR No.  1233 - The 
Settlement of Immovable Property Disputes (Dir and Swat) 
Regulation  - (‘MLR 123 ’). He states that MLR  122 was in respect of 
the lands which were owned by the Wali of Sw at wherein the 
people had no right or interest and MLR  123 was in respect of all 
other land s in the former Swat State wherein people had a right 
and/or interest , and that in respect of the latter  a Federal Land 
Commission was constituted for the purpose of  determining the 
claims of different parties  and to attend to their disputes . 
Subsequently, MLR 122 was amended and paragraph 6 -A was 
incorporated therein which expanded the jurisdiction of the 
Federal Land Commission and empowered it to also consider 
claims/cases covered by MLR 122. The learned Advocate -General 
submits that the suit was not maintainable because both MLR 122 
and MLR 123 specifically oust ed the jurisdiction of the courts. We 
enquired from the learned Muhammad Arshad Yousafzai, who 
represents  the contesting respondents , whether the  land is 
governed by either of these MLRs and he agree s with the learned 
Advocate -General and says that the land come s within the purview 
of MLR 122. If the contesting respondents conced e that the land 
was personally  owned by the former ruler of Swat State then the 
contesting respondents and those they represent ed had no interest  
in the land . 
 
5. However, objection with regard to the ouster clauses 
contained in MLR 118, MLR 122 and/or MLR 123 was not taken 
before the Trial Court and no issue/s was framed with regard 
thereto . Therefore,  it will not be appropriate to consider the same 
at this juncture.  
                                                
2 Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, 12 April 1972.  
3 Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, 12 April 1972.  CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  4
 
6. The suit was filed on 2 November 2002 in respect of the land 
which has been in the possession of the School since the year 1964  
and was hopelessly time -barred , submit s the School’s 
representative and the learned Advocate -General. According to 
them, the suit should have been filed within six years of 1964, that 
is, latest by the year 1970, but it was filed after thirty -eight years . 
According to them, the applicable provision is Article 120 of the 
First Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1908 (‘ the Act ’) which 
prescribes a limitation period of six years from the time the right to 
sue accrues . They further submit that if it is  contended , that 
Article 142 of the First Schedule to the Act is applicable , which 
provides for twelve years  for filing of a suit , then too the suit is 
time-barred as it was filed after sixteen years , but add that  Article 
142 is not applicable because , admittedly , neither the contesting 
respondents nor any of those they represent ed were in possession 
of the land , which is a prerequisite to attract Article 142 . 
Alternatively, but without conceding, they submit, that if the date 
giving rise to the cause of ac tion is taken from the date of the first 
settlement and recording of ownership rights to the land, that 
happened in the year 1985 -86 and from this date too the suit was 
time-barred.  
 
7. The learned counsel for the contesting respondents relies  
upon the jud gments of the learned Civil Judge and of the learned 
Judge of the High Court and states that both these judgments are 
well reasoned and sustainable . With regard to the period of 
limitation the learned counsel states that the Jamabandi  is 
periodically updat ed and the preparation of every fresh Jamabandi  
gives rise to a fresh cause of action . However, the learned counsel 
did not refer to any Jamabandi  which had been prepared afresh or 
updated . He also did not dilate on whether this principle is 
applicable whe n no change is made in the updated Jamabandi  
with regard to the initial entry.  
 
8. We have heard the learned counsel and the School’s 
representative and with their assistance examined the documents CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  5
on record. Civil Appeal No.  71-P/2014 is belatedly filed with a 
delay of 19 days because, as stated by the Government, it was  
under a misapprehension that a petition , and not an appeal , had 
to be filed to challenge the impugned judgment.  The High Court 
had set aside the judgment of the Appellate Court, which clearly 
meant that an appeal lay4 which had to be filed within thirty days,5 
but this was not done . The Government is supposed to know the 
law of the country , especially something as basic as the prescribed 
time period within which an appeal needs to be filed . The School , 
run by the Presentation Sisters , knew the law and were  vigilant . 
They filed an appeal within time to protect their interest  and the 
interest  of the children studying in the School . The reason given to 
condone the delay does not behoove the Go vernment and the 
highest law office of the Province. However, s ince both appeals 
arise from the same impugned judgment then, even if the appeal 
filed by the Government is dismissed because it was belatedly filed, 
the appeal filed by the School is maintaina ble and needs 
consideration .  
 
9. The f ailure to file an appeal within the prescribed period of 
thirty days reflects the Government ’s ineptitude in not protecting 
public property but also its disdain towards  the beneficiaries of the 
School,  the local child ren who stud y in the School . The School is 
situated in the troubled Swat region  which has suffered in equities 
at the hands of those  who oppose the education of girls , have 
resorted to violence , attacked schools, forced schools to shut  down  
and attacked sch ool-going children. The School is the only  all-girls 
school in Swat and it is educating  over a thousand girls . The 
School was bombed by terrorists and remained closed for about 
five years due to terrorist activity  in Swat.  The Government’s gross 
incompeten ce and neglect in filing a timely appeal may have  
achieve d the very same result which the rampaging terrorists had 
achieved, which is the  forced closure of the School. 
 
                                                
4 Article 185(2)(d) or (e) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  
5 Supreme Court Rules, 1980, Order XI Rule 2.  CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  6
10. The first command from Almighty Allah to Prophet 
Muhammad  (peace and blessings be u pon him), and through him 
to humanity, was Iqra – Read .6 Iqra is a command , it is expressed 
in the  command  from of the Arabic verb .7 This first command 
proceeds to then mention the pen8 (qalam ) and education  or 
learning9 (ilm). Of the myriad of things that  the Most Benevolent 
Creator could have conveyed in the first revelation  in the Holy 
Qur’an He , in his Infinite Wisdom and Mercy, considered reading, 
writing and education to be of the primary importance. Prophet 
Muhammad (peace and blessing be upon him) a lso placed great 
emphasis o n education; he enabled  the non -Muslim prisoners 
taken after the Battle of Badr ,10 to secure their freedom if they 
taught the illiterate amongst the Muslims to read and write. This 
was probably the first ever use of a community se rvice order  (used 
in some countries),  which is the successor of a probation order .11 
Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon him) had also 
said to the men and women of the Islamic community to go as far 
as China , a non -Muslim  country , to seek knowledg e.12 Islam’s 
emphasis on education and learning distinguished it from the 
prevailing civilizations where education and learning was restricted 
either to a particular class or to a section of society. Islam was 
inclusive and non -discriminatory  - ‘The most ho noured of you in the 
sight of Allah is the one who is the most righteous ’.13 Race, colour, 
status , wealth and gender were submerged under the Islamic 
equality principle . Ironically , education has come under attack in 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan despite  the Constitution 
guaranteeing equality14 of sexes  and which compel s the State to 
                                                
6 Holy Quran, surah  Al-‘Alaq (96) verse 1.  
7 ﻓﻌﻞ  أﻣﺮ  – fael amer . 
8 Holy Qur’an, surah  Al-‘Alaq (96) verse 4.  
9 Above, verse 5.  
10 13 March 624 AD or 17 Ramadhan 2 AH.  
11 Discussed and used by the Balochistan High Court in the case of Ghulam 
Dastagir v The State , PLD 2014 Baluchistan 100.  
12 This saying  is cited in Shams al -Din Muhammad al -Sakhawi, in his al-
Maqasid al -hasana fi bayan kathir min, al -ahadith al -mushtahara ‘ala ‘l -alsina  
(Cairo , 1956), by Al -Bayhaqi in his Shuab al -Iman , vol. 2 p. 253 and by Ibn 
Abdul Barr in his Jamia Bayan al -Ilm, vol. 7 , p. 8.   
13 Al-Qur’an, surah  Al-Hujurat (49) verse 13.  
14 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 25.  CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  7
provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of 
five to sixteen .15 
 
11. There were over a thousand attacks on educational 
institutions in Pakistan between 1 970-2019, recorded by the 
Global Terrorism Database ;16 the highest number of attacks on 
educational institutions in the world. Unfortunately, neither the 
National Counter Terrorism Authority (‘ NACTA ’), the Ministry of 
Interior nor the Ministry of Defence of  the Government or any other 
official website maintain s such a database . A State protects and 
supports its citizens. It is a testimony to the courage and 
determination of the teachers and children who attend schools in 
such dire circumstances. However, t he horrendous number  of 
terrorist attacks and the death and destruction left in their wake  
requires that the State ensure s the guaranteed fundamental right 
to life17 and education.18 What lesson is really being taught to the 
girls studying in Public School San gota and to the hundreds of 
millions of others who are, or should be, in school? Is it t hat their 
constitutionally guaranteed fundamental right to life and education 
is, after all , meaningless.  
 
12. The Trial Court had framed a specific issue with regard t o 
limitation, which was issue No.  7 - Whether suit of the plaintiffs is 
barred by limitation ? The learned Civil Judge had decided th is 
issue in favour of the plaintiffs by simply stating that, ‘ the cause of 
action for instituting the instant suit accrued t o them [plaintiffs]  at 
the time when defendants started interference in the suit property 
and disturbing their  [plaintiff’s] possession ’. However, the plaint did 
not provide any particulars in this regard nor any date when the 
cause of action  accrued.  It has come on record that the School had 
possession of the land since 1964.  Therefore, this finding is not 
sustainable. The learned Judge of the High Court did not attend to 
                                                
15 Above, Article 25A.  
16 Maintained at the University of Maryland, 
https://www.start.umd.edu/gtd/search/Results.aspx?page=1&casualties_type=
b&casualties_max=&dtp2=all&country=153&target=8&count=100&charttype=lin
e&chart=overtime&ob=GTDID&od=desc&expanded=yes#results -table.  
17 Above , Article 9.  
18 Above, Article 25A.  CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  8
Issue No. 7. It is clear that the suit  was belatedly filed . The plaint 
did not provid e a reason for or justify its belated filing, an 
indispensable deficiency. The defendants had object ed to the 
belated filing and had stated that the suit was barred by limitation , 
but (as noted above) the learned Civil Judge cursorily and by 
disregarding t he law , decided this issue in favour of the plaintiffs . 
The learned counsel for the contesting respondents attempted to 
save the suit by saying that every Jamabandi  gives rise to a fresh 
cause of action. It is true that in case of mere  correction of an 
entry in the revenue record, every new adverse entry in the revenue 
record of rights ( Jamabandi ) gives rise to a fresh cause of action to 
the person aggrieved of such an entry if that person is in 
possession of the land  regarding which the entry is made .19 But, 
this was not only a matter of correction of an adverse entry having 
been made in the settlement/revenue record with regard to the 
ownership of the land  but also  a case in which possession had 
been assumed  or, as alleged by the plaintiffs they were 
dispos sessed . The suit was filed thirty -eight years after possession 
of the land was taken over by the School  and sixteen years after 
the entry was made in the Jamabandi . The suit was clearly time -
barred and , leaving aside the other contentions which have been 
raised , it would fail on this ground alone. Therefore, we allow the 
School’s appeal, Civil Appeal No. 864/2014, and set aside the 
impugned judgment of the High Court and the judgment of the 
learned Civil Judge, and dismiss the suit, but since two concurrent  
judgments in favour of the contesting respondents have been set 
aside there shall be no order as to cost.  And, the Government’s 
appeal, Civil Appeal No. 71 -P/2014, is disposed of. It would be 
appropriate to translate this judgement into Urdu20 for its wide r 
dissemination as it contains matters of public importance, 
including the importance of education.  
     
Judge  
 
 
                                                
19 Khan Muhammad v Khatoon Bibi , 2017 SCMR 1476.  
20 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 251.  CA No.71 -P/2014 & No.864/2014  9
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
26.11.2021  
Approved for reporting .  
Rashid  