 
JUDGMENT    
 MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL, J. --- I hav e had the 
privilege to go through the main judgment authored by the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice. I agree with the same but I will also give a 
concurring judgment of my own comprising reasons in support of 
our unanimous short order dated 07.04. 2022 ( PLD 2022 SC 290), 
accordingly.  
2.  A resolution for a vote of no -confidence  (“the resolution ”) 
against Mr. Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi, the then Prime Minister of 
Pakistan (“ the PM ”) was submitted on 8th March, 2022 by a large 
number of the Members of the National Assembly  (“MNAs ”), well 
beyond the prescribed twenty per cent um of the total membership of 
the National Assembly as  required under Article 95(1) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , 1973  (“the 
Constitution ”). On 20.03.2022 a Session of the National Assembly 
was summoned by the Speaker for 25.03.2022. On 25.03.2022 the 
session was adjourned after Fateha  for a deceased MNA. On 
28.03.2022 leave to move the resolution for vote of no confidence was 
granted by the H ouse and the session  was again adjourned to 
31.03.2022 for discussion on the resolution. After some discussion, 
the session was adjourned from 31.03.2022 to 03.04.2022 for voting 
on the resolution for vote of no confidence. On 03.04.2022, the 
session was p resided over by the Deputy Speaker (Qasim Khan Suri ) 
without any explanation why the Speaker did not preside over. On 
03.04.2022, Mr. Fawad Ahmed Chaudhary, Minister for Law & 
Justice rising on a point of order , submitted before the House while 
referring to Article 5 of the Constitution that in the normal 
circumstances under Article 95 it is the right of the members of 
House to move a resolution for vote of no confidence against the PM; 
however, the present resolution against the PM was app arently linked 
with and has a clear nexus with the efforts of a Foreign State to bring 
about change of government and as such cannot be entertained or 
allowed to be voted upon in this august House, and must be rejected. 
Whereupon the Deputy Speaker,  withou t waiting even for a single 
moment,  read in the House his pre -drafted ruling ( impugned ruling ”) 
dated 03.04.2022, rejecting  the resolution for vote of no confidence 
against the PM  and consequently did not allow voting on the same . 
The Speaker ( Asad Qaisar ) also concurred  with the said ruling by SMC No.1 of 2022   2 
 
signing the same. The impugned ruling is reproduced herein below 
for ready reference:   
“RULING OF THE SPEAKER ON NO -CONFIDENCE 
RESOLUTION  
1.  On today the 3' April 2022, Mr. Fawad Ahmed 
Chaudary , Minister for Law and Justice rising on a point of 
order drew attention of the Chair that in the normal 
circumstances under Article 95 of the Constitution it is right of 
the members to move a resolution for vote of no -confidence 
against the Prime Minister . He further stated that Article 5 of 
the Constitution provides that it is the basic duty of the every 
citizen to show the loyalty to the State. He also pointed out that 
Pakistani diplomat met with the officials of the foreign state and 
also informed about  the intention of that State against the Prime 
Minister Imran Khan.  
2.  A notice for requisitioning the session of National 
Assembly was filed by members of the opposition in terms of 
Article 54(3) of the Constitution of Pakistan, with the Secretariat 
of the National Assembly on 8 -3-2022. On the same date i.e., 8 -
3-2022 another notice under Rule 37 of the National Assembly 
Rules, for the notice of resolution of no confidence against Mr. 
Imran Khan, as Prime Minister was filed with the Secretariat of 
the Na tional Assembly.  
3. The session of the National Assembly was summoned to be 
held on 25 -3-2022. After offering fateha the session was 
adjourned for 28 -3-2022. On that date leave for moving 
resolution for a vote of no confidence in terms of Article 95 of the  
Constitution was granted and the session was adjourned for 
31-3-2022. The session was then adjourned for 3 -4-2022.  
4.  In the meanwhile Prime Minister Iman Khan addressed a 
public rally on 27 -3-2022 at Parade ground, Islamabad. Mr. 
Shah Mahmood Qureshi, M inister for Foreign Affairs and Prime 
Minister Imran Khan briefly disclosed about a foreign country's 
interference in the internal affairs and parliamentary process in 
Pakistan. The details as later emerged were that on 7 -3-2022 
Pakistan's Ambassador deput ed to an important foreign capital 
sent official correspondence i.e. cypher narrating details of a 
meeting and conversation with high official(s) of that foreign 
state. The gist of the contents of the cypher indicated that the 
foreign state was interfering  in the internal affairs of Pakistan 
and Prime Minister lmran Khan was its primary target. The 
circumstance shows that there was nexus between no 
confidence motion against Prime Minister and the foreign 
intervention and the activities of that State's repre sentatives 
deputed to Pakistan. The Federal cabinet as well as the 
National Security Committee (NSC) headed by Prime Minister, 
some members of the Federal Cabinet, The Chairman, Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Committee, and the three services Chiefs, 
meeting on 31 3- 2022 was briefed about the unwarranted 
foreign, interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan. It is a 
matter of record that after the meetings of the Federal Cabinet 
and the National Security Committee, Pakistan formally 
conveyed a demarche to the f oreign state concerned.  
5. Given the above facts and circumstances a briefing for 
the Parliamentary Committee on the National Security was 
arranged for briefing on the issue on 31 -3-2022. Unfortunately 
the concerned members of the opposition choose to boyc ott or 
ignore the briefing. However, as Speaker and custodian of the SMC No.1 of 2022   3 
 
National Assembly, I asked the concerned functionaries of the 
Government to provide me the relevant facts and information 
subject to the applicable laws. This was accordingly done. The 
facts reveled to me were absolutely shocking and completely 
unacceptable for any independent people with self respect and 
dignity. I was fully convinced that there was blatant foreign 
interference in the internal affairs of• Pakistan and the duly 
elected Pri me Minister of Pakistan was the prime target. When 
was even more shocking was the apparently close nexus and 
proximity between blatant foreign interference and the motion of 
no confidence against the Prime Minister also became evident.  
6. For a number of r easons and save for what I have 
observed hereinabove, I would presently refrain from giving 
more and specific details about the foreign intervention and its 
links to the no -confidence motion moved against the Prime 
Minister Imran Khan. If and when so requi red by this august 
House and subject to applicable laws, details and specifics of 
foreign interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan and its 
parliamentary process including no confidence motion can be 
provided and discussed in greater detail in close d door in 
camera session.  
7.  Suffice it to say that to me it is now clear that there has 
been blatant foreign interference in the internal affairs of 
Pakistan and there exists a close nexus between such foreign 
interference and the campaign to oust and re move the 
democratically elected government headed by Prime Minister 
Imran Khan through different means including the motion for 
no-confidence initiated on 8 -3-2022. No self respecting 
independent, democratic country and people with national pride 
and digni ty could or should ever let such things to happen nor 
allow its democratic institutions including parliamentary 
processes to be so grossly abused by foreigners or foreign 
states to bring a change of any Government or Prime Minister 
as appears to be the cas e presently.  
8. The membership of this august House is a matter of 
great honour and trust for every member. Any action though 
purported to be under the Constitution and the Rules but for 
extraneous purposes and goals which could compromise the 
sovereignty and independence of the country could not be 
sustained under any circumstances. Any such attempt must be 
thwarted and quashed.  
9. The motion of no confidence against the Prime Minister is 
apparently linked with and has clear nexus with the efforts of 
the f oreign State to bring about change of Government cannot 
be entertained or allowed to be voted upon in this august House 
and must be rejected empathetically as this could ever be the 
intent of the Constitution. The fundamental existential issue 
should be cl early settled first leaving no doubt or taint of 
external interference or collusion of Pakistani citizens including 
few member of the National Assembly. If any, in this unholy 
venture. This would require a thorough investigation by 
appropriate forum or aut hority under the law. However, without 
such thorough probe, if such motion no -confidence is 
entertained in the grab of parliamentary process now or 
allowed to succeed and a foreign country is able to achieve its 
goal to oust a democratically elected Govern ment and/or Prime 
Minister in this manner, we shall cease to be an independent 
and sovereign country governed by the Constitution and the 
laws.  
10. I, as the Deputy Speaker and custodian of the House 
and bound by the oath taken by me under the Constitution  of SMC No.1 of 2022   4 
 
Pakistan to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution 
cannot remain indifferent or act as unconcerned spectator let 
alone be instrumental in this unconstitutional act of change of 
Government and /or Prime Minister orchestrated by a foreign 
state. T he present motion of no confidence being the very 
essence of the internal proceedings 
of the House cannot be entertained 
or allowed by me to proceed in 
these circumstances and has to be 
disallowed and accordingly rejected.  
Note:  
These are the detailed reas ons of my order dated 3rd April 
2022 in the sitting of the National Assembly  
 
 
(Qasim Khan Sun)  
Deputy Speaker  
National Assembly of Pakistan  
 
I concur with the above ruling.  
 
 
(Asad Qaisr)  
Speaker  
3rd April 2022  National Assembly of Pakistan
 
  Within minutes thereafter, the PM on a live TV channel 
announced that he had advised the President of Pakistan (“ the 
President ”) to dissolve the National Assembly and the same within 
no time was followed by the dissolution of National Assembly by the 
President. A notification was also issued by the Cabinet Division 
stating that the PM has ceased to hold the office. The Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of Pakistan took SUO MOTU notice of the matter and the 
same was fixed before this Five -Members bench. Notices were issued 
to all the concerned.  
3.  The Attorney -General for Pakistan and the learned 
counsel for th e Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf, PTI, b oth argued that under 
Article 69 of the Constitution this Court cannot inquire into any 
proceedings of Parliament. Further argued that the resolution of vote  
of no confidence was motivated by a Foreign State interested  in the 
regime change in Pakistan; the PM, Speaker, Deputy Speaker and the 
Federal Minister while relying upon a letter / communication 
allegedly received from a Foreign state correctly exercised  their 
respective constitutional powers. Hence, this Cou rt has no 
SMC No.1 of 2022   5 
 
jurisdiction to call  in question any such constitutional action of the 
president, the PM, Speaker, Deputy Speaker  
4.  The learned Counsel for the other political parties made 
almost similar submission by arguing that the opposition parties 
individually started announcing in January 2022 that the y were 
planning to move a vote of  no confidence against the PM; the 
opposition parties jointly endorsed the move in late February 2022; 
the alleged letter / communication was allegedly received by the PM 
on 07.03.2022 and after 19 days on 27.03.2022 the PM waved the 
letter during a mass meeting in Islamabad by presenting it a Foreign 
conspiracy / threat against him. Further, the opposition parties 
demanded that said letter / communication be presented before the 
Parliament but the same was not presented. The PM cannot continue 
in office as he does not hold majority of MNAs.  
5.  We have heard  this matter for a couple of days  including 
the learned  Attorn ey-General and the learned counsel  for the 
Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf, PTI and other political parties.  
6.  No doubt, the validity of the proceedings in the National 
Assembly and its sovereignty is protected by the Constitution. The 
clause (1) of Article 69 provides that the validity of any proceedings in 
the Parliament shall not be called in question on the ground of any 
irregularity of procedure whereas clause (2) of Article 69 provides that 
no officer or Member of the Parliament in whom powers are vested by 
or under the Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of 
business, or for maintaining order in the Parliament shall be subject 
to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of any such exercise of 
power by him . The issue  as to what are, and what are not, the 
internal proceedings of the Parliament, which are beyond the pale of 
jurisdiction of the Courts has been dilate d upon by this Courts in the 
past on many occasions.  It would not be out of place to observe that 
Article 69 of the Constitution however does not place a complete bar  
on the jurisdiction of this Court . The actions by the Speaker , if based 
in violation of existing rules or the discretion so exercised by him 
affecting the smooth running of the functions of the H ouse is, prima 
facie, in violation of judicious norms, cannot be given a protecting 
blanket of Article 69 of the Constitution. Reference here can be made 
to the case of Muhammad Azhar Siddiqui v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2012 SC 774 ). SMC No.1 of 2022   6 
 
7.  It is a matter of record that the resolution against the PM 
was submitted on 8th March, 2022 by a large number of the MNAs 
well beyond the prescribed twenty per centum of the total 
membership of the National Assembly as required under Article 95(1).  
Since,  the resolution was declared admissible by the Speaker, then 
the Speaker under Article 95(2) was under constitutional 
duty/ responsibility to hold votin g thereon within the time frame  
prescribed therein that, “ a resolution shall not be voted upon before 
the expiration of three days, or later than seven days, from the day on 
which such resolution is moved in the National Assembly ”. Meaning 
thereby such a resolution should have been voted upon between 
three and seven days but the Speaker for no reason delayed the 
voting thereon and finally rejected the resolution on the question of 
inadmissibility which is alien to the Constitution . Once the leave to 
move the resolution is granted then that resolution has to be voted 
upon. The deputy Speaker in rejecting  the resolution exercised a 
jurisdiction not so vested in him and his such unilateral act was 
unconstitutional and without lawful authority. Once the matter was 
fixed for voting, then the Speaker had no power and lawful authority 
to avoid voting or reject the resolution without voting.  This alone is 
an act which is ultra vires the Constitution calling for interference by 
this Court.  
8.  The Speaker in a Parliamentary form of Government like 
us holds an office of highest distinction and has the sole 
respon sibility cast on him of maintaining the prestige and the dignity 
of the House and its members. The Speaker enjoys a very high status 
and position of great respect and esteem in the parliamentary 
traditions. He, being the very embodiment of propriety and 
impartiality, has been assigned the function to regulate the 
procedure or the conduct of business , or for maintaining order in the 
Parliament.  The Speaker enjoys a pivotal position which is and has 
been held by people of outstanding ability and impartiality. It may be 
noted that an elected member of the Assembly  when elected as a 
Speaker, he ought to be neutral in the discharge of his duty and 
function and ought to be above politics.  (See Mirza Tahir Beg v. Syed 
Kausar Ali Shah and Others ( PLD 1976 SC 504 )). While deciding any 
matter in his competence , the Speaker shall not be influenced by 
anyone,  including the party to which he is affiliated.  While portraying 
the entire episode no tionally in our minds would reflect that the SMC No.1 of 2022   7 
 
conduct of the Deputy Speaker throughout remained very partisan , 
manuring to undo the resolution.  The conduct so reflected by the 
Deputy Speaker is unbecoming of such a prestigious position of the 
House of the legislators. It is again for the Parliamentarians to decide 
how to stop such a biased and partial act in future by a person 
holding the prestig ious position like Speaker/Deputy Speaker.  
9.  Moreover, t he Preamble/Objectives Resolution of the 
Constitution, which is a "substantive part of the Constitution and 
shall have effect accordingly" (Article 2A of the Constitution), 
mandates that the people  of Pakistan "through the chosen 
representatives of the people" exercise their powers, and the most 
important power is the power to vote, but the Deputy Speaker in 
violation of the Constitution denied them the right to vote. The 
Speaker has utterly failed to discharge its solemn duty. The Speaker 
appears to have forgotten or ignored deliberately for certain reasons 
best known to him that he is required to discharge the duty enjoined 
upon him under the Constitution . The action of t he Speaker rejecting 
the resolution vide impugned ruling would neither fall within the 
meaning of term "any proceedings in the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament)" used in Article 69, nor such action could be described 
as an exercise of power by the Speaker of the House regulating the 
procedure or the conduct of business in the Assembly and, therefore, 
in my opinion, no question of immunity for such an action can arise 
under Article 69 of the Constitution.  The impugned ruling as such 
was a nullity in the eye of la w, worthy of no credence.  
10.  Adverting to the oth er aspect of the matter that o n 
03.04.2022, the session was presided over by the Deputy Speaker 
without any explanation why the Speaker did not preside over. This 
act of both the Speaker as well as the Deputy Speaker is against the 
provisions of Article 53(3), which contemplates that, “ when the office 
of Speaker is vacant,  or the Speaker is absent  or is unable to 
perform his functions due to any cause , the Deputy Speaker shall 
act as Speaker, and if, at that time, the Deputy Speaker is also absent 
or is unable to act as Speaker due to any cause, such member as may 
be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly shall preside 
at the meeting of the Assembly ”. The record shows that the Deputy 
Speaker  read out the impugned ruling in the name of the Speaker as 
the same was also signed by the Speaker on the same day. Meaning 
thereby, on the day when the Deputy Speaker preside d over the SMC No.1 of 2022   8 
 
session of the House and read out the impugned ruling, the office of 
the Speaker was neither “vacant” nor was the Speaker “absent” or 
“unable to perform his functions”. Even no explanation in this regard 
was place d on record subsequently by the Speaker or Deputy 
Speaker. For the foregoing reason, I would say without any hesitation 
that the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker had shown sheer disregard 
for the mandatory provision s of the Constitution. The Deputy 
Speaker has had no authority to preside over the meeting of the 
Assembly and to pass impugned ruling on 03.04.2022  rejecting the 
resolution of vote of no confidence against the PM. The so called 
ruling of Deputy Speaker is, therefore, without jurisdiction and 
coram non - judice.  This very act of the Deputy Speaker is sufficient 
enough to reflect his biased and prejudic ed mind which in my view is 
against the norms and dignity of the chair of the Speaker. This very 
act, alone, is sufficien t to annul the so called ruling which otherwise 
also has no legal sanctity.    
11.  Since the impugned ruling is found null and void and of 
no legal effect , the resolution would be deemed pending before the 
National Assembly. The PM would continue to suffer from disability 
under Explanation of Article 58(1) to advise dissolution of National 
Assembly which states that once a "resolution for a vote of no  
confidence has been given in the National Assembly" against the 
PM he could no longer advise the President to dissolve the National 
Assembly under Article 58(1) of the Constitution. Therefore, any 
order by the President to di ssolve the National Assembly on the 
advice of such a PM is also declared as void.  
12.  Before parting with this order, it has been observed 
that t he Constitution opens by stating that the exercise of authority 
"is a sacred trust" and can only be exercised  through "the chosen 
representatives of the people." However, this sacred trust was violated 
amongst others by the President, PM, the Speaker , the Deputy 
Speaker  and the Law Minister as the elected representatives of the 
people were prevente d from voting o n the resolution  and for such 
blatant transgression of the Constitution there must be 
consequences  and the law must take its course . It is also found that 
the series of afore -noted acts right from the rejection of resolution by 
the Deputy Speaker till the dissolution of National Assembly by the 
President were not performed in the ordinary course of business but 
the same were result of premeditation and deliberations  in order to SMC No.1 of 2022   9 
 
defeat the  resolution of vote of no confidence while playing fraud on 
the Constitution . To my understanding , Article 5 of the Constitution, 
which mandates "obedience to the Constitution," was cited to violate 
the Constitution. However, whether the stated acts attrac t Article 6 of 
the Constitution is also left open to be determined by the 
Parliament arians as to whether they leave open the doors for such 
unconstitutional acts or take suitable measures to stop such like 
mess  in future .    
13.  Above are the reasons of o ur short order supra, which is 
reproduced hereunder for facility of reference:  
“For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject to 
what is set out therein by way of amplification or 
otherwise, these matters are disposed of in the following 
terms:  
1.    The ruling of the Deputy Speaker of the National 
Assembly ("Assembly") given on the floor of the House on 
03.04.2022 ("Ruling") in relation to the resolution for a 
vote of no -confidence against the Prime Minister under 
Article 95 of the Constitution ("Resolution") (for which 
notice had been given by the requisite number of 
members of the Assembly on 08.03.2022, and in relation 
to which leave was granted to move the Resolution on 
28.03.2022), and the detailed reasons for the Ruling 
(released subsequent ly and concurred with by the 
Speaker) are declared to be contrary to the Constitution 
and the law and of no legal effect, and the same are 
hereby set aside.  
2.    In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the Resolution was pending and subsistin g at all times 
and continues to so remain pending and subsisting.  
3.    In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
at all material times the Prime Minister was under the 
bar imposed by the Explanation to clause (1) of Article 
58 of the Constituti on and continues to remain so 
restricted. He could not therefore have at any time 
advised the President to dissolve the Assembly as 
contemplated by clause (1) of Article 58.  
4.    In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the advice tendered by the Prime Minister on or about 
03.04.2022 to the President to dissolve the Assembly 
was contrary to the Constitution and of no legal effect.  
5.    In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the Order of the President issued on or about 
03.04.2022  dissolving the Assembly was contrary to the 
Constitution and of no legal effect, and it is hereby set 
aside. It is further declared that the Assembly was in 
existence at all times, and continues to remain and be 
so. 
6.    In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
all actions, acts or proceedings initiated, done or taken SMC No.1 of 2022   10 
 
by reason of, or to give effect to, the aforementioned 
Order of the President and/or for purposes of holding a 
General Election to elect a new Assembly, including but 
not limited  to the appointment of a care -taker Prime 
Minister and Cabinet are of no legal effect and are 
hereby quashed.  
7.    In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the Prime Minister and Federal Ministers, Ministers of 
State, Advisers, etc stand resto red to their respective 
offices as on 03.04.2022.  
8.    It is declared that the Assembly was at all times, 
and continues to remain, in session as summoned by the 
Speaker on 20.03.2022 for 25.03.2022 ("Session"), on 
the requisition moved by the requisite number of 
members of the Assembly on 08.03.2022 in t erms of 
clause (3) of Article 54 of the Constitution. Any 
prorogation of the Assembly by the Speaker prior to its 
dissolution in terms as stated above is declared to be of 
no legal effect and is set aside.  
9.    The Speaker is under a duty to summon and ho ld 
a sitting of the Assembly in the present Session, and 
shall do so immediately and in any case not later than 
10:30 a.m. on Saturday 09.04.2022, to conduct the 
business of the House as per the Orders of the Day that 
had been issued for 03.04.2022 and in terms as stated 
in, and required by, Article 95 of the Constitution read 
with Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in the National Assembly Rules, 2007 ("Rules").  
10.  The Speaker shall not, in exercise of his powers 
under clause (3) A rticle 54 of the Constitution, prorogue 
the Assembly and bring the Session to an end, except as 
follows:  
a.     If the Resolution is not passed by the requisite majority 
(i.e., the no -confidence resolution is defeated), then at 
any time thereafter;  
b.    If the Resolution is passed by the requisite majority 
(i.e., the no -confidence resolution is successful), then at 
any time once a Prime Minister is elected in terms of 
Article 91 of the Constitution read with Rule 32 of the 
Rules and enters upon his office.  
11.  If the Resolution is passed by the requisite 
majority (i.e., the no -confidence resolution is successful) 
then the Assembly shall forthwith, and in its present 
Session, proceed to elect a Prime Minister in terms of 
Article 91 of the Constitution read with Rule 32 of the 
Rules and all other enabling provisions and powers in 
this behalf and the Speaker and all other persons, 
including the Federal Government, are under a duty to 
ensure that the orders and directions hereby given are 
speedily complied with  and given effect to.  
12.  The assurance given by the learned Attorney 
General on behalf of the Federal Government in C.P. 
2/2022 on 21.03.2022 and incorporated in the order 
made in that matter on the said date shall apply as the 
order of the Court: the Fe deral Government shall not in SMC No.1 of 2022   11 
 
any manner hinder or obstruct, or interfere with, any 
members of the National Assembly who wish to attend 
the session summoned as above, and to participate in, 
and cast their votes, on the no confidence resolution. It is 
furth er directed that this order of the Court shall apply 
both in relation to the voting on the Resolution and (if 
such be the case) in relation to the election of a Prime 
Minister thereafter. It is however clarified that nothing in 
this Short Order shall affec t the operation of Article 63A 
of the Constitution and consequences thereof in relation 
to any member of the Assembly if he votes on the 
Resolution or (if such be the case) the election of a Prime 
Minister thereafter in such manner as is tantamount to 
his defection from the political party to which he belongs 
within the meaning of the said Article.  
13.  The order of the Court made in S.M.C. 1/2022 on 
03.04.2022 to the following effect, i.e., "Any order by the 
Prime Minister and the President shall be subjec t to the 
order of this Court" shall continue to be operative and 
remain in the field, subject to this amplification that it 
shall apply also to the Speaker till the aforesaid actions 
are completed. ” 
 
(Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel ) 
Judge  
 
Approved for reporting.  
 