IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
Civil Misc. Application No. 6762 of 2020  
In  
Civil Appeal No. 20 of 2014  
 
Administrator Municipal Corporation  
Peshawar.       … Petitioner  
          Versus  
Taimur Hussain Amin and others.   … Respondent s 
 
On Court’s Notice:  
Mr. Aatif Ali Khan,  
Addl. Advocate General, KP  
Mr. Asadullah Khan,  
Dy. Secretary, Local Council Board. 
Israrullah, Director, LG & RD.  
 
Date of Hearing:    18.11. 2020  
 
ORDER  
Mr. Aatif Ali Khan, the learned Additional Advocate General, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (‘ AAG’) states that in compliance with 
paragraph Nos. 20 to 25 of order dated 11 February 2020 (‘ the 
order ’) Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 7246 of 2020 (‘ CMA’) 
has been filed. The CMA comprises of 479 pages and details the 
moveable assets, of different District Councils, Tehsil/Municipal 
Administrations, Village and Neighborhood Councils.  
 
2. We had not sought the documents which have been filed in 
the CMA. In stead, we had directed the Chief Secretary and 
Secretary, Local Government Elections and Rural Development 
Department (‘ the said Secretary ’) to issue written instructions to 
the concerned to ensure compliance with section 39 of the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Local  Government Act, 2013 (‘ the Act ’) which 
mandates that annual reports be submitted disclosing: “ (a) 
particulars of the properties held during the preceding year; (b) total 
value of the property and annual return there from; (c) particulars of CMA No. 6762 of 2020  
 
 
 2 
unserviceable articles and losses if any; and (d) plans for utilization, 
development and improvement during the following year ”. We had 
further directed that in case any pilferage / loss of public property 
takes place action pursuant to section 41 of the Act be taken. 
However, the Chief Secretary and the said Secretary have 
unnecessarily filed 479 pages, assuming that quantity is a 
substitute for quality.  
  
3. The order had also directed to preserve and protect public 
property and to ensure that this is done by all conce rned and that 
the public once informed would also remain alert about the 
properties which ultimately are for their use/benefit, and in this 
regard had directed that ‘ easy access to particulars of all public 
properties in the Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa ’ be disclosed to 
enable them to have information about the properties in accessible 
digital/electronic form. On our query the learned AAG enquired 
from the officers present in Court and informed us that as yet 
there is no public disclosure of public proper ties on any website of 
the Province. Consequently, the public does not know what is 
owned and such opaqueness and non -transparency facilitates 
pilferage, theft and conversion of public properties to private use.  
 
4. The Government of the Province by its c onduct is displaying 
lack of interest in preserving public property nor wants to make 
the requisite disclosure of public properties to the public. The 
people must not be deprived of their valuable properties. The object 
of government  is to provide governan ce which can only mean to 
serve the people.  The people of the Province are not served when 
the Government itself disregards the law, including section 39 of 
the Act. The learned AAG says that if one more opportunity is 
granted to the Government he shall e nsure that the order and the 
Act are complied with. Accordingly, acting purely on the assurance 
extended by the learned AAG we grant last and final opportunity to 
the Chief Secretary of the Province and the said Secretary to 
comply with the order and secti on 39 of the Act, and to disclose CMA No. 6762 of 2020  
 
 
 3 
the said public properties electronically / digitally on a 
Government website and ensure it functions and is accessible by 
everyone before the next date of hearing, failing which they should 
be in attendance in Court to re spond as to why action pursuant to 
section 41 of the Act may not be ordered to be taken against them 
as well as action for disobeying the order.  
 
5. We have noted that items of little value like wastepaper 
baskets, cupboards, racks and chairs have also bee n mentioned in 
the documents filed in the CMA.  However, our concern (as 
expressed in the order) was primarily with regard to immovable 
properties and it is these and vehicles which are the most valuable 
and must be disclosed and, if the Government wants t o also 
disclose other assets over a particular value it is upto the 
Government, keeping in mind that particulars of immovable 
properties and valuable items don’t get buried in a surfeit of 
information.  
 
6. During the hearing it transpired that the Province  is bereft of 
elected representatives, after the term of the elected 
representatives of the people came to an end on 28 August 2019. 
Therefore, Chapter V of the Act titled ‘ Local Council Elections ’, 
which comprises of 47 sections, has been rendered redunda nt. We 
are surprised to note this brazen disregard of the law. Local 
government and local government elections is also (for the last ten 
years) a requirement of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (‘ the Constitution ’), which stipulates as under:  
 
140A . (1) Each Province shall, by law, establish a local 
government  system and devolve political, administrative 
and financial responsibility and authority to the elected 
representatives of the local governments.  
 
(2) Elections to the local governments shall be held 
by the Election Commission of Pakistan.  
 CMA No. 6762 of 2020  
 
 
 4 
7. The aforesaid responsibility of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and the Election Commission of Pakistan (‘ ECP’), 
which is a constitutional body, is reiterated in Article 222(f)  of the 
Constitution and also finds mention in the Act. To abide by the 
Constitution and the law is not optional but obligatory. All 
constitutional office holders before entering their offices take oath, 
including the Chief Election Commissioner and the me mbers of the 
ECP whose oath requires them to act ‘ in accordance  with the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law ’, but 
unfortunately, neither they, the Chief Minister nor the Members of 
the Provincial Cabinet are abiding by the Act and  the Constitution 
as local government elections are not being held and the people 
continue to be deprived of democracy. This grave violation of the 
Act and the Constitution must be brought to an end and the Act 
and the Constitution must be complied with.  
 
8. Copy of the order passed today be sent to the Chief Election 
Commissioner, the Members of ECP, the Chief Minister and every 
member of the Provincial Cabinet to ensure compliance with the 
Act and the Constitution and their respective legal and 
constitut ional duties and to the Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa, through its Chief Secretary, and to the said 
Secretary. Notices be also sent to the learned Advocate -General, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the learned Attorney -General for 
Pakistan to advise their respect ive governments to abide by the law 
and the Constitution and to stop depriving the people of their 
democratic right to elect their local government representatives.  
 
9. To come up on 15 December 2020 . 
 
Judge 
 
 
Judge 
Bench -IV 
Islamabad  
18.11. 2020  
(M. Tauseef)  