IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
    (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
    Present  
    Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
    Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal  
    Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan  
    Mr. Justice Khalil -ur-Rehman Ramday  
    Mr. Justice Mian Sh akirullah Jan  
    Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani  
    Mr. Justice Nasir -ul-Mulk  
    Mr. Justice Raja Fayyaz Ahmed  
    Mr. Justice Ch. Ijaz Ahmed  
    Mr. Justice Muhammad Sair Ali  
    Mr. Justice Mahmood Akhtar Shahid Siddiqui  
    Mr. Justice Jawwad S.  Khawaja  
    Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali  
    Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
    Mr. Justice Rahmat Hussain Jafferi  
    Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
    Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOS. 76 TO 80 OF 2007 & 59/2009,  
 
AND  
CIVIL APPEAL N O. 1094 OF 2009  
(On appeal from the order dated 15.1.2009 passed 
by High Court of Sindh at Karachi in 
Const.P.No.355 of 2008)  
AND  
HRC  NOS.14328 -P TO 14331 -P &  15082 -P OF 200 9 
 
 
Dr. Mobashir Hassan    (Const.P.76/07)  
Roedad Khan      (Const. P.77/07)  
Qazi Hu ssain Ahmad    (Const.P.78/07)  
Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif   (Const.P.79/07)  
Muhammad Tariq Asad    (Const.P.80/07)  
Syed Feroz Shah Gillani    (Const.P.59/09)  
Fazal Ahmad Jat     (C.A.1094/09)  
Shaukat Ali      (H.R.C.14328 -P/09)  
Doraiz       (H.R.C.14329 -P/09)  
Zulqar nain Shahzad     (H.R.C.14330 -P/09)  
Abid Hussain      (H.R.C.14331 -P/09)  
Manzoor Ahmad     (H.R.C.15082 -P/09)  
… … … Petitioner s.  
    Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, etc.   
… … … Respondents.  
 
 Const. P.76/2007, etc.  2 
For the petitioner s  : Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC.  
     Mr. Suleman Akram Raja, ASC.  
Mr. Ejaz Muhammad Khan, AOR.  
     Assisted by:  
Abdul Mujeeb Pirzada, Sr.ASC  
Mr. M.Afzal Siddiqui, ASC  
Mian Gul Hassan Aurangzeb, ASC  
Mr. Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC  
Barrister Feroze Jamal Shah, Adv.  
Mr. Hameed Ahmeed, Adv.  
Mr. Mustafa Aftab Sherpao, Adv.  
Mr. Sameer Khosa, Adv.  
Mr. Umar Akram Chaudhry, Adv.  
Malik Ghulam Sabir, Adv.  
     (in Const. P. 76/2007)  
 
     Mr. Muhammad Ikram Ch. ASC.  
     Mr. G. N. Gohar, AOR.  
     (in Const. P. 77/2007)   
      
Dr. Farooq Hassan, Sr.AS C 
     Mr. Hashmat Ali Habib, ASC  
     Ch. Muhammad Akram, AOR  
     (in Const.P.78/07 ) 
      
     Mr. Ashtar Ausaf Ali, ASC  
     (In Const.P.79/07)  
      
     Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC (in person)  
     (In Const.P.80/07)  
 
     Mr. A.K. Dogar, Sr. ASC  
     (In Co nst.P.59/09)  
      
     Mr. Shahid Orakzai (in person)  
     (In CMA 4842/09)  
 
     Raja Muhammad Ibrahim Satti, Sr. ASC  
 (in CA.1094/2009)       
       
     NEMO (in HR.Cases)  
 
For the Respondents : 
 
For M/o Law    : Mr. Kamal Azfar, Sr. ASC. Assisted by  
     Mr. K.K. Agha, ASC.  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR.  
      (in Const.P.76 -77/07) 
 
 Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR.  
      (in Const.P.78 -80/07 & 59/09)  
 
For the NAB    : Dr. Danishwar Malik, PG.  
Mr. Abdul Baseer Qureshi, Addl : PG   
     Dr. Asghar Rana, ADPG,  
Ch. Akht ar Ali, AOR.  
     Mr. Naveed Ahsan, Chairman NAB  
 Const. P.76/2007, etc.  3 
On Court Notice   : Mr. Shah Khawar,  
     Acting Attorney General for Pakistan.  
     Assisted by:  
     Agha Tariq Mehmood Khan,  DAG.  
     Mr. Dil Muhammad Al izai, DAG.  
     Raja Aleem Abbassi, DAG.  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan  : Dr. Salahuddin Mengal, AG.  
 
For Govt. of NWFP.  : Mr. Zia -ur-Rehman, A.G.  
Mr. Zahid Yousaf, Addl. A.G.   
Mr. Naveed Akhtar, A.A.G.  
 
For Govt. of the Punjab  : Mr. M. Hanif Khattana, Addl: AG.  
Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser, Addl: AG.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh   : Mr. Yousaf Leghari, AG.  
 
On Court’s Call:   : Malik Muhammad Qayyum, Sr. ASC  
     Former Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
     Mr. Justice (R) M. Riaz Kiani  
     Secretary Law & Justice.  
     Dr. Riaz Mehmood, Sr. Joint Secretary.  
Syed Nasir Ali Shah, Solicitor General.  
       
     Mr. M. Salman Faruqui,  
     Principle Secretary to the President.  
  
Amicus Curi ae  : Mian Allah Nawaz, Sr. ASC.  
     Mr. Shaiq Usmani Sr. ASC.  
     Mr. M. Sardar Khan, Sr. ASC.  
     Assisted By Mr. Idrees Ashraf, Adv.  
 
Date s of hearing   : 07th -10th & 14th - 16th December, 2009.  
 
   O R D E R  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. – The a bove t itled 
Constitution P etitions  have been filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan [he reinafter referred to as ‘the 
Constitution’] challenging the constitutionality of the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance (No.LX) 2007 [hereinafter referred to as ‘the 
NRO’] , while HR cases and Civil Appeal , by leave of the Court, have been 
filed by the appl icants/appellant for extension of benefit of the NRO to 
them.  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  4 
2. Succinctly  stating the facts, giving rise to instant proceedings , are that 
on 5th October, 2007, the President of Pakistan, in  purported exercise of 
powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 89 of the Constitution , issued the 
NRO, whereby , certain amendments have been made in the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1898, the Representation of the People Act, 1976 and the 
National Accountability Ordinance, 1999  [hereinafter referred to as “the 
NAB Ordinan ce”]. By means of Section 2 of the NRO, Section 494 of 
Cr.P.C. has been amended. Likewise, vide Section 3 of the NRO, Section 
39 of the Representation of the People Act, 1976 has been amended. 
Similarly, Sections 4, 5 & 6 of the NRO amended Sections 18, 24  and 31A 
of the NAB Ordinance , respectively, whereas by  means of Section 7 of the 
NRO, Section 33F has been inserted in the NAB Ordinance.  
3. The NRO came under challenge, as stated above, before this Court, 
through listed petitions . These petitions came up for hearing before the 
Court on 12th October, 2007 when after hearing the learned counsel for the 
petitioners, the Court proceeded to issue notices to the respondents as well 
as to Attorney General for Pakistan, for a date in office after three weeks,  
while making the following observation: - 
 “however, we are inclined to observe in unambiguous terms that 
any benefit drawn or intended to be drawn by any of the public 
office holder shall be subject to the decision of the listed petitions 
and the beneficiar y would not be entitled to claim any protection of 
the concluded action under Sections 6 and 7 of the impugned 
Ordinance, under any principle of law, if this Court conclude that 
the impugned Ordinance and particularly its these provisions are 
ultra vires t he Constitution”.   
4. Pending decision of these petitions, on 3rd November , 2007, 
emergency was proclaimed in the country by the then President of Pakistan 
and also the Chief of Army Staff and under the garb of Provisional 
Constitution Order, 2007, Provis ional Constitution  (Amendment) Order, Const. P.76/2007, etc.  5 
2007 was issued , whereby , Article 270AAA was inserted in the 
Constitution, which provided protection to all the laws including the 
Ordinance s in force on the day on which the Proclamation of Emergency of 
3rd November 2 007 was revoked.  As a result of above constitutional 
amendment , the apparent interest was that the NRO  should attain 
permanence.  The Proclamation of Emergency as well as other extra -
constitutional instruments were challenged before this Court in the case o f 
Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan  v. General Pervez Musharraf  (PLD 
2008 SC 178), when the Court declared the Proclamation of Emergency of 
3rd November, 2007, the  Provisional Constitution Order , 2007, Provisional 
Constitution (Amendment) Order,  2007, the Oath of  Office (Judges) Order, 
2007 and the President’s Order No.5 of 2007,  to be validly enacted.  
However, this Court, vide its judgment dated 31st July 2009, in the case of 
Sindh High Court Bar Association v.  Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2009 SC 879) declared all the above five instruments to be unconstitutional, 
illegal and void ab initio , as a result whereof Article 270AAA stood deleted 
from the Constitution. Consequently, the NRO, as well as 37 other 
Ordinance s, which were meant to be protected,  were shorn o f the 
permanency purportedly provided under Article 270AAA of the 
Constitution  and sanctified by the judgment passed in Tikka Iqbal 
Muhammad Khan’s case  (ibid) . However, through the same judgment, 
this Court, while supporting the doctrine of trichotomy of powers, as 
envisaged in the scheme of the Constitution  and to prevent any disruption , 
enabled the Parliament to reconsider and, if thought fit, to enact , all the 37 
Ordinance s including the NRO,  as Acts of Parliament. For this purpose the 
life of the Ordin ance s stood extended  for another 120 days (in case of 
Federal Legislation) and 90 days (in case of Provincial Legislation) . This Const. P.76/2007, etc.  6 
constituted an opportunity to the democratic Government at the Centre and 
in the Provinces  to legitimize the acts, actions, pro ceedings and orders, 
initiated, taken or done, under those Ordinance s, by placing them before the 
Parliament, to make them enactments  of Parliament , with retrospective 
effect.  
5. In pursuance of above judgment  of 31st July, 2009 , the NRO was 
placed before the Standing Committee  of the National Assembly  on Law & 
Justice, in its meeting held on 29th & 30th October , 2009. During the 
discussions and deliberations, some of the members did not agree with the 
decision of the Committee and left the proceedings in p rotest . However, 
ultimately, on 2nd November, 2009 the Committee recommended that, after 
the p roposed amendments in the Bill for enacting the NRO , the same may 
be passed by the Assembly. It is pertinent to mention here that despite 
finalization of the repo rt of the Standing Committee on NRO and before its 
approval by the Chairperson of the Committee, the Minister concerned 
withdrew the Bill under Rule 139 of Procedure & Conduct of Business in 
the National Assembly, 2007 . As a result, the NRO could not be pa ssed by 
the Parliament,  within its extended life, therefore, it lapsed.  
6. The petitioners in these Constitution Petitions have challenged the 
vires of the NRO with the prayer that the same may be declared ultra vires  
the Constitution, viod ab initio  and o f no legal effect. For convenience, the 
prayer made in Constitution Petition No. 76 of 2007, filed by Dr. Mubashir 
Hassan, is reproduced herein below: -  
“1) Section 2, 4, 5, 6 & 7 of the NRO may kindly be declared 
to be void ab initio , of no legal effect a nd ultra vires the 
Constitution, in particular Articles 25, 62, 63 and 175 
thereof.  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  7 
 2) During the pendency of the instant petition, the respondents 
may kindly be restraint from taking any action under or in 
terms of the impugned Ordinance. The respondent s may in 
particular, be restrained from withdrawing any request for 
mutual assistance and civil party, letters rogatory and like 
issued to any Foreign Government, Court or other 
Authority or Multilateral Organization.  
 3) Any other order deemed beneficial to the interest of Justice 
and equity, may also kindly be made.  
 
7. The i nstant petitions came up for hearing before this Bench on  
7th December 2009, when Mr. Shah Khawar, Acting Attorney General for 
Pakistan, placed on record a written statement on beha lf of Federation of 
Pakistan. Relevant paras therefrom are reproduced herein below: - 
“2. That the Federation believes in supremacy of the 
Constitution of 1973 and the Parliament.  
3. That the National Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007 was 
promulgated by the p revious regime and I am under 
instruction not to defend it. ” 
8. Mr. Kamal Azfar, learned Sr. ASC appearing on behalf of the 
Federation of Pakistan, through Ministry of Law & Justice, filed Civil 
Misc. Applications No. 4875 & 4898 of 2009 in Constitution Pe titions  
No. 76 & 77 of 2007. Contents of paras at page 11 & 12 of the said 
applications are reproduced herein below: - 
“If however, this Hon’ble Court wishes to rule upon wider issues 
other than those raised in the petition and prayer the Federation reques ts 
that fresh petitions be filed precisely stipulating these issues whereupon 
the Federation will seek instructions on such new petition.  
Pak Today is poised at the cross roads. One road leads to truly federal 
democratic welfare sate with the balance of p ower between an 
Independent judiciary, a duly elected Govt. representing the will of the 
people a determined executive which is fighting the war against terrorism 
and poverty. The second road leads to destabilization of the rule of law. 
The people of Pakis tan await your verdict.”  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  8 
When we confronted the learned counsel with above contents  of his 
applications , he requested that the same may be treated as deleted. In this 
behalf, he, however, filed a written statement, contents whereof are 
reproduced herein be low for ready reference: - 
 “STATEMENT  
 
In Compliance of the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of Pakistan to appraise the Hon’ble Court as to how the Federation 
would interpret the wording “the second road leads to the 
destabilization of the rule of law” , it is submitted as follows: - 
(1) There is no mention of the wording ‘threat to democracy’ 
in the Statement.  
(2) The Federation supports the Prosecution, in accordance 
with law, of persons alleged to have done wrong doing. The 
Federation does not oppose the Petit ions seeking a 
declaration that the National Reconciliation Ordinance 
2007 (NRO) is illegal and unconstitutional.  
(3) With regard to the “wider issues” mentioned in paragraph 
No.9 these refer to those matters which were raised by the 
Petitioner’s counsel durin g oral arguments and which find 
no mention whatsoever in the Petitions. For example, 
submissions made in respect of Articles 89 (in particular 
the alleged concept of “implied Resolution”) and A.264 on 
the effect of Repeal.  
(4) The Federation’s view is that tho se who have benefited 
under the NRO should be proceeded against under the 
appropriate laws before the courts having the competent 
jurisdiction. As factual matters need to be determined by 
the trial courts.  
(5) So far as my comments made yesterday before this H on’ble 
Court concerning the threat from GHQ, the CIA and the 
contents of paragraph 9 of the CMA are concerned these 
were my personal views and were not made on the 
instructions of the Federation of Pakistan. As such I 
withdraw the same, which should not be  considered by this 
Hon’ble Court in any manner whatsoever and the same 
should be deleted and expunged from the record.  
(6) It is emphasized that the Federation of Pakistan holds this 
Hon’ble Court in the highest esteem and has the greatest 
respect for the sam e.” 
 
9. Learned Advocates General of Punjab, Sindh, NWFP and 
Balochistan appeared and supported the stan ce taken by the Attorney 
General for Pakistan.  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  9 
10. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have 
also gone through the material placed on record in support of their 
submissions.   
11. As it has been noted above that challenge to NRO was thrown by the 
petitioners, no sooner same was promulgated by the President and 
admission order dated 12th October, 2007, was passed, to examine 
following questions: - 
 “2. Mr. S alman A kram  Raja, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 76 of 2007 argued 
that:-- 
a) Section 7 of the impugned Ordinance being self -
executory in nature amounts to legislative judgment, 
which is impermissible intrusion into the exercise of 
judicial powers of the State and thus falls foul of 
Article 175 of the Constitution which envisages 
separation and independence of the judiciary from 
other organs of the State.  
b) Legislative judgment ca nnot be enacted by the 
Parliament. [ Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi   v.  Raj 
Narain  (AIR 1975 SC 2299)].  
c) By promulgating Section 7 of the impugned 
Ordinance, Article 63(1)(h) and 63(1)(l) of the 
Constitution have been made ineffective, as regards 
chosen cate gory of people, therefore, it is ultra vires 
the Constitution as it amounts to defeat the 
constitutional mandates.  
d) Impugned Ordinance exhorts about or indemnifies a 
particular class of people i.e. public office holders 
from proceedings, actions and orde rs passed by the 
competent authorities, whereas no such powers are 
available to the Parliament or, for that matter, to the 
President of Pakistan under Federal or Concurrent 
Legislative List. Further; the President is empowered 
only to pardon an accused per son, under Article 45 of 
the Constitution, after passing of sentence by a Court 
of law, whereas by means of impugned Ordinance, the 
President has been empowered to indemnify or pardon 
an accused, against whom proceedings are pending 
before Investigating Ag ency or a Court of law or in 
appeal by giving a blanket cover.      
e) The impugned Ordinance violates the provisions of 
Article 25 of the Constitution because it is not based 
on intelligible differentia, relatable to lawful objects, 
therefore, deserves to  be struck down.  
f) The impugned Ordinance is against the public policy Const. P.76/2007, etc.  10 
because it also provides protection against future 
action in terms of its Section 7 and it had also 
rendered Articles 62 and 63 of the Constitution 
ineffective.  
g) Sub-sections (2) a nd (3) of Section 494 of Cr.P.C. 
added by means of impugned Ordinance are contrary 
to provisions of Sub -section (1) of Section 494 of 
Cr.P.C. where it has been provided that cases can only 
be withdrawn with the consent of the Court, whereas, 
in newly added  Sub -Sections, powers of the “ Court ” 
have been conferred upon the Review Boards of the 
Executive Bodies, therefore, these Sub -sections are 
also contrary to Article 175 of the Constitution.  
    and 
 No criteria has been laid down as to why the cases 
fallin g between the 1st day of January 1986 to  
12th day of October 1999 have been covered under 
these provisions, inasmuch as definition of political 
victimization has not been provided in these Sub -
sections, as a result whereof it has been left at the 
subjecti ve consideration of Review Board/ Executive 
Bodies to determine the same. Thus such provisions 
cannot exist in any manner.  
 
h) The impugned Ordinance has been promulgated in 
colorable exercise of Legislative powers and its 
various provisions have created d iscrimination among 
ordinary and classified accused, therefore, all these 
provisions tantamount to malice in law.  
i) The provisions of impugned Ordinance are so 
overbroad that these have provided blanket cover to all 
the holders of public offices, includin g chosen 
representatives and ordinary employees, therefore, the 
object of national reconciliation cannot be achieved by 
allowing it to exist.  
j) The provisions of Sections 4 and 5 of the impugned 
Ordinance are highly discriminatory in nature, 
therefore, a re liable to be struck down.  
k) Section 6 of the impugned Ordinance is contrary to the 
basic principles relating to annulment of judgments, 
even if passed in absentia, in accordance with existing 
law, according to which unless the basis for the 
judgment, in favour of a party, is not removed, it could 
not affect the rights of the parties, in whose favour the 
same was passed but when the Legislature 
promulgated the impugned Ordinance, in order to 
remove the basis on which the judgment was founded, 
such judgm ent shall have no bearing on the cases. 
[Facto Belarus Tractor Ltd.   v.  Government of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 605)]. Hence, provisions of 
the impugned Ordinance as a whole are against the 
concept of equality of Islamic Injunction, provided 
under Article 2A  of the Constitution, therefore, on this 
score as well, deserves to be struck down being ultra Const. P.76/2007, etc.  11 
vires the Constitution.            
3. Mr. Muhammad Ikram Chaudhry, learned Sr. ASC for 
petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 77 of 2007, while adopting 
the abo ve arguments, added that : - 
i) The impugned Ordinance is purpose specific and 
period specific, therefore, violates Article 25 of the 
Constitution.  
4. Dr. Farooq Hassan, Sr. ASC appearing in Constitution 
Petition No. 78 of 2007 on behalf of petitioner, whi le adopted the 
arguments raised by Mr. Suleman Ahmed Raja, ASC contended 
that:- 
i) The impugned Ordinance is contradictory to and 
violative of the United Nation’s Convention Against 
Corruption, enacted in 2005 and ratified by Pakistan 
on 31st of August 200 7. 
ii)  Under the Constitution, no indemnity or amnesty can 
at all be given to any one, except granting pardon in 
terms of Article 45 of the Constitution.  
iii) Sections 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the impugned Ordinance are 
violative of the doctrine of trichotomy of powe rs.  
iv) The impugned Ordinance has in fact changed the basic 
structure of the Constitution.  
v) The impugned Ordinance has also violated the 
principles of political justice and fundamental rights 
because it allows plundering of national wealth and to 
get away wit h it. More so, it tried to condone 
dishonesty of magnitude which is unconscientious and 
shocking to the conscience of mankind.  
5. Mr. M.A. Zaidi, AOR appeared on behalf of Mr. 
Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC in Constitution Petition 
No.79 of 2007 and adopte d the above arguments of the learned 
counsel for the petitioners.  
6. Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC appearing in Constitution Petition 
No. 80 of 2007 also adopted the above arguments, while adding 
that:- 
a) The impugned Ordinance has been promulgated on the 
basis of  personal satisfaction of the President of 
Pakistan but for extraneous reasons and to provide 
indemnity/immunity to the public office holders, 
therefore, is liable to be struck down.  
 
 Const. P.76/2007, etc.  12 
12. Subsequent thereto cases remained pending except when their 
heari ng was fixed on  27th February, 200 8 and  order dated 12th October, 
2007, was vacated in following terms : - 
“3. These Constitution Petitions are adjourned to a date in 
office due to indisposition of the learned counsel for the 
petitioners. Meanwhile, in vi ew of the rule laid down in the case of 
Federation of Pakistan vs. Aitzaz Ahsan (PLD 1989 SC 61), the 
observations made by this Court in Para 8 of the order dated 
12.10.2007 in Constitution Petitions No.76 -80 of 2007 to the effect 
that “however, we are inc lined to observe in unambiguous terms 
that any benefit drawn or intended to be drawn by any of the 
public office holder shall be subject to the decision of the listed 
petitions and the beneficiary would not be entitled to claim any 
protection of the conclu ded action under Sections 6 and 7 of the 
impugned Ordinance, under any principle of law, if this Court 
conclude that the impugned Ordinance and particularly its these 
provisions are ultra vires the Constitution”  are deleted. 
Resultantly, the Ordinance shal l hold the field and shall have its 
normal operation. The Courts and authorities concerned shall 
proceed further expeditiously in the light of the provisions of the 
Ordinance without being influenced by the pendency of these 
petitions.”  
 
13. As it has been  noted above that while deciding the case of Sindh 
High Court Bar Association  (ibid), all the Ordinances which were not laid 
before the Parliament, on account of insertion of Article 270AAA in the 
Constitution, were shorn of permanency, therefore, the Parl iament was 
asked to examine all such Ordinances within a period of 120 and 90 days, 
as the case may be, commencing from 31st July, 2009, when a 14 Member 
Bench announced judgment. The period so assigned by the Court expired 
on 28th November, 2009 but the N RO was taken back from the Parliament, 
leaving for this Court to examine its constitutionality in the cases listed 
above. It is a cardinal principle of jurisprudence that courts are not required 
to give decisions of cases in vacuum rather it has to conside r facts as well, Const. P.76/2007, etc.  13 
giving a cause to a person to approach Courts. The NRO gave benefits to a 
class of people, whose identification is not difficult to ascertain, namely 
accused persons, involved in criminal and corruption cases, during the 
period commencing from 1st January, 1986 to 12th October, 1999 and this 
classification has created a divide amongst ordinary citizens of Pakistan and 
a class of alleged criminals who statedly have committed crimes of murder, 
dacoity, rape, looting/plundering of money/resour ces of this nation. 
Therefore, prima facie, to understand the nature of such beneficiaries, 
Federal Government, Provincial Governments and the NAB were asked to 
provide details in this behalf. In response to such query the Government of 
Sindh through its A dvocate General filed a large list of such like accused, 
who being charged for the cases of criminal nature, benefited from the 
NRO, which included heinous and minor crimes, as well. As far as the 
remaining Governments and the Federating Units are concerne d, they 
categorically denied extension of benefits of the NRO to even a single 
accused in their respective jurisdictions. However, NAB has submitted a 
list containing names of 248 persons, who benefited from the NRO within 
and outside the country. A cursor y perusal of this list suggests that barring 
the cases inside the country, huge benefit has been availed by some of the 
persons in the cases pending against them outside the country. At this stage 
it is to be noted that application of the NRO, beyond the territories  of the 
country, is a question which requires consideration on jurisdictional plane 
of this Court as well. NAB has also provided a list of the persons, who were 
convicted in absentia under Section 31A of the NAB Ordinance.  
14. In depth examinati on of the NRO suggests that it has not been 
promulgated to provide reconciliation on national basis as this nation has 
seen reconciliation in 1973, when a Constituent Assembly gave the Const. P.76/2007, etc.  14 
Constitution of 1973 to the nation, guarant eeing their fundamental righ ts, 
on the basis of equality and brotherhood, as a result whereof, the nation had 
proved its unity, whenever it faced a challenge to its sovereignty and 
existence. The representation of the people, in subsequent Legislative 
Assemblies, ha s upheld the provi sions of 1973 Constitution, except for few 
occasions when they have made amendments under peculiar circumstances. 
However, salient features of the Constitution i.e. Independence of 
Judiciary, Federalism, Parliamentary form of Government blended with 
Islami c provisions, now have become integral part of the Constitution and 
no change in the basic features of the Constitution, is possible through 
amendment as it would be against the national reconciliation, evident in the 
promulgation of the Constitution of 19 73, by a Legislative Assembly. 
Therefore, promulgation of the NRO seems to be against the national 
interest and its preamble is contrary to the substance embodied therein. 
Thus, it violates various provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, by 
means of ins tant short order, reasons of which shall be record ed later, we 
hold as follows: - 
(i) that the NRO is declared to be an instrument void ab initio  being ultra 
vires  and violative of various constitutional provisions including 
Article  Nos. 4, 8, 25, 62(f), 63(i)( p), 89, 175 and 227 of the 
Constitution;  
(ii) that as a consequence of the said declaration, all steps taken, actions 
suffered, and all orders passed by whatever authority , any orders 
passed by the courts of law including the orders of discharge and 
acquittals recorded in favour of the accused persons, are also declared 
never to have existed in the eyes of law and resultantly  of no legal 
effect;  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  15 
(iii) that all cases in which the accused persons were either discharged or 
acquitted under Section 2 of the NRO or where pr oceedings pending 
against the holders of public office had got terminated in view of 
Section 7 thereof, a list of which cases has been furnished to this Court 
and any other such case s/proceedings which may not have been 
brought to the notice of this Court , shall stand revived and relegated to 
the status of pre -5th of October, 2007 position;  
(iv) that all the concerned courts including the trial, the appellate and the 
revisional courts are ordered to summon the persons accused in such 
cases and then to proceed in  the respective matters in accordance with 
law from the stage from where such proceedings had been brought to 
an end in pursuance of the above provisions of the NRO;  
(v) that the Federal Government, all the Provincial Governments and all 
relevant and competent  authorities including the Prosecutor General of 
NAB, the Special Prosecutors in various Accountability Courts, the 
Prosecutor s General in the four Provinces and other officers or 
officials involved in the prosecution of criminal offenders are directed 
to offer every possible assistance required by the competent courts in 
the said connection ;  
(vi) that similarly all cases which were under investigation or pending 
enquiries and which had either been withdrawn or where the 
investigation s or enquiries had been ter minated on account of the NRO 
shall also stand revived and the relevant and competent authorities 
shall proceed in the said matters in accordance with law;  
(vii) that it may be clarified that any judgment, conviction or sentence 
recorded under section 31 -A of th e NAB Ordinance shall hold the field 
subject to law and since the NRO stands declared as void ab initio , 
therefore, any benefit derived by any person in pursuance of Section 6 
thereof is also declared never to have legally accrued to any such 
person and co nsequently of no legal effect;  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  16 
(viii)  that since in view of the provisions of Article 100(3) of the 
Constitution, the Attorney General for Pakistan could not have 
suffered any act not assigned to him by the Federal Government or not 
authorized by the said Governm ent and since no order or authority had 
been shown to us under which the then learned Attorney General 
namely Malik Muhammad Qayyum had been authorized to address 
communications to various authorities/courts in foreign countries 
including Switzerland, ther efore, such communications addressed by 
him withdrawing the request s for Mutual Legal Assistance or 
abandoning the status of a Civil Party in such proceedings abroad or 
which had culminated in the termination of proceedings before the 
competent fora in Swi tzerland or other countries or in abandonment of 
the claim of the Government of Pakistan to huge amount s of allegedly 
laundered moneys, are declared to be unauthorized, unconstitutional 
and illegal act s of the said Malik Muhammad Qayyum;  
(ix) that since the NRO  stands declared void ab initio , therefore, any 
actions taken or suffered under the said law are also non est  in law and 
since the communications addressed by Malik Muhamma d Qayyum to 
various foreign for a/authorities/courts withdrawing the request s earlier  
made by the Government of Pakistan for Mutual Legal Assistance; 
surrendering the status of Civil Party; abandoning the claim s to the 
allegedly laundered moneys lying in foreign countries  including 
Switzerland , have also been declared by us to be unauthori zed and 
illegal communications and consequently of no legal effect, therefore, 
it is declared that the initial reque sts for Mutual Legal Assistance;  
securing the  status of Civil Party and the claim s lodged to  the allegedly 
laundered moneys lying in foreign  countries including Switzerland are 
declared never to have been withdrawn . Therefore the Federal 
Government and other concerned authorities are ordered to take 
immediate steps to seek revival of the said requests, claims and status;  Const. P.76/2007, etc.  17 
(x) that in view of the ab ove noticed conduct of Malik Muhammad 
Qayyum, the then learned Attorney General for Pakistan in addressing 
unauthorized communications which had resulted in unlawful 
abandonment of claim s of the Government of Pakistan, inter alia, to  
huge amounts of the al legedly laundered money s lying in foreign 
countries including Switzerland, the Federal Government and all other 
competent authorities are directed to proceed against the said Malik 
Muhammad Qayyum in accordance with law in the said connection;  
(xi) that we plac e on record our displeasure about the conduct and lack of 
proper and honest assistance and cooperation on the part of the 
Chairman of the NAB, the Prosecutor General of the NAB and of the 
Additional Prosecutor General of the NAB , namely , Mr. Abdul Baseer 
Qureshi in this case. Consequently,  it is not possible for us to trust 
them with proper and diligent pursuit of the cases falling within their 
respective spheres of operation. It is therefore, suggested that the 
Federal Government may make fresh appointment s against the said 
posts of persons possessing high degree of competence and 
impeccable integrity in terms of Section 6 of the NAB Ordinance as 
also in terms of the observations of this Court made in the case of 
Khan Asfandyar Wali v . Federation of Pakista n (PLD 2001 SC 607). 
However, till such fresh appointments are so made, the present 
incumbents may continue to discharge their obligations strictly in 
accordance with law . They shall, however,  transmit periodical reports 
of the actions taken by them to the  Monitoring Cell of this Court 
which is being established through the succeeding parts of this 
judgment;  
(xii) that a Monitoring Cell shall be established in the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan comprising of the Chief Justice of Pakistan or a Judge of the 
Supreme Cour t to be nominated by him to monitor the progress and 
the proceedings in the above noticed and other cases under the NAB 
Ordinance. Likewise similar Monitoring Cells shall be set up in the 
High Courts of all the Provinces comprising of the Chief Justice of the Const. P.76/2007, etc.  18 
respective Province or Judges of the concerned High Courts to be 
nominated by them to monitor the progress and the proceedings in 
cases in which the accused persons had been acquitted or discharged 
under Section 2 of the NRO;  
(xiii)  that the Secretary of the Law Division, Government of Pakistan, is 
directed to take immediate steps to increase the number of 
Accountability Courts to ensure expeditious disposal of cases;  
15. We place on record our deep sense of appreciation for the learned counsel 
for the parties  as also for the learned amici i curiae  who have rendered invaluable 
assistance to us in these matters.  
The petitions stand allowed and disposed of by this short order in terms 
noted above.  
 
     
Islamabad  
16.12.2009  
Irshad /* 
 
   APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  
 