SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
C.P.1274 -L/2013  
(Against the order dated 31.05.2013 passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore  
in W.P.No.11657/2013)  
 
Province of Punjab, etc .                     ..….Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Hafiz Muhammad Ahmad  
…….Respondent(s)  
 
For the petitioner(s):   Rana Shamshad Khan, Addl. A.G.  
     a/w Abdul Majeed, Dy. Director ACE.  
         
For the respondent(s):  N.R. 
 
Date of hearing:   26.07.2021  
ORDER  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - We have heard the 
learned counsel for the petitioners at  some length and have gone 
through the impugned order and  the record of the case , with his 
able assistance . The learned counsel has not been able to point out 
any legal error in the impugned order passed by the High Court, 
which may justify grant of leave to appeal. The impugned order is 
well-reasoned and we are of the considered view that it does not 
warrant any interference  by this Court . The petition is, therefore , 
dismissed , and leave declined .  
2.  We have, however, noted  that the High Court has 
relied on a series of case law,  referred  to in the impugned order  by 
reproducing the head notes  of the law reports.  The headnotes 
preceding  the judgment  of a court are not a part of that  judgment  
but are the notes prepared by the editors of the law -reports,  
highlighting  the key law points  discussed in the judgment  and are 
supplied  just to facilitate the reader with a summarized version of 
the salient features of  the case  which helps in quick ly scanning 
through the law reports . It is a matter of common knowledge that 
the headnotes are at times misleading and contra ry to the text of 
the judgment. Head notes by the  editors  of the law -reports cannot C.P No. 1274 -L/2013 
 2 
 
be taken as verbatim extracts of the judgment and relied upon as 
conclusive guide to the text of the judgment reported , hence they 
should not be cited as such . Therefore, it is  neither safe nor 
desirable to cite a dictum by reference to the headnotes .1 We ar e 
sangui ne that in future the High Court s and the District Courts 
while referring to a precedent or case law in their judgments and 
orders will cite the actual text of th e judgment rather than place 
reliance on the head notes  thereof . 
 
 
 
 
Lahore,  
26th July, 2021.  
Approved for reporting  
Iqbal   
  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
                                                
1 See Salah -Ud-Din v.  Zaheer -Ud-Din  PLD 1988 SC  221; Nahar In dustrial Enterprises Ltd. V.  
Hong Kong & Shanghai B anking Corporation  AIR 2009 SC  6262 ; Farhat Nasreen v. Muhammad 
Hussain PLD 1997 Kar  204. 
 
 
 