IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction) 
 
 
  
PRESENT
 
     
Mr. Justice Sh. Riaz Ahmed, C.J. 
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Farooq    Mr. Justice Mian Muhammad Ajmal 
   Mr. Justice Syed Deedar Hussain Shah 
   Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar 
  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.1/2002
 
 Supreme Court Bar Association through   
its President Mr. Hamid Khan.    …Petitioner. 
     VERSUS 
 
The Federation of Pakistan & others.   …Respondents. 
  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 6/2002
 
 Pakistan Lawyers Forum through its President. …Petitioner.  
     VERSUS 
General Pervez Musharraf  President of Pakistan & others.   …Respondents.  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 7/2002
 
 Wattan Party through its President Zafarullah Khan.      …Petitioner. 
 
    VERSUS 
Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice &  
Parliamentary Affairs & others.   …Respondents. 
  CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 8/2002
 
 
Rai Muhammad Nawaz Kharal, ASC.   …Petitioner 
      VERSUS 
 
Federation of Pakistan & others.   …Respondents    Const.P.1/2002 etc.  2
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 12/2002  
 Pakistan Bar Council through its Chairman 
Mr. Hadi Shakeel Ahmed.    …Petitioner. 
      VERSUS 
Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice &  
Parliamentary Affairs & others.   …Respondents.  
… 
 
For the petitioners:  Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC. (in CP 1/2002)   Mr.M.A.Zafar, ASC      Mr. Ejaz Ahmed Khan, AOR (absent). 
 
For the petitioner:   Mr. A.K. Dogar, ASC. (in CP 6/2002) Mr. S. Abul Asim  Jafri, AOR (absent).  For the petitioner:   Mian Allah Nawaz, ASC. 
(in CP 7/2002)   Mr. Mehmoodul Islam, AOR (absent). 
For the Petitioner:   Dr.Farooq Hasan, ASC. (in CP 8/2002)   Rai Muhammad Nawaz Kharal, ASC.      
For the petitioner:   Mr. Rashid A. Rizvi, ASC. 
(in CP 12/2002)   Mr. M.A. Zaidi, AOR.  For the Federation:  Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC. 
     Mr. Abdul Mujeeb Pirzada, ASC 
     Mr.M.S.Khattak, AOR.  For Respondent No.7:  Mr.K.M.A.Samdani, ASC. (in CP 1/2002)   Ch.Akhtar Ali, AOR. 
 
For Respondents No.9, 10       Mr.M.Jafar Hashmi, ASC & 11 (in CP 1/2002)                Mr.M.Ghani, ASC. 
Mr.Imtiaz Muhammad Khan, AOR. 
 
 On Court’s notice:   Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, 
Attorney General for Pakistan. 
  
  Mr. Maqbool Elahi Malik, 
Advocate General, Punjab. Rao Muhammad Yusuf Khan, AOR. 
 
 
Dates of Hearing: 18, 19, 20 & 21
st March, 2002, and 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8 & 9th April 2002 
 
… 
 
 Const.P.1/2002 etc.  3
JUDGMENT  
SH. RIAZ AHMED, CJ. -   By virtue of notification 
No.1(4)/2001-All dated 26th December, 2001, issued by the 
Government of Pakistan  Law, Justice and Human Rights Division, 
the President of Pakistan appointed the following Judges of the 
Peshawar High Court and the Lahore High Court as Judges of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan with effect from 10th January, 2002:- 
(i) Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan, 
Chief Justice, Peshawar High Court, Peshawar. 
 
(ii) Mr. Justice Khalil ur Rehman Ramday, 
Judge, Lahore High Court, Lahore. 
 
(ii) Mr. Justice Muhammad Nawaz Abbasi, 
Judge, Lahore High Court, Lahore. 
 (iv) Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar, 
Judge, Lahore High Court, Lahore. 
 2.  The Supreme Court Bar Association through its 
President Mr. Hamid Khan, Pakistan Lawyers Forum through its 
President Mr. A.K. Dogar, Wattan Party through its President Mr. Zafarullah Khan Barrister-at-Law, Rai Muhammad Nawaz Kharal, 
Advocate Supreme Court of Pakistan and Pakistan Bar Council 
through its Vice President Mr. H. Shakeel Ahmed have challenged the 
validity of the appointments to the extent of the three Judges elevated 
from the Lahore High Court by filing the above-mentioned 
Constitution Petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic republic of Pakistan, hereinafter referred to as the 
Constitution. The appointment of Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad 
Raza has not been challenged for the reason that being the Chief 
Justice he was the most senior amongst the Judges of the Peshawar 
High Court.  
3.  The factual matrix in all the petitions relates to the 
number of available vacancies, details of appointments, seniority Const.P.1/2002 etc.  4
position of the elevated Judges and the incidence of supersession. 
The assertions prominently highlighted therein are that the names of 
Mr. Justice Khalil ur Rehman Ramday, Mr. Justice Muhammad 
Nawaz Abbasi and Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar appear at 
Serial No.3, 4 and 13 respectively of the seniority list of the Judges of 
the Lahore High Court, Mr. Justice Khalil ur Rehman Ramday and 
Mr. Justice Muhammad Nawaz Abbasi have superseded the Chief 
Justice and the senior puisne Judge of the Lahore High Court and 
Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar, who was the Secretary Law 
Justice and Human Rights Division at the crucial time, has not only 
superseded the Chief Justice and the senior puisne Judge but also 
eight other Judges senior to him. 
4.   The appointments have been challenged mainly on the 
following grounds:- 
 
(a) In view of the well established constitutional 
convention and the law laid down by this Court 
in Al-Jehad Trust  v. Federation of Pakistan   (PLD 
1996 SC 324), hereinafter referred to as the Judges case
, and Malik Asad Ali  v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 161), hereinafter referred 
to as Asad Ali's case  the concerned 
constitutional functionaries are bound to elevate Judges from the High Court to the Supreme Court on the basis of their seniority and in the event of departure from the principle of seniority 
they are obliged to record reasons which are 
justiciable. The appointments of Judges from the Lahore High Court have been made in violation of the principle of seniority;  
 
(b) The recommendations made by the judicial 
consultee and the reasons recorded by him as well as the President of Pakistan for appointing Const.P.1/2002 etc.  5
junior Judges of the Lahore High Court and 
ignoring the senior Judges have not been disclosed or communicated to the superseded Judges which shows that the process was not 
transparent; 
 
(c) The appointments militate against the doctrine of 
legitimate expectancy, enunciated in the aforesaid two cases, on which the principle of seniority is essentially based. The Chief Justice and other senior Judges of a High Court have a legitimate expectancy to be appointed as Judges of the Supreme Court according to their 
respective seniority and any deviation therefrom 
renders the appointment invalid and unconstitutional; 
 
(d) The appointments have introduced an arbitrary 
practice of ‘pick and choose’ which is fraught with disastrous consequences as on the one hand it will undermine the independence of judiciary, create an anarchic situation within the 
judiciary, lead to an unhealthy competition 
amongst Judges of the High Court to achieve coveted positions and out of turn elevations to the Supreme Court and on the other lead to the public perception of the Government having packed the Supreme Court with pliant and pliable Judges of its own liking;  
 
(e) The fundamental rights of ‘equality before law’ 
and ‘equal protection of law’ of the superseded 
Judges have been violated as they have been 
ignored and superseded without affording them an opportunity of being heard;  
 
(f) The superseded Judges have been disqualified 
from elevation in future and if elevated in future Const.P.1/2002 etc.  6
they will rank junior in the Supreme Court to the 
junior Judges who have superseded them;  
 
(g) The impugned notification is illegal to the extent 
of two vacancies which had occurred after the retirement of the Chief Justice of Pakistan in 
respect of whom he was not the judicial 
consultee at all. The Chief Justice can be a consultee only in respect of those vacancies which exist or occur during his own tenure and not those which are to occur after his retirement;  
 
(h) The appointment of Mr. Justice Faqir 
Muhammad Khokhar is void ab initio  because, 
firstly, he was not qualified for appointment as a 
Judge of the Supreme Court having not performed judicial duties and functions for a period of five years and, secondly, being the Secretary Law, Justice and Human Rights Division he had played an important role in the process of appointments in question and as such 
his appointment offended the principle of natural 
justice, viz., ‘no one should be a judge in his own 
cause’;  
 
(i) The office of Judge of the Supreme Court has 
been devalued by retaining the Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court and elevating his juniors to the Supreme Court;  
 
(j) The main object of the judgments of this Court in 
the Judges case
 and Asad Ali’s case  was to make 
the judiciary independent and self-operative but 
the same has been defeated by the impugned appointments; and 
 
(k) The fundamental right of the citizens of Pakistan 
to have access to impartial and independent Supreme Court has been infringed by appointment of junior Judges. Const.P.1/2002 etc.  7
5.  It has been prayed in all the petitions that the impugned 
appointments except that of Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Raza be 
declared as void being unconstitutional and a direction be issued for 
initiation of the process of appointment against the available 
vacancies afresh. It has been further prayed in Constitution Petition 
No.8 of 2002 that while making fresh appointments the petitioner 
and other lawyers should also be considered in view of the provisions 
of Article 177(2)(b) of the Constitution. 
6.  The Federation of Pakistan in its concise statement did 
not dispute the factual assertions in regard to seniority and 
supersession of the concerned Judges but resisted the petitions on 
the following pleas: - 
i) The appointments in question were made by the 
President of Pakistan strictly in accordance with 
the letter and spirit of the Constitution fully adhering to the recommendations made by the Chief Justice of  Pakistan; 
 ii) The petitions are not maintainable as the 
recommendations of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan in the process of constitutional 
consultation in the matter of appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court are not justiciable; and 
 
iii) The principles of legitimate expectancy and 
natural justice are not attracted. 
 
7.  At this juncture it will be pertinent to refer to CMA 
No.399/2002 moved in Constitution Petition No. 1 of 2002 and 
record reasons for its dismissal. Through the said CMA it was prayed 
that on account of the importance and sensitive nature of the matter 
the petition be heard by the Full Court excluding the newly appointed Const.P.1/2002 etc.  8
Judges. The prayer was adopted and joined in by the learned counsel 
representing the petitioners in the connected petitions. The 
application was turned down, after hearing learned counsel for the 
parties and the learned Attorney General, with the observation that 
reasons for its dismissal will be recorded in the main judgment.  
8.  In support of the application Mr. Hamid Ali Khan, 
Sr.ASC, learned counsel for the petitioner in Constitution Petition 
No.1 of 2002, contended that no doubt the constitution of Benches 
for hearing cases is the prerogative of the Chief Justice of Pakistan 
but a practice has developed over the years that all important 
constitutional matters are heard by the Full Court. Reliance was 
placed on the cases reported as Reference by H.E. the Governor 
General  (PLD 1955 FC 435), Reference by the President of Pakistan  
(PLD 1957 SC 219), Special Reference under Article 187 of the Interim 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  (PLD 1973 SC 563), 
Reference No.1 of 1988 made by the President of Pakistan  (PLD 1989 
SC 75) and Federal Government of Pakistan  v. M.D. Tahir Advocate  
(1990 SCMR 189). He also laid emphasis on Asad Ali’s case  and 
submitted with vehemence that the entire Court had heard the said 
matter, therefore, whenever the question of appointment of Judges of 
the Supreme Court is involved/raised in any case all the Judges of the Supreme Court should hear the case. He also, though half-
heartedly, tried to argue that Judges of all the Provinces should sit on 
the Bench to decide the questions raised in these petitions.  
9.  Mr. A. K. Dogar, learned counsel for petitioner in 
Constitution Petition No.6 of 2002 referred to Articles 176 and 177 of 
the Constitution to contend that the concept of Benches is 
unconstitutional and the Supreme Court must hold its sitting as one Const.P.1/2002 etc.  9
body because it is a single unit and entity as an institution and the 
Court as defined in Article 176 of the Constitution should hear the 
cases as is done in the United States of America.  He also read out 
the definition of the expression “quorum” from the Black’s Law 
Dictionary and contended that the provisions in regard to 
constitution of Benches contained in the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 
particularly Order XI thereof are ultra vires  the Constitution. He 
concluded his arguments with the submission that whenever an 
important question cropped up this Court leaned in favour of a larger 
Bench. Since the present case involved issues of general public importance, therefore, all the Judges should be associated by 
constituting a larger Bench. 
10.  Dr. Farooq Hasan, learned counsel for the petitioner in 
Constitution Petition No.8 of 2002, stated at the outset that the 
proposition advanced by Mr. A.K. Dogar had no constitutional or 
legal basis and the rules framed by the Supreme Court with a view to 
regulating its working were intra vires  the Constitution and did not 
suffer from any legal infirmity. However, he contended that the 
matter of appointment of Judges was very serious and involved 
legitimacy of the Court itself, therefor e, the petitions  should be heard 
by the Full Court or a larger Bench. 11.  M/S Razhid Rizvi, Mian Allah Nawaz and Hafiz Abdur 
Rehman Ansari learned counsel representing other petitioners 
adopted the contentions of Mr. Hamid Khan. 
12.  On the other hand, Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr.ASC, 
learned counsel for the Federation of Pakistan contended that all the 
learned counsel for the petitioners except Mr. A. K. Dogar had 
conceded that the rules governing constitution of Benches were intra 
vires and it is the sole prerogative of the Chief Justice of Pakistan to Const.P.1/2002 etc.  10
constitute Benches. He further contended that the Judges case  from 
which these petitions had flown was decided by a Bench of five 
Judges, there was no allegation of bias and the matter was not 
complex, therefore, the present Bench constituted by the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan was proper and in accordance with law and the 
Constitution. 
13.  The learned Attorney General for Pakistan contended 
that the points of law involved in these petitions were not complex 
and all the major judgments relating to appointment of Judges of the 
Superior Courts were rendered by Benches of five Judges. In support of the contention he cited Abrar Hassan’s
 v. Government of Pakistan  
(PLD 1976 SC 315), the Judges case , Muhammad Ikram Chaudhry 
and others  v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 1998 SC 103) 
and Ghulam Hyder Lakho  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2000 SC 
179). He further argued that Asad Ali’s case  stood on a different 
footing as it pertained to a writ of quo warranto.   
14.  It was rightly argued by Dr. Farooq Hasan that there is a 
clear distinction between the judicial system of the United States and 
that of Pakistan.  The Supreme Court of Pakistan works in Benches.  
All petitions for leave to appeal and appeals from appellate and 
revisional judgments and orders made by a Single Judge in the High Court are heard by a Bench of two Judges of this Court.  The 
petitions against acquittal and appeals decided by a Division Bench 
of the High Court are heard by three Judges of this Court.  However, 
depending upon the nature of the controversy involved in any 
particular case, the Chief Justice has the sole prerogative to 
constitute a larger Bench consisting of any number of Judges.  The 
objections raised at the Bar are neither new nor have been raised for Const.P.1/2002 etc.  11
the first time. Such objections were raised in the past in a number of 
cases but were repelled by this Court. In any case, it was conceded 
by all the learned counsel that it was the prerogative of the Chief 
Justice to constitute any Bench with any number of Judges and the 
same cannot be questioned. The contentions raised by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners are devoid of force and have no merit 
whatsoever.  The attention of the learned counsel was drawn to the 
Judges case , which was decided by five Judges of this Court, out of 
whom one was an ad hoc  Judge. Likewise the case of Abrar Hassan’s 
case, wherein a Judge of this Court was appointed as Acting Chief 
Justice of the High Court of Sindh and the notification of his 
appointment kept his lien/seniority in this Court, was heard by four 
Judges of this Court.  As far as Asad Ali’s case  is concerned, it was 
heard by ten Judges while four Judges refused to sit on the Bench.  
In course of hearing of Asad Ali’s case , an attempt was made to argue 
that the other Judges should also sit on the Bench but it was pointed 
out that since four learned Judges of this Court had refused to hear 
the case, therefore, they could not be forced to sit on the Bench.  It is important to note that Asad Ali’s case
 revolved around the 
appointment of Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah as the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, who could not have been appointed as such being junior to 
three other Judges. It is further important to observe here that while 
laying down that the rule of seniority should prevail because a Judge 
has legitimate expectancy to become the Chief Justice, the then Chief 
Justice, who was junior to three other Judges, did not opt to step 
down.  That is why at a subsequent stage when appointment of Mr. 
Justice Sajjad Ali Shah as the Chief Justice of Pakistan was challenged, a larger Bench was constituted to hear and decide the 
said case in a situation when the notification of appointment of Const.P.1/2002 etc.  12
Mr.Justice Sajjad Ali Shah stood suspended and he had been 
restrained from performing the functions as the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan.  We reiterate here that this Court not once but on a 
number of occasions has laid down that it is the sole prerogative of 
the Chief Justice of Pakistan to constitute a Bench of any number of 
Judges to hear any particular case and neither an objection can be 
raised nor is any party entitled to ask for constitution of a Bench of 
its own choice.  We are fortified in this view by the judgments 
reported as Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  v. State  (PLD 1978 SC 125), In re: 
M.A. No.657 of 1996 in References Nos.1 and 2 of 1996  (PLD 1997 SC 
80) and Hamid Sarfaraz  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1979 SC 991). 
Similarly, in the matter of constitution of Benches of this Court, it is 
inappropriate to raise the question of parochialism and provincialism.  
This was deprecated in Hamid Sarfaraz’s case . 
15.         Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr. ASC and President Supreme Court Bar Association has addressed the Court with the following 
contentions in support of Constitution Petition No. 1 of 2001: - 
(a) The Federation of Pakistan in its written 
statement, filed pursuant to the order of this Court, had not disclosed all the facts relevant and necessary for setting the controversy at rest. It was altogether silent about the 
recommendations of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan and reasons for recommending the junior and ignoring the senior Judges. There are no state secrets involved in judicial appointments, therefore, the record should be produced so that it could be seen as to why the senior Judges were ignored. The entire process 
of appointments has to be transparent so that 
the public at large has confidence in the independence of the judicial system. To the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  13
similar effect are the observations made in the 
Judges case  at page 404 that “the process of 
appointment of a Judge must be made 
transparent so that the litigant public and 
people at large should have faith in the independence of Judiciary.” The impugned appointments were diametrically opposed to the dictum laid down in the Judges case
 that there 
should be no room for complaint of arbitrariness 
or unfair play;  
 
(b) The notification in question was issued on 26th 
December, 2001 whereas the appointments were to take effect from 10
th January, 2002. At the 
time of issuance of the notification, the strength of the Court was Chief Justice plus fourteen Judges whereas the sanctioned strength is Chief 
Justice plus sixteen Judges. Two vacancies had 
occurred on the retirement of Mr. Justice Rashid Aziz Khan in July 2001 followed by the retirement of Mr. Justice Abdur Rehman Khan in September 2001 but the same were not filled within 30 days as directed in the Judges case.
 
The consultee Chief Justice retired on 6th 
January, 2002 and another learned Judge retired on 9
th January, 2002.  It was not within 
the competence of the then learned Chief Justice to make recommendations for appointments that were to take effect in future, particularly after 
his retirement. The lawyers generally and the 
Supreme Court Bar Association in particular have a strong stake that the principles laid down and the conventions recognized in the landmark judgment in the Judges case ,
 which was 
implemented through their efforts, are 
preserved. As a matter of fact under Rule 165 of 
Pakistan Legal Practitioners and Bar Councils Rules framed under Section 55 of the Bar Const.P.1/2002 etc.  14
Councils Act, 1973, which has been given 
judicial recognition in the Judges case , it is the 
duty of the lawyers to endeavour to prevent 
political considerations from outweighing 
judicial fitness in the appointment and selection of Judges. It is also the duty of the members of the Bar to ensure that the judiciary remains independent and this objective can only be achieved if the process of appointment of Judges 
is clean, transparent and not arbitrary. This 
principle was also reiterated and further fortified at page 245 (para 54) of the judgment in Asad 
Ali’s case.   In that case this proposition has 
been firmly and finally settled that the 
independence of judiciary is inextricably connected with the manner and process of the appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court because they are the persons in the country who are burdened with the responsibility of protecting and preserving the 
Constitution; 
 
(c) On 26
th December, 2001 the seniority position of 
the Judges of the Lahore High Court was as 
under:- 
 
1. Mr. Justice Falak Sher, Chief Justice 
2. Mr. Justice Mian Nazir Akhtar 
3. Mr. Justice Khalilur Rehman Ramday 
4. Mr. Justice Muhammad Nawaz Abbasi 
5. Mr. Justice Karamat Nazir Bhandari 
6. Justice Mrs. Fakhrun Nisa Khokhar 
7. Mr. Justice Iftikhar Hussain Chaudhry 
8. Mr. Justice M. Javed Butter 
9. Mr. Justice Tasadduq Hussain Jillani 
10. Mr. Justice Raja Muhammad Sabir 
11. Mr. Justice Sh. Abdul Razzaq 
12. Mr. Zafar Pasha Chaudhry 
13. Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar Const.P.1/2002 etc.  15
 
The Judges at serial No.1 and 2 were ignored in 
favour of those at serial No.3 and 4 and Judges at serial No.1, 2 and 5 to 12 were ignored in favour of the Judge at serial No.13. Thus, in two appointments two senior Judges were ignored 
and in the third appointment, 10 senior Judges 
were ignored and in doing so, no reasons whatsoever have been advanced; 
 
(e)     The judgments rendered by this Court in the 
Judges case
 and Asad Ali’s case  make it 
manifest that the entire exercise undertaken by this Court was to make the judicial system 
healthy and self-operative so as to ensure access 
to justice and preservation of the fundamental rights of all the citizens. The first step for making the judiciary self-operative is induction on merits and without personal considerations or political pressure of persons as Judges of the High Court whose integrity and competence are 
beyond question. The second step is that once 
the appointments are made in the High Court a seniority list of the Judges is to be maintained and the principle of seniority which is sine qua 
non for the maintenance of order and regularity, 
must be adhered to strictly. The third step is the 
legitimate expectancy to become the Chief Justice of the High Court and elevation to the Supreme Court. The fourth step is that whenever a vacancy occurs in the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of the High Court from  
where the vacancy is to be filled should be 
appointed and the way for the next senior Judge to attain his legitimate expectancy  should be 
cleared. The fifth step in the self-operative Judiciary is maintenance of seniority list of the 
Judges of the Supreme Court and preservation 
of their legitimate expectancy to be appointed as Const.P.1/2002 etc.  16
Chief Justice of Pakistan. It is only when the 
self-operative system is in vogue the judiciary would become independent and no Judge will look up to the government to make him the 
Chief Justice. If this is not followed every Judge 
would be prone to nurturing the ambition of becoming Chief Justice out of turn which would be disastrous for the judiciary. The Judges case
 
covers the first three steps i.e. (i) induction in 
the High Court on merits; (ii) maintenance of 
seniority amongst the High Court Judges; (iii) appointment of the senior puisne Judge of a High Court as Chief Justice of the High Court on the basis of the principle of legitimate expectancy whereas the last two steps i.e. (iv) elevation of the Chief Justice of High Court 
whenever a position is required to be filled from 
any High Court to the Supreme Court and if more than one Judges  are to be elevated, on the basis of seniority, and (v)  maintenance of seniority list of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the legitimate expectancy of the Judges to be appointed as Chief Justice of Pakistan 
according to the seniority are covered by Asad 
Ali’s case.  Any breach of these steps would 
throw the entire judicial system and the judicial scheme of things in a state of anarchy and 
disorder and even if one of these five elements is 
disturbed, the whole system will collapse and we will go back to square one, i.e. the situation prevailing prior to the Judges case.
 The 
appointment of three junior Judges of the 
Lahore High Court as Judges of the Supreme 
Court involves breach of third and fourth steps which has disturbed the judicial order;  
 
(f) According to the observations made in para 7(i) 
at page 364 of the  Judges case,
 in the case of Const.P.1/2002 etc.  17
elevation of the Supreme Court Judges the 
‘consensus’ means the consensus of three consultees viz., the Chief Justice of Pakistan, 
the Prime Minister and the President. The Prime 
Minster, whose advice is binding on the President is missing, so there was no consensus within the purview of the Judges case.
 At 
present there is de facto  Presidential system 
which is not akin to the Parliamentary system. 
It does not mean that no appointments should have been made in the last two and half years because that would not be in the interest of the people but  after the exit of the President in 
June 2001, it was even more important that no 
appointment generating any controversy should have been made whereas the impugned appointments have created controversy. In this particular situation, where consensus cannot be created because one of the constitutional functionaries is missing, the appointments 
should be made strictly on the basis of the 
criteria of seniority laid down in the two judgments. In the Judges case,
 primacy has 
been given to the opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan, but at the same time, it does not mean exclusiveness; 
 
(g) The impugned appointments are ex facie   
violative of the established constitutional 
conventions that the Judges are to be appointed/elevated in accordance with the principle of seniority. The conventions are at a pedestal higher than the ordinary law as held at pages 179 and 313 of Asad Ali’s case
. The word 
‘Judge’ as defined in Article 260 of the 
Constitution includes Chief Justice and there is no difference between a Judge and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court except that the latter Const.P.1/2002 etc.  18
performs some administrative functions. The 
rule of seniority enunciated in Asad Ali’s case  
must, therefore, be extended to appointment of 
the Judges of the Supreme Court and if the rule 
is not applied in the case of appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court then the entire exercise undertaken by this Court in the Judges 
case and Asad Ali’s case  will be rendered 
meaningless. The appointment of a Judge of the 
High Court as Chief Justice and that of Chief Justice of a High Court as Judge of the Supreme Court, is generally termed as ‘elevation’ but the word ‘elevation’ has not been 
used in the Constitution. The word ‘elevation’ 
has not been used either in the Constitution of the United States of America or that of India. It is appointment, akin to promotion, but it is not a fresh appointment and it can be said to be an appointment by promotion, i.e. appointment to a higher position. New oath is administered for 
the reason that the incumbent is required to 
perform different kind of functions. The doctrine of legitimate expectancy  laid down and provided 
for in the Judges case
 and Asad Ali’s case 
applies to all stages and it cannot be said that a 
senior Judge has  legitimate expectancy of being 
appointed as Chief Justice of the High Court or the Supreme Court but not as a Judge of the Supreme Court; 
 
(h) The doctrine of justiciability, which has certain 
judicial and legal connotations, is applicable to 
the recommendations of the judicial consultee if 
the same are not within the parameters of reasonable, determinable and justifiable criteria and concept of separation of powers between the various organs of the State.  The meanings of the word ‘justiciable’ given in the Black’s Law Const.P.1/2002 etc.  19
Dictionary, 6th Edition advance the proposition 
that opinion of the Chief Justice is a ‘matter appropriate for court review’ particularly when it suffers from arbitrariness, unreasonableness, 
unfairness and obvious mistake. The opinion of 
the Chief Justice whether it is a matter of ‘objective’ or ‘subjective’ satisfaction, is in effect an exercise of discretion which cannot be wanton and has to be exercised reasonably, in complete good faith and it should not frustrate the ultimate object, i.e. appointment on merit 
and merit includes seniority. In Chairman, 
Regional Transport Authority  v. Pakistan Mutual 
Insurance Co.  (PLD 1991 SC 14), Government of 
N.W.F.P through Secretary and 3 others  v. Mejee 
Flour and General Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. Mardan and 
others  (1997 SCMR 1804) and Director, Food, 
NWFP & others  v. M/S Madina Flour Mills, 
through General Manager  (PLJ 2001 SC 9) the 
subject of structuring of discretion has been dealt with and it has been held that the discretionary powers delegated to an officer are 
held in trust for the people and whenever 
circumstances clearly point to bias, mala fide  or 
dubious exercise, the exercise of discretion would not be proper; and 
 
(i) That apart from the principle of seniority, the 
appointment of Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar, who at the relevant time was at serial 
No.13 in the seniority list of the Judges of the 
Lahore High Court, was hit by the provisions of Article 177 of the Constitution. The said learned Judge was appointed in December 1996 as an Additional Judge of the Lahore High Court and as a Judge in December 1997.  On 11
th January 
2000, he was appointed as Federal Law 
Secretary.  He worked as an Additional Judge Const.P.1/2002 etc.  20
for one year and as a Judge of the High Court 
for two years and a few days and thus he did not complete five years service as a Judge of the High Court as contemplated under Article 177 
of the Constitution.  The period spent by him as 
the Federal Law Secretary cannot be counted in his service as a Judge of the High Court.  The situation is similar to that of certain Judges of the High Courts who were laid off in view of the Judges case
 on the ground that their 10 years 
practice at the Bar was simpliciter and not 
effective. The appointment of Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar, apart from suffering from the constitutional flaw, was defective inasmuch as being the Federal Law Secretary he was instrumental in the process of appointments of 
the Judges and other constitutional 
functionaries, such as the Chief Election Commissioner, the Auditor General of Pakistan, Chairman, Federal Public Service Commission, etc and as such he had not only made mileage from his status as the Law Secretary but was also a judge in his own cause. 
16(1)  The learned counsel in the remaining petitions while 
adopting the arguments of Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr. ASC, have 
argued the additional grounds. Mr A.K Dogar, ASC made the 
following submissions: -  
(a) All the Constitution Petitions filed in this Court 
challenging the impugned appointments may be stayed pending decision of the writ petitions filed in the Lahore High Court. The Pakistan Lawyers Forum had filed a writ petition in the Lahore High Court which was admitted to 
regular hearing, notices were issued to the 
Federation and the learned Attorney General and a date was also fixed for hearing sometime Const.P.1/2002 etc.  21
in the month of February.  Two similar writ 
petitions were filed at Bahawalpur and Rawalpindi Benches of the Lahore High Court which too were admitted to regular hearing and 
an order had been passed that a larger Bench of 
five Judges be constituted for hearing the same.  An order was also passed by the learned Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court that all the cases be heard together by the learned Division Bench already hearing the case of Pakistan Lawyers Forum.  However, it transpired before 
the hearing that record of all the petitions had 
been forwarded to this Court.  In support of the prayer he referred to the observations made in the case reported as Manzoor Elahi
 v.  
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1975 S.C.66 at 79) 
that: (i) if two Courts have concurrent 
jurisdiction and the petitioner elects to invoke jurisdiction of one of such Courts then he should be bound by such election; (ii) if there are two Courts vested with concurrent 
jurisdiction, but one is subject to appellate 
jurisdiction of the other, as in the case of High Court and the Supreme Court the litigant cannot be deprived of his vested right of appeal;   (iii) it is an established principle of law that the lowest Court or Tribunal must be approached in the first instance; and (iv) the language used in 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution is so strong 
that despite petition filed in the Supreme Court the one filed in the High Court can only proceed. He submitted that the judgment in Manzoor 
Elahi’s case  was rendered by the Full Court 
whereas the case reported as Pakistan Lawyers 
Forum  v. Pervez Musharraf  (2000 SCMR 897) 
was decided by three learned Judges of this 
Court and the case of Manzoor Elahi  was merely 
distinguished and not revisited. The provisions Const.P.1/2002 etc.  22
of Article 184(3) of the Constitution make it 
manifest that the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution is much wider than that of the Supreme Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution; 
(b) The petitioners were well within their right to 
examine the record as in the absence of record the questions raised in the petition cannot be determined.  According to him, the record i.e. the correspondence between the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the Ministry of Law should have 
been appended with the concise statement. The 
Federal Government had kept the process of impugned appointments secret and confidential, therefore, production of the record was essential and an adverse inference will have to be drawn in the event of its non-production as was done 
in the Judges Case
. The Federal Govt. was 
obliged to proceed in the matter in accordance with the Islamic principles.  In Islam, absolute justice is required, which means absolute fairness.  Absolute justice in Islam is distinguished from the ‘remedial justice of the 
Greeks’, the ‘formal justice of the Anglo-Saxons’ 
and the ‘natural justice of the Romans’.  He submitted that fairness demands that the entire record should be produced by the Federal government; 
(c) Under Article 177 of the Constitution the 
appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court is 
neither promotion nor involves the process of confirmation.  It is just an ‘appointment’ in contradistinction with ‘nomination’. The difference between the two is that the appointment is made according to certain criteria while nomination is arbitrary, 
capricious, haphazard, without any criterion, Const.P.1/2002 etc.  23
merit and is just pick and choose.  In the 
present case the Judges have been nominated because the appointments have not been based upon any tangible criteria; 
(d) The word ‘seniority’ in relation to the 
appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court has not been used anywhere in the Constitution and for the proposition that only the most senior Judges of the High Courts are to be appointed as Judges of the Supreme Court dependence would mainly rest upon the 
convention regarding appointments of the 
seniors in preference to the juniors.  The principle of seniority is in-built in Article 177 inasmuch as for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court five years service as a Judge of the High Court or fifteen years practice at the 
Bar have been laid down.  These are clear 
pointers to the fact that the framers of the Constitution wanted the number of years to be relevant for the purposes of these appointments, therefore, if a person has greater years of service or practice, he has a better right to be appointed as such.  The longer the experience the more 
meritorious a Judge is which is a matter of 
common experience and thus the rule of seniority is a constituent element of merit. Appointments made in violation of the principle of seniority have serious and dangerous consequences and if the appointing authority or a consultee deviates from that principle he must 
give cogent reasons for such deviation and 
public at large and the lawyer community in particular have a right to know such reasons; 
(e) The opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan is 
an opinion of the Judiciary, therefore, it is to be made in consultation with the senior Judges of Const.P.1/2002 etc.  24
the Supreme Court.  In the present case opinion 
of the Chief Justice of Pakistan appears to have been made without consultation with the senior Judges of the Supreme Court. According to the 
observations made in re Presidential Reference 
(AIR 1999 SC1) the opinion of the Chief Justice 
of India with regard to appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court is formed in consultation with collegium of Judges which consists of four 
senior most Judges of the Supreme Court.  
While forming the opinion inter se  seniority of 
the Judges is given due weight and strong reasons are recorded in case of departure from the order of seniority; and 
(f) In Amanullah Khan and others
 v. Federal 
Government of Pakistan and others  (1990 SC 
1092) seven principles for guidance of exercise of discretion have been laid down and it has been held that the discretionary power without 
rules to regulate its exercise is taken to be an 
enhancement of power.  In the same string is the case of Inamur Rehman
 (1992 SCMR 563) 
wherein it has been ruled that unguided discretion and the practice of ‘pick and choose’ 
are ex facie discriminatory and arbitrary and 
cannot be constitutionally recognized.  The judiciary besides being self-operative, as emphasized by Mr Hamid Khan, should also have a self-executory and automatic system in place with the least room for arbitrary pick and 
choose. 
(2) Dr. Farooq Hasan, Sr. ASC submitted as under:- 
(a) The term ‘legitimate’ is synonymous with the 
word ‘reason’, therefore, the burden is on the Federation to prove that the appointments were reasonable. The senior Judges of the Lahore High Court had legitimate expectancy to be Const.P.1/2002 etc.  25
elevated as Judges of the Supreme Court but 
they were ignored and thus the principle of legitimate expectancy laid down in the Judges 
case and Asad Ali’s case  was violated; 
(b) There is a classification of Judges in a Court 
and within that classification there is an order of sequential preference, which applies to the length and breadth of all kinds of activity that 
the Court undertakes. The way the Judges sit, 
walk, etc there is a methodology. In terms of ‘discretion’ it starts with the Chief Justice and in terms of voting the order is vice versa , therefore, 
order is very important. The passages occurring 
at pages 341 and 352 of the Judges case,
 read 
many times during hearing, deal with disastrous consequences such as heart-burning, psychological disadvantages, etc., that would follow in case the principle of seniority is violated. While ignoring the senior Judges and 
picking junior Judges strong reasons are 
required to be given because higher position in seniority is reached going by the rungs of the ladder one by one; 
(c) The word ‘opinion’ occurring para 7(i) at page 
364 of the judgment in the Judges case
 has 
been used in a legal sense in which judgments 
are given and it is like a judgment of a Court. The Courts always have jurisdiction in all matters and it is for them to withhold scrutiny by self-imposed standards. The ouster of jurisdiction has not stood in the way of the 
Courts of Pakistan inasmuch as even double 
non obstante  clauses in the Constitution have 
not prevented them from examining the matters brought before them. The jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184 (3) is all encompassing 
and there are no contours on its provisions as Const.P.1/2002 etc.  26
held in Mahmood Khan Achakzai’s case  (PLD 
1997 SC 426), Syed Zafar Ali Shah’s case  (PLD 
2000 SC 869) Muhammad Sharif  v. Federation of 
Paksitan  (PLD 1988 Lah. 725) and Haji Saifullah 
Khan’s case  (PLD 1989 SC 166). The 
recommendations made by the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan cannot be termed as ‘subjective’ and being ‘objective’ are judicially reviewable. The principles of natural justice are applicable to the exercise of discretion according to the book titled ‘Administrative Law’ by H.W.R. Wade. The 
Courts do not allow abuse of discretionary 
power. In the present case, the discretionary power has been exceeded, therefore, the impugned appointments are liable to be struck down; 
(d) The issue of ‘bias and the conflict of interest’, 
has been commented upon elaborately in Asad 
Ali’s case.  This is a fundamental point in this 
case because the beneficiary i.e. Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar somehow is involved in the process.  According to the definition of the 
expression ‘conflict of interest’ given in the 
Black’s Law Dictionary a public official is in a fiduciary relationship and the concept of trust is most important in law. In the present case the said learned Judge stood at the relevant time in a fiduciary relationship, therefore, there is a 
clash between the public interest and private 
interest; 
(e) Article 177 of the Constitution, which is pari 
materia  with Article 193 ibid, provides two pools 
of candidates for judgeship of the Supreme 
Court, viz., Judges of the High Courts with not less than five years service and lawyers with not less than 15 years standing at the Bar. However, no lawyer has so far been appointed as a Judge Const.P.1/2002 etc.  27
of the Supreme Court with the result that the 
provisions contained in Article 177(2)(b) have become redundant. The members of the legal fraternity should also be considered for 
appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court; 
and 
(f) On the day the impugned notification was 
issued the incumbent President was not lawfully authorized to make the appointments. 
 
(3) Mian Allah Nawaz, ASC made the following submissions:- 
(a) The Judges case
 was the result of overbearing 
struggle between the two wings of the government, i.e. the executive and the judiciary 
and for the first time certain restrictions, limits 
and parameters between the two organs of the State were laid down. The Judges case
 may be 
revisited and the defects which have come to light with passage of time may be removed; and 
(b) Since on the day of the notification there existed 
two vacancies, therefore, two appointments, i.e., 
one from the Peshawar High Court and the other from the Lahore High Court may be allowed to stand and the remaining two appointments from the Lahore High Court must be de-notified because the learned Chief Justice was not a consultee in relation thereto. 
(4) Mr. Rashid A. Rizvi, ASC made the following 
submissions:- 
(a) Consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan 
can be made only in respect of existing vacancies in the Supreme Court, the doctrine of legitimate expectancy is fully applicable in the matter of appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court, the criteria for elevation to the Supreme Const.P.1/2002 etc.  28
Court should be the rule of seniority as it is 
recognized by law as well as the Constitution, and the matter of elevation of High Court Judges to the Supreme Court may not be left to the 
absolute and unfettered discretion of the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice in view of the well known maxim, ‘absolute power corrupts absolutely’ ; 
(b) In the light of para 7 (i) of the short order in the 
Judges case
 and the detailed discussion 
occurring at page 491 of the judgment effective, 
meaningful, purposive and consensus oriented consultation requires the Chief Justice to give sound reasons while formulating his recommendations for appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court and for ignoring the senior 
Judges of the High Court which should be made 
public; and 
(c) The questions of legitimate expectancy and the 
rule of seniority are inter-connected and the concept of legitimate expectancy is part of the principles of natural justice. The rule of 
seniority laid down for the appointment of the 
Chief Justice of the High Court and the Chief Justice of Pakistan should be applicable to the appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court. The rule of seniority is also recognized by Article 209 of the Constitution, which provides for the composition of the Supreme Judicial 
Council, i.e. the Chief Justice of Pakistan, two 
most senior Judges of the Supreme Court and two most senior Chief Justices of the High Courts. 
(5) Mr. K.M.A. Samdani, ASC filed written arguments in 
support of the case of his client. According to him: - 
(a) The appointment of three junior Judges of the 
Lahore High Court as Judges of the Supreme Const.P.1/2002 etc.  29
Court of Pakistan is against the law and 
precedents of the superior courts. The seniority of the Judges of different High Courts in Pakistan must be reckoned w.e.f. the dates of 
their appointment, i.e. their seniority must be 
determined on all Pakistan basis for appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. The position of inter se  seniority of the 
Judges of the Lahore High Court is admitted 
and as a result of the violation of the rule of 
seniority, the superior judiciary of the country has sunk into frustration and disappointment; 
 
(b) The ultimate responsibility in the matter of 
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan is that of the President of Pakistan. He was supposed to consult the Chief Justice of Pakistan in the matter of appointment against the existing vacancies and was not legally 
required to ditto the recommendation without 
examining whether it was just and fair or whether it was erroneous and arbitrary. The then Chief Justice did not assign any reason for superseding either the Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court or the other Judges of the 
Lahore High Court and arbitrarily followed the 
rule of pick and choose which is detrimental to the independence of judiciary and against all canons of justice and fair play; and 
 
(c) The recommendation of the Ex-Chief Justice has 
merged into the final order/notification issued by the President of Pakistan, which is justiciable under the constitutional jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. If these illegal 
appointments are not undone, then in future 
the Judges of High Courts in Pakistan will tend to become subservient to the wishes of the executive. In that eventuality, judiciary will lose Const.P.1/2002 etc.  30
its confidence. Needless to add that if judiciary 
loses its independence and confidence in the eyes of the litigants/general public, then people resort to self-help, which promotes crime and 
terrorism in the society. Moreover, foreign 
investment is stopped because in case of a dispute, the foreign investor does not expect a fair and impartial decision from the judiciary.  
17(1)   Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC, representing the 
Federation of Pakistan submitted that the Court must take judicial 
notice of the fact that the Judges case
 was decided at a time when 
there was a virtual state of confrontation between the judiciary and the executive and the judgment in Asad Ali’s case
 was also the result 
of confrontation between the then Chief Justice and the executive.  It 
is also known and noted in Asad Ali’s case  that Mr. Justice Ajmal 
Mian, J. (as he then was) had not accepted the appointment of Mr. 
Justice Sajjad Ali Shah as Chief Justice of Pakistan and the persons who were aggrieved by the elevation of the then Chief Justice had not 
waived their right. He submitted that the things were not good 
between the Bar and the former Chief Justice and the impugned 
notification has left a little heart burning in the Bar.   
(2)      He next submitted that in December, 1972 the 
Constitution Committee, in which representatives of all the political 
parties in the Constituent Assembly were present, had unanimously 
recommended that the removal of the Judges of the Superior Courts, 
as in India, be made by the Parliament and the conduct of the Judges 
must be debated publicly. The recommendation was resisted by the 
Judiciary.  Mr. Justice Hamoodur Rehman, Chief Justice of Pakistan, 
Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal, Chief Justice of the Lahore 
High Court and Mr. Justice Tufail Ali Abdur Rehman, Chief Justice of Const.P.1/2002 etc.  31
the High Court of Sindh threatened to resign in the event of 
acceptance of recommendation. He submitted that the sum total of 
the Judges case  is that the power of appointment of the Judges of the 
superior courts did not rest with the executive and primacy was 
conceded to the opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan.  On the 
basis of the observations made in the Judges case  it has been held in 
Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case   (PLD 2000 SC 179) that the views of the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan are subjective and his opinion is not 
justiciable. The primacy conceded to the Chief Justice went to such 
an extent that it became non-justiciable and the irony of the fate is 
that it was the pressure from the Bar, which had transferred the 
power resting with the President to the Chief Justice. However, if the 
demand of the Bar of making the appointment of the Judges of the 
Supreme Court on the principle of seniority is accepted their next 
demand would be that the Bar be consulted in the matter of appointment of Judges of Superior Courts and one wonders what will 
happen if the question of appointment of Judges is debated in the 
Bar.   
(3) He further submitted that a wrong precedent was set by 
this Court in the Judges case
 and Asad Ali’s case  by making them 
applicable ex post facto  and the result is that petitions are being filed 
to challenge the appointment of the Judges of the Superior Courts.  The closest constitutional arrangement to that of Pakistan in respect 
of the appointment of Judges is that of India.  They virtually follow 
the same practice, although there are certain different provisions 
regarding collegium of Judges.  However, none of the judgments of 
the Indian Supreme Court have been made retrospectively applicable 
and not a single sitting Judge has ever been de-notified and whatever 
they have laid down, has been made applicable to future.  In the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  32
AORs case  (AIR 1994 SC 268) the provision of Article 124(2) of the 
Constitution of India, which lays down that the Chief Justice of India 
while making recommendation for the appointment of the Judges will 
consult the senior Judges of the Supreme Court, was interpreted and 
from there emerged the concept of collegium of Judges.  Such a 
provision does not exist in the Constitution of Pakistan and the entire 
consultative power has been vested in the Chief Justice of Pakistan. 
The concept of collegium of Judges can be adopted for the future but 
in order to avoid any controversy in the power of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, the matter can be considered by the Pakistan Law Commission, which is the appropriate forum for the purpose. Mr. 
Pirzada raised the following further contentions:- 
(a) The appointment of Mr. Justice Faqir 
Muhammad Khokhar, which appears to have been singled out as against the other three Judges, does not suffer from any legal defect or constitutional disqualification. He was enrolled as an Advocate of the Supreme Court in June, 1975 and was appointed as Deputy Attorney 
General on 24.7.1990.  Under section 3 of the 
Central Law Officers Ordinance, 1970 (Ordinance VII of 1970), the qualifications for appointment as Deputy Attorney General are same as that of a Judge of the Supreme Court, so he was eligible for appointment as a Judge of 
the Supreme Court in the year 1990.  Mr. 
Justice (Late) S. A. Nusrat had rendered less than five years service as a Judge of the High Court but he was appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court in view of his 29 years practice at the Bar. The contention that a person in order to be qualified for appointment as a Judge of 
Supreme Court must have had experience of 
functioning as a Judge of High Court for five Const.P.1/2002 etc.  33
years was not correct as held in Malik Ghulam 
Jilani  v. Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul  (1978 SCMR 
110) Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul as well as Mr. 
Justice (Late) S. A. Nusrat were appointed as Judges of the Supreme Court while serving as Secretary, Ministry of Law and Parliamentary Affairs; 
 
(b) As to the non-availability of two vacancies on 
26
th December 2001, the issuance of notification 
in anticipation of the vacancies is not an 
unusual act as it has happened many a times in 
the past, such as the appointment of Mr. Justice M. R. Khan and Mr. Justice Saiduzzaman Siddiqui, the former Chief Justice of Pakistan, which was notified 2/3 months in advance.  Unless an appointee makes oath of his office, he 
cannot perform the functions of his office and 
the provisions of Article 178 of the Constitution are very clear on the subject.  In the present case, although the notification was issued on 26
th December 2001, yet the notification itself 
recited that the appointments will take effect from 10
th January 2002, i.e. the day when four 
vacancies would be available in the Supreme 
Court.  The Judges case in fact mandates that the process of appointments against the vacancies foreseeable in the near future ought to be initiated in advance. Article 177 of the Constitution refers to the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and there is no reference 
to the occurrence of vacancies.  As far as 
appointment against vacant office of the Chief Justice of Pakistan or a Judge of the Supreme Court is concerned, it is governed by Articles 180 & 181 of the Constitution.  No doubt such an appointment is to be made when the 
concerned office is vacant but in these cases too Const.P.1/2002 etc.  34
the process of appointment has to be initiated 
before the actual occurrence of the vacancy.  If the process is to be initiated on or after the occurrence of vacancies as is canvassed by the 
learned counsel for the petitioners, it will upset 
the scheme of things.  In all such cases, the appointment is made before the occurrence of the vacancy but the appointment takes effect from the date mentioned in the notification; 
 
(c) The principle of seniority in the appointment of 
the Judges of the Supreme Court has not been accepted in the Judges case
 and Asad Ali’s case.  
Rather it has been  categorically held that there 
is no such convention. In Asad Ali’s case , after 
tracing the entire history of the appointments of the Chief Justices of Pakistan it was found that 
there was a long practice of appointment of the 
most senior Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of Pakistan and it was held that this practice had become a constitutional convention which was enforced as part of the Constitution; 
 
(d) An Additional Judge of the High Court has 
legitimate expectancy to become a permanent Judge if a permanent vacancy occurs during his 
tenure as an Additional Judge. The most senior 
Judge of a High Court has legitimate expectancy to be appointed as Chief Justice of High Court in the absence of sound reasons to be recorded by the executive which have been made justiciable.  The most senior Judge of the High Court has 
not been conferred dual legitimate expectancy, 
in the first place to be appointed as Chief Justice of High Court, or in the second, to be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court.  If the principle of seniority  is made applicable to the appointment of Judges  in the Supreme Const.P.1/2002 etc.  35
Court then integrated seniority list of all the 
High Courts would per force be required to be maintained which  may not be desirable in our context; 
 
(e) The appointments of Mr. Justice Mukhtar 
Ahmed Junejo, Mr. Justice Raja Afrasiab Khan 
and Mr. Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri, immediately after the Judges case
 and then the 
appointment of Mr. Justice Tanvir Ahmed Khan, superseding Mr. Justice Falak Sher, establish that no constitutional convention exists for 
appointing the most senior Judge of a High 
Court as a Judge of the Supreme Court; 
 
(f) The appointment of Judges of the Supreme 
Court is made on the basis of merit and the Chief Justice of Pakistan is best qualified to assess the merits of any person for judgeship in the Supreme Court.  The opinion of the Chief Justice, being subjective, is not open to judicial 
review, more so in the present case because it 
has been reinforced by the succeeding Chief Justice who accepted it and administered oath of office to the four Judges; 
 
(g) Article 177(2)(b) of the Constitution is not 
redundant.  Competent, able, fairly senior Advocates of the Supreme Court have a legitimate expectancy to be considered for 
appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court 
and several Hon’ble Chief Justices have seriously considered the question of appointment of senior lawyers as Judges of the Supreme Court. Merit should not be sacrificed for the sake of seniority.  Guidelines may be laid down so that the provisions of Article 177 (2)(b) 
of the Constitution are not rendered redundant; 
 Const.P.1/2002 etc.  36
(h) The judgment in   Asad Ali’s case  has closed the 
door on the question of issuance of writ against brother Judges and it was held that this power 
may be available to the Supreme Court but not 
to the High Court.  In Abrar Hassan’s case,
 this 
factor was clearly deprecated and a caution was sounded; 
 
(i) Transparency in the context of appointment of 
Judges of the Supreme Court connotes that in case the executive differs with the 
recommendation of the Chief Justice, valid 
reasons are required to be given which are justiciable but the Court cannot substitute its opinion for that of the constitutional consultee. In the present case the Federation is under no moral pressure because it is the record of the 
Chief Justice and the Court and as happens in 
India, the process of appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan starts with the recommendation of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and with the Chief Justice of a High Court if the appointment of a Judge of the High Court is to be made; 
 
(j) After the two judgments, as reiterated in Ghulam 
Hyder Lakho’s case , it is for the Court to weigh 
the evil and the good that may possibly result in opening up the record which is not the norm but an aberration because if the recommendation of the Chief Justice is made public it will put 
undue and unbearable strain and burden not 
only on the Chief Justice but also on the Judge concerned.  In the past, on the rule of propriety, this Court has refrained from destroying the confidentiality of the recommendations of the Chief Justice.  Injustices happen in a system 
that is governed by human beings but balance is 
required to be struck in the interest of the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  37
institution.  In Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case , Mr. 
Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri, (as he then was) had expressed unhappiness over the 
harm done to some of the Judges and made 
harsh observations but notwithstanding the same it was held that the opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan is not justiciable.  Protection to the opinion of the Chief Justice has been given by a judgment of this Court, which can 
only be undone by this Court, that too 
prospectively and not retrospectively; 
 
(k) On the issue of existence of vacancies, the 
scheme, intent and mandate of the Constitution is that it does not countenance occurrence of vacancies for the tenure appointments, particularly where the vacancies are anticipated ones.  The distinction between the anticipated and unanticipated vacancies has been 
recognized by this Court in the Judges case
, 
inasmuch as it talks of two types of vacancies, i.e. a determinative vacancy which is reasonably assured on a particular date (retirement of a Judge) and unanticipated vacancy which may 
result from death, disability, resignation or 
removal of a Judge.  An anticipated vacancy is required to be filled up within 30 days and an unanticipated vacancy within 90 days.  Article 177 of the Constitution does not countenance prior occurrence of the vacancies, but it talks of appointment of Judges by the President in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan.    
The appointment of   Mr. Justice Hamoodur Rehman was notified in advance. Mr. Justice Fazle Akbar, the then Chief Justice of Pakistan had recommended the appointment of Mr. Justice M. R. Khan against his own vacancy, 
who was a junior Judge from East Pakistan and Const.P.1/2002 etc.  38
the notification was issued one and a half 
months before the vacancy occurred.  In this behalf, the practice is well established that the retiring Chief Justice in anticipation makes the 
recommendations which are accepted and 
appointments made but oath is administered and vacancy filled on the retirement of the incumbent.  There is nothing on record to show that Mr. Justice Hamoodur Rehman had declined to make recommendations before his retirement, as stated by one of the counsel for 
the petitioners.  In some countries, the list is 
issued in the beginning of the year for the appointments to be made during the whole year.  There is no impediment in the way of the Chief Justice making recommendations for filling vacancies that are to occur after his own 
retirement; 
 
(l) The appointment of Judges consists of five 
parts: (i) recommendation/initiation of 
consultation process by the Chief Justice of Pakistan in the case of a Judge of the Supreme Court and by the Chief Justice of High Court in the case of a Judge of the High Court; (ii) consideration of the recommendation by the President, agreement or disagreement and giving 
reasons in the latter case. For a meaningful 
consultation, it is possible that the President may refer the matter to the Chief Justice to reconsider his recommendation and the Chief Justice may alter his recommendations; (iii) issuance of the notification of appointment; (iv) 
communication of the appointment to the Judge 
designate, who may accept the appointment or refuse it; and (v) administration of oath of office to the Judge by the Chief Justice of Pakistan, as Const.P.1/2002 etc.  39
commanded by Article 178 of the Constitution 
which is not in the hands of the executive; 
 
(m) The appointment can be present or in future 
and can take effect immediately or on a certain contingency and until the final stage of 
appointment, i.e. oath has occurred no vested 
right is created in the Judge.  A person who has been appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court cannot enter upon his office unless he takes oath which is the last process of appointment. That is why in the impugned notification Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad 
Khokhar was addressed as Secretary, Law, 
Justice & Human Rights, i.e. as a Judge of the High Court and not that of the Supreme Court.  It is quite possible that before oath takes place the notification may be withdrawn as for example where the sitting Chief Justice says that he has not been consulted; 
 
(n) Mr. Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri took 
over as Chief Justice of Pakistan on 7
th January 
2002 and administered oath to the Judges appointed through the impugned notification on 10
th January 2002. He neither wrote to the 
President to withdraw the notification on the ground that he was not in agreement with the appointments nor had he sent his own 
recommendations. He could have refused to 
administer the oath of office, reconsidered the recommendations or made new recommendations in the exercise of his powers.  He also did not suspend the impugned notification in the exercise of his judicial power while presiding over the Bench which had heard 
the Constitutional Petition on 31
st January 2002 
and issued notices; 
 Const.P.1/2002 etc.  40
(o) The period of 30 days given in the judgment 
presupposes that the process is initiated much earlier. The Constitution is to be interpreted as a whole. On the tenure appointments, as with the 
office of the President (Article 44), the process 
precedes the actual occurrence of vacancy but the term of his office starts the day he takes the oath, although he is elected earlier.  Similarly, the term of the office of a Judge starts when he takes oath.  The provisions of Article 224 of the Constitution are also a case in point.  In the 
United States, the President is elected three 
months before the vacancy occurs; 
 
(p) The impugned notification is not severable. It is 
either wholly good or wholly bad. If it is good in respect of Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Raza, as conceded by the learned counsel for the petitioners, then it is good in respect of the remaining three Judges as well; and 
 
(q) The Court ought to decline to exercise 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3), which is 
discretionary and equitable if its exercise perpetrates unconstitutionality and injustice. 
 
18(1)  Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, the learned Attorney General 
for Pakistan while appearing on Court notice, stated that the 
proposal was initiated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan, the 
recommendations were strictly followed, the impugned notification 
was issued which recited that the Judges were to be appointed with 
effect from 10
th January 2002 and on that date they were 
administered oath by Mr. Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri, the 
succeeding Chief Justice. He submitted that learned counsel for the 
petitioners had sought striking down of the impugned notification on 
the basis of the application of the judgments in the Judges case  and Const.P.1/2002 etc.  41
Asad Ali’s case  except Mian Allah Nawaz,  learned counsel for the 
petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 7/2002, who had candidly 
stated at the Bar that these judgments did not cover the point and 
sought an extension and not application of these precedents.  
(2)      The situation at the time of the Judges case  was that the 
executive ignored the time honoured practice that the consultation/recommendations made by the Chief Justice were 
followed.  In Asad Ali’s case
, the convention of appointing the most 
senior Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of Pakistan 
was enforced.  The principles invoked were the principles of 
independence of judiciary and the constitutional conventions. 
Therefore, in order to succeed in these petitions on the basis of the 
principles laid down in the two judgments, burden is on the 
petitioners to show the convention that Judges of the Supreme Court 
have always been appointed from amongst the most senior Judges of the High Courts and that this principle, either on the basis of 
consistency or judicial precedents, has evolved into a convention. 
Once the convention is established in the manner given in the two 
judgments only then it can be enforced.  The petitioners have not 
established that there is any such constitutional convention, 
inasmuch as they have not shown that in the past there has been no 
deviation from the seniority principle or that the deviation was in the 
rarest cases.  In Asad Ali’s case
, the rule of seniority has been 
recognized vis-à-vis the Chief Justice of Pakistan and in case this is made applicable to the Judges of the Supreme Court it will be 
extension and not application of the judgments.   
(3) The learned Attorney General placed on record two 
charts - one containing names of the Judges of the High Courts 
appointed to the Supreme Court where the seniority principle was not Const.P.1/2002 etc.  42
followed, and the other containing the list of ad hoc/Acting Judges 
who were not made permanent to contend that right from the time of 
appointment of Mr. Justice Abdul Rehman made on 7th February 
1950 till the appointment of Mr. Justice Tanvir Ahmed Khan on 27th 
September 2000 the principle of seniority was not adhered to in 25 
appointments.  Mr. Justice Mukhtar Ahmed Junejo was not the most 
senior Judge at the time when he was appointed as Acting Judge of 
the Supreme Court.  Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Gul was appointed 
as a Judge of the Supreme Court bypassing four of his seniors and so 
was Mr. Justice Muhammad Afzal Cheema.  Mr. Justice Abdul Kadir 
Shaikh bypassed two of his seniors whereas Mr. Justice Muhammad 
Akram bypassed three of his seniors. 
(4) He also filed a list of six Judges, where, with one 
exception of Mr. Justice Mushtaq Hussain the then Chief Justice of 
the Lahore High Court, the principle of seniority was not followed 
even in terms of ad hoc and acting appointments.  Among them, Mr. Justice Fakhruddin G. Ebrahim was not the most senior Judge of the 
High Court of Sindh.  Out of 93 appointments, six were those of ad 
hoc and Acting Judges and remaining 87 were permanent.  The 
principle of seniority was not followed in the case of 9 retired Judges 
and 25 serving Judges, so more than 30 percent of the appointments 
were not made in accordance with this principle.  Four appointments 
were made after the Judges case
, out of which three appointments 
were made of the Judges who were not the most senior Judges of the 
High Court and those appointments were made by the Chief Justice 
and the Judges who were party to the Judges case .  Therefore, the 
Judges case  does not recognize any such principle or any such 
constitutional convention as is evident from the practice of the very 
authors of that case. As such, no convention or practice to the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  43
satisfaction of the Court, which is operative, exists.   If the principle 
of seniority is accepted as argued by the learned counsel for the 
petitioners the Chief Justices of Pakistan would be left with no 
function to perform and in any case it would not lead to a better 
judiciary which is self-operative and independent. 
   (5) He further submitted that in case the argument of 
the petitioners that the executive should not have abdicated its 
power and ought to have rejected the recommendation of the 
Chief Justice is accepted, it would open the door which was 
closed by the Judges case . He placed reliance on the 
direction/conclusion given in the Judges case  at page 364, para 
7(i), which gives primacy to the opinion of the Chief Justice. The 
discretion of the executive is confined only to the antecedents of a 
candidate, in the case of appointment of a Judge of a High Court, 
based on the intelligence reports and in matters of fitness and 
suitability the views of the Chief Justice(s) must prevail.  In case 
the scope of discretion of the executive is extended by this Court 
in the present case, it would inevitably lead to executive 
interference in the judicial appointments.   
(6) The learned Attorney General next submitted that akin to 
the above argument is the submission of the petitioners that the recommendation of the Chief Justice is subject to judicial review. It is 
well-settled that the recommendations of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan are not justiciable. In case the petitioners’ submission is 
upheld, it would open the door for issuing writs of mandamus and 
certiorari as well.  The concept of ‘collegium’ in India is based on the 
constitutional provision whereas the Constitution of Pakistan does 
not have any such provision.  If the opinion of the Chief Justice is 
held to be justiciable, the opinion of the collegium would also be Const.P.1/2002 etc.  44
justiciable and subsequently a writ would be filed against the opinion 
of the collegium and an objection taken that the members of the 
collegium should not sit on the Bench.  He submitted that Mr. 
Justice Ajmal Mian (as he then was) had held in the Judges case  that 
the opinion of the Chief Justice was subjective and for this reason the 
Supreme Court in Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case  held that the views of 
the Chief Justice are not justiciable.   
  (7) Another submission made with vehemence was that it 
was absolutely unnecessary to issue notice to any of the Judges and 
the principle of natural justice would not be violated if notice was not 
issued to the concerned Judges. Reliance was placed on the   Judges 
case, Asad Ali’s case  and   Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case.   
  (8) Regarding production of the record of the case the learned Attorney General for Pakistan submitted that in the Judges 
case this Court had directed the Federation to produce the 
documents but inspection was not allowed.  He submitted that record in the present case, which is none other than the letter of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, was available and the Court was at liberty to 
examine it but such letter has never been made public in the history 
of the Supreme Court nor inspection thereof ever granted to the 
parties because of the confidentiality attached to it.  The Government 
in England had ordered an inquiry into the appointment procedures 
relating to Judges.  The Lord Chancellor appeared before the Inquiry 
Committee to give his evidence.  On a query from the Committee as to 
how many of the recommendations of Lord Chancellor were acted 
upon and how many ignored the Lord Chancellor refused to answer it 
saying he had made the recommendations in the strictest confidentiality and in case the recommendations are made public the 
independence of the judiciary would be undermined.  He submitted Const.P.1/2002 etc.  45
that there are examples when Judges ignored at one time were 
appointed subsequently and if such a document was made public it 
would hurt the chances of Judges in future.   
(9) The learned Attorney General placed reliance on the 
Judges case  to contend that appointments can be made in advance. 
According to him several appointments  in the past were made 
against anticipated vacancies. The appointments of Mr. Justice Fazle 
Akbar, Mr. Justice M. R. Khan, Mr. Justice Hamoodur Rehman, Mr. 
Justice Muhammad Yaqoob Ali, Mr. Justice Waheeduddin Ahmed, 
Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal, Mr. Justice Mushtaq Hussain, Mr. Justice Saleem Akhtar and most recently Mr. Justice 
Saiduzzaman Siddiqui were notified in advance. The ratio of the 
Judges case
 is that normally permanent vacancies should be filled in 
advance.   
(10) He also submitted that the impugned notification would 
stand or fall in entirety and there is no principle of law on which it 
can be severed.   
  (11) He further submitted that both the judgments, i.e. the 
Judges case  and Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case  are binding on this 
Court in view of the principle laid down in Ardeshir Cowasjee’s case  
(1999 SCMR 2883) that a Bench of equal number of Judges must 
follow earlier judgment given by a similar number of Judges. He also 
vehemently urged that the gains secured through the two judgments 
followed by Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case  should  be consolidated and 
not lost. 
(12) On the question of appointment of the Federal Law 
Secretary as a Judge of the Supreme Court, he submitted that Mr. 
Justice S. A. Nusrat, at the time of his elevation to the Supreme 
Court, had not completed five years service as a Judge of the High Const.P.1/2002 etc.  46
Court of Sindh and his standing at the Bar was taken into 
consideration.  In the case of Justice Muhammad Gul , it was held that 
the period spent by a Judge of the High Court as Federal Law 
Secretary would be counted towards his tenure as a Judge of the 
High Court.  The judgment in the case of Justice Muhammad Gul , 
having been delivered by a five-member Bench is binding on this Bench. 
19.  Before we proceed to appreciate the rival contentions and 
examine the grounds on which the impugned appointments have 
been assailed it will be appropriate to highlight the background of the 
Judges case
 as well as Asad Ali's case  and the law laid down therein 
as both sides have pressed into service these cases in support of their 
respective contentions and the petitions have in fact flown from these 
cases.  
20.  In the year 1994, the President of Pakistan on the advice of the Prime Minister Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto appointed 20 
Judges in the Lahore High Court and in addition thereto, Acting 
Chief Justices were appointed in the Lahore High Court and the High 
Court of Sindh instead of permanent Chief Justices.   Mr. Justice M. 
Mahboob Ahmed, the then Chief Justice of Lahore High Court was 
transferred to the Federal Shariat Court and Mr. Justice Muhammad 
Ilyas, who was discharging functions as a Judge of the Federal 
Shariat Court, was appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court and 
then appointed as Acting Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court. 
Later, he was recalled to the Supreme Court and Mr. Justice Irshad 
Hasan Khan, a Judge of the Supreme Court (as he then was) was 
appointed as Acting Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court.  Mr. 
Justice Nasir Aslam Zahid, the then Chief Justice of the High Court 
of Sindh was transferred to the Federal Shariat Court and Mr. Justice Const.P.1/2002 etc.  47
Abdul Hafeez Memon, a Judge of the Supreme Court was appointed 
as Acting Chief Justice of the High Court of Sindh.  These 
appointments were resented by all quarters including the judiciary 
and various Bar Associations of the country.  Further, six Additional 
Judges of the Lahore High Court who were appointed as Additional 
Judges for a period of two years in August 1992 were not confirmed 
on the expiry of their term of initial appointment and they ceased to 
hold office in August 1994.  Mr. Habibul Wahabul Khairi, head of Al-
Jehad Trust and an Advocate of this Court filed Constitution Petition 
No. 29 of 1995 under Article 184(3) of the Constitution challenging, 
inter alia , the appointment of the Acting Chief Justice of Pakistan, 
appointment of Mr. Justice Nasir Aslam Zahid as a Judge of the Federal Shariat Court. Mr. Habibul Wahabul Khairi also filed C.P.L.A. 
No. 11 of 1995 against the judgment passed by a Division Bench of 
the Lahore High Court whereby Writ Petitions No. 875/94, 101-
86/94 and 9893/94 preferred against the non-confirmation of 
aforesaid six Additional Judges of the Lahore High Court, the 
appointment of 20 Additional Judges and the appointment of Acting 
Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court were dismissed in limine .  
These matters remained pending till second half of 1995 when this 
Court while taking up the same for hearing issued notices to all concerned.  A Bench of five Judges headed by Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali 
Shah, the then Chief Justice of Pakistan, which included Mr. Justice 
Mir Hazar Khan Khoso, an ad hoc Judge of this Court was 
constituted for the purpose.  Besides the counsel for the parties, 
eminent lawyers, namely, Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, S.M. Zafar and 
Fakhruddin G. Ebrahim, Senior Advocates Supreme Court assisted 
the Court as amicus curiae . Const.P.1/2002 etc.  48
21.  Through a long debate, Articles 196, 177, 193, 180, 181, 
182 and 197 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 
were discussed and interpreted with reference to the term 
‘consultation’ used in Article 177 and 193 ibid. After considerable 
deliberations it was held that the word  ‘consultation’ employed in 
Articles 177 and 193 of the Constitution connotes that ‘consultation’ 
should be effective, meaningful, purposive, consensus-oriented, 
leaving no room for complaint of arbitrariness or unfair play.  It was 
also laid down that the opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and 
the Chief Justice of High Court regarding fitness and suitability of a candidate for judgeship was entitled to be accepted in the absence of 
very sound reasons to be recorded by the appointing authority and if 
the President/Executive appoints a candidate found to be unfit by 
the Chief Justice of Pakistan and Chief Justice of High Court 
concerned, it will not be a proper exercise of power under the relevant 
Articles of the Constitution. It was further held that in case of 
disagreement, the executive was required to record sound reasons, 
which will be justiciable.  The crux of the matter was dilated upon 
and it was held that as far as fitness and suitability of a candidate for 
judgeship were concerned, the opinion of the Chief Justice was 
binding and had primacy.  However, the President could refuse to 
appoint a person as a Judge of the High Court if the Governor had 
expressed negative opinion on the basis of information received by 
him about his antecedents.  In the context of the appointment of the 
Acting Chief Justices, it was held that such appointment on the face 
of it smacked mala fide  although there was a provision in the 
Constitution to appoint a Judge of the Supreme Court as Acting Chief Justice and this Court while placing embargo on such appointments 
held that such appointments could not last for more than 90 days.  It Const.P.1/2002 etc.  49
was also held that the most senior Judge of the High Court had 
legitimate expectancy to be considered for appointment as Chief 
Justice and such legitimate expectancy could not be defeated in the 
absence of concrete and valid reasons to be recorded by the 
President/Executive.  However, it was reiterated that the 
President/Executive could refuse to recognize the principle of 
legitimate expectancy provided they had information with regard to 
antecedents of a Judge in relation to his extra-professional activities 
but as a rule of law it was laid down that the most senior Judge in 
the High Court was entitled to be appointed as Chief Justice on the 
doctrine of legitimate expectancy and Additional Judges in the High 
Court had legitimate expectancy to be made permanent Judges.  It 
was also held that appointment of a sitting Chief Justice of a High 
Court or a Judge thereof as a Judge of the Federal Shariat Court 
under Article 203C of the Constitution without his consent being 
violative of Article 209 which guaranteed the tenure of office was void.  It was found that the judicial consultees in regard to appointment of 
20 Judges of the Lahore High Court had not been taken into 
confidence or consulted before making these appointments and 
consequently all appointments were declared to be unconstitutional 
and it was directed that the cases of those Judges should be re-
processed in accordance with the Constitution for regularization of 
their appointments/confirmations.  It was also held that affiliation of 
a person with a political party wa s not a bar for appointment as a 
Judge of the High Court provided he was otherwise qualified to be 
appointed as Judge of the High Court.  The cases of five Additional 
Judges who were appointed in August 1992 and were not confirmed 
and dropped on the expiry of their initial term of appointment in the 
year 1994 were directed to be processed for their Const.P.1/2002 etc.  50
confirmation/permanent appointment as Judges of the High Court. It 
would be advantageous to reproduce the relevant portions of the 
Short Order in the Judges case , which read as follows: - 
“2. In these two cases some appointment of Judges 
in the Superior Judiciary are challenged and  called in question on the ground that they have been made in contravention of the procedure and guidelines laid down in the Constitution, and in this context we are 
called upon to examine in detail the relevant Articles 
pertaining to the Judiciary specified in Part VII of the Constitution to render an authoritative decision on the question of interpretation of such Articles in the light of other co-related Articles. ………………… “7. Our conclusions and directions in nutshell are 
as under:- 
(i)    The words “after consultation” employed inter alia in Article 177 and 193 of the Constitution connote that the consultation should be effective, meaningful, purposive, consensus oriented, leaving no room for complaint of arbitrariness or unfair play. The 
opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the 
Chief Justice of a High Court as to the fitness and suitability of a candidate for judgeship is entitled to be accepted in the absence of very sound reasons to be recorded by the President/Executive.  
(ii) That if the President/Executive appoints a 
candidate found to be unfit and unsuitable for 
judgeship by the Chief Justice of Pakistan and 
the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, it will not be a proper exercise of power under the relevant Article of the Constitution. 
 
(iii) That the permanent vacancies occurring 
in the offices of Chief Justice and Judges Const.P.1/2002 etc.  51
normally should be filled in immediately not 
later than 30 days but a vacancy occurring before the due date on account of death or for any other reasons, should be filled in within 90 
days on permanent basis. 
 
(iv) That no ad hoc Judges can be appointed 
in the Supreme Court while permanent vacancies exist. 
 
(v) That in view of the relevant provisions of 
the Constitution and established conventions/practice, the most senior Judge of a High Court has a legitimate expectancy to be considered for appointment as the Chief Justice and in the absence of any concrete or valid 
reasons to be recorded by the 
President/Executive, he is entitled to be appointed as such in the Court concerned. 
 
(vi) An Acting Chief Justice is not a consultee 
as envisaged by the relevant Articles of Constitution and, therefore, mandatory Constitutional requirement of consultation is not fulfilled by consulting as Acting Chief Justice 
except in case the permanent Chief Justice 
concerned is unable to resume his functions within 90 days from the date of commencement of his sick leave because of his continuous sickness. 
 
(vii) That Additional Judges appointed in the 
High Court against permanent vacancies or if permanent vacancies occur while they are acting 
as Additional Judges, acquire legitimate 
expectancy and they are entitled to be considered for permanent appointment upon the expiry of their period of appointment as Additional Judges and they are entitled to be Const.P.1/2002 etc.  52
appointed as such if they are recommended by 
the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and the Chief Justice of Pakistan in the absence of strong valid reason/reasons to be recorded by 
the President/Executive. 
 
(viii) That an appointment of a sitting Chief 
Justice of a High Court or a Judge thereof in the Federal Shariat Court under Article 203-C of the Constitution without his consent is violative of Article 209, which guarantees the tenure of office. Since the former Article was incorporated by the Chief Martial Law Administrator and the 
latter Article was enacted by the Framers of the 
Constitutional, the small shall prevail and, hence, such an appointment will be void. 
 
(ix) That transfer of Judge of one High Court 
to another can only be made in the public interest and not as a punishment.  
 
(x) That the requirement of 10 years’ practice 
under Article 193(2)(a) of the Constitution relates to the experience/practice at the Bar and not simpliciter the period of enrolment.  
(xi) That the simpliciter political affiliation of a 
candidate for judgeship of the superior Courts 
may be a disqualification provided the candidate 
is of an unimpeachable integrity, having sound knowledge in law and is recommended by the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and the Chief Justice of Pakistan. 
 
(xii) That it is not desi rable to send a Supreme 
Court Judge as an Acting Chief Justice to a High Court in view of clear adverse observation of this 
Court in the case of Abrar Hassan v. 
Government of Pakistan and others PLD 1976 SC 315 at 342. Const.P.1/2002 etc.  53
 
(xiii) That since consultation for the 
appointment/confirmation of Judge of a Superior Court by the President/Executive with consultees mentioned in the relevant Articles of the Constitution is mandatory, any 
appointment/confirmation made without 
consulting any of the consultees as interpreted above would be violative of the Constitution and, therefore, would be invalid. 
 
In view of what is stated above, we direct: 
 
(a) That permanent Chief Justices should be 
appointed in terms of the above conclusion 
No.(iii) in the High Courts where there is no permanent appointment incumbent of the office of the Chief  Justice. 
 
(b) That the cases of appellants Nos.3 to 7 in Civil 
Appeal No.805 of 1995 (i.e. Additional Judges who are dropped) shall be proceeded and considered for their permanent appointment by 
the Chief Justice within one month from the 
date of assumption of office by him as such. 
(c) That appropriate action be initiated for filling in 
permanent vacancies of Judges in terms of above conclusion No.(iii). 
 
(d) That ad hoc Judges working at present in the 
Supreme Court either be confirmed against permanent vacancies in terms of Article 177 of the Constitution within the sanctioned strength 
or they should be sent back to their respective 
High Courts in view of above conclusion No.(iv). 
 
(e) That the cases of the appointees of the Federal 
Shariat Court be processed and the same be 
brought in line with the above conclusion No.(viii); and 
 Const.P.1/2002 etc.  54
(f) That upon the appointment of the permanent 
Chief Justices in the High Courts where there is no permanent incumbent or where there are permanent incumbents already, they shall 
process the cases of the High Courts’ Judges in 
terms of the above declaration No.13 within one month from the date of this order or within one month from the date of assumption of office by a permanent incumbent whichever is later in time and to take action for regularizing the appointments/confirmation of the Judges 
recently appointed/confirmed inter alia of 
respondents Nos.7 to 28 in Civil Appeal No.805/95 in the light of this short order.  In like manner, the Chief Justice of Pakistan will take appropriate action for recalling permanent Judges of the Supreme Court from the High 
Courts where they are performing functions as 
Acting Chief Justices and also consider desirability of continuation or not of appointment in the Supreme Court of ad hoc/Acting Judges. 
Resultantly, the direct petition and the appeal captioned above are allowed in the terms and the 
extent indicated above.”     
 
It was also held that recommendations made by the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan are not justiciable and a normal permanent vacancy should be filled in advance. 
22.  In the light of the verdict given by this Court in the 
Judges case
 that the most senior Judge in the High Court and the 
Supreme Court have a legitimate expectancy to become the Chief 
Justice of the respective Court, the appointment of Mr. Justice Sajjad 
Ali Shah as Chief Justice of Pakistan was declared unconstitutional 
in Asad Ali’s case .  The appointment of Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah Const.P.1/2002 etc.  55
as the Chief Justice of Pakistan was made in June 1994 in 
supersession of three senior Judges, but was temporarily saved in 
the Judges case  on the grounds that the matter was sub judice  in the 
Peshawar High Court and the prayer to that extent had been 
withdrawn.  The ratio of Asad Ali's case  is fully spelt out by the 
following observations made therein: - 
 “101.   From the preceding discussion, it follows that 
the convention to appoint the senior most Judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief Justice of Pakistan, has come to be recognized as the well-established constitutional convention, and therefore, any deviation or breach of this convention by the Appointing Authority under the provisions of Article 177 of the 
Constitution, would amount to the violation of the 
constitutional provisions relating to the appointment of Chief Justice of Pakistan.  We, therefore, find no room for the argument that the rule of seniority cannot be extended while interpreting the provisions of Article 177 of the Constitution.” 
 
23.  In this backdrop, we proceed to consider the first 
common contention of the petitioners that appointment of Judges 
from the Lahore High Court has been made in violation of the 
principles of seniority and legitimate expectancy.  We are afraid the 
contention is misconceived and travels beyond the parameters 
indicated in the Judges case
 and Asad Ali's case . In our considered 
view, the scope of the principles of seniority and legitimate 
expectancy enunciated in those cases is restricted to the appointment 
of Chief Justice of a High Court and the Chief Justice of Pakistan and 
these principles neither apply nor can be extended to the 
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court.  It is nowhere 
mentioned in those judgments that the principles of seniority and Const.P.1/2002 etc.  56
legitimate expectancy shall also apply in the matter of appointment of 
Judges of the Supreme Court.  The omission appears to be 
intentional and not accidental in view of the line of reasoning in the 
said judgments.  In the Judges case  while interpreting Article 193 of 
the Constitution it was held that there is no constitutional 
requirement to appoint the most senior Judge as Chief Justice of a 
High Court whenever permanent vacancy occurs but there is a 
constitutional convention in this context which has developed by 
continuous usage and practice over a long period of time and must 
be followed in the interest of independence of judiciary.  In Asad Ali's 
case this view was applied with greater force in the case of 
appointment of the Chief Justice of Pakistan under Article 177 of the 
Constitution on the strength of the constitutional convention and 
past practice and the analogy of Article 180 of the Constitution which 
provides that in absence of the Chief Justice of Pakistan the most senior Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed as Acting Chief 
Justice of Pakistan.  There exists no constitutional convention or past 
practice to appoint the most senior Judge of a High Court as a Judge 
of the Supreme Court. The Constitution makers were aware of the 
expression ‘the most senior’ used in Article 180 of the Constitution 
and in the light of the well-established principle of interpretation of 
the Constitution and law, the absence of the words, ‘the most senior’ 
in Article 177 for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court would 
show that seniority of a Judge in the High Court is not a sine qua non  
for his appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court.  If for the 
purpose of appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court, the 
seniority of the judges inter se  in the High Courts would have been 
the rule, there was no impediment in the way of the Constitution 
makers to use the expression, 'the most senior’ in Article 177 of the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  57
Constitution.  Even, juristically speaking and analyzing the rationale 
of the principle of appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court, it 
becomes very clear that the Chief Justice of Pakistan being the pater 
familia  of the judiciary of the country is the best judge to ascertain 
and gauge the fitness and suitability of the Judges working in the 
High Court for appointment as Judges of the Supreme Court.   We 
are clear in our mind that neither the principle of seniority is 
applicable as a mandatory rule for appointment of Judges in the 
Supreme Court nor the said rule has attained the status of a 
convention. 
24.  The role and functions of the Chief Justice of Pakistan in 
the process of appointment of the Judges of the Superior Courts have 
been described in detail in the Judges case  in the following words: - 
“The object of providing consultation, inter alia, in 
Articles 177 and 193 of the Constitution of Pakistan (1973) for the appointment of Judges in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts was to accord constitutional recognition to the practice/convention of consulting the Chief Justice of the High Court 
concerned and the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, 
which was obtaining prior to the independence of India and post-independence period, in order to ensure that competent and capable people of known integrity should be inducted in the superior judiciary which has been assigned very difficult and delicate task of acting as watch dogs for ensuring that all the functionaries of 
the State act within the limits delineated by the 
Constitution and also to eliminate political considerations. The power of appointment of Judges in the superior Courts had direct nexus with the independence of Judiciary. Since the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and the Chief Justice of Pakistan have expertise knowledge about the ability Const.P.1/2002 etc.  58
and competency of a candidate for judgeship, their 
recommendations, have been consistently accepted during pre-partition days as well as post-partition period in India and Pakistan. The words “ after 
consultation” referred to, inter alia, in Article 177 and 
193 of the Constitution involve participatory consultative process between the consultees and also with the Executive. It should be effective, meaningful, purposive, consensus-oriented, leaving no room for complaint or arbitrariness or unfair play. The Chief Justice of a High Court and the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan are well equipped to assess as to the 
knowledge and suitability of a candidate for judgeship in the superior Courts, whereas the Governor of a Province and the Federal Government are better equipped to find out about the antecedents of a candidate and to acquire other information as to his 
character/conduct. No one of the above 
consultees/functionaries is less important or inferior to the other. All are important in their respective spheres. The Chief Justice of Pakistan, being Paterfamilias i.e. had of the judiciary, having expertise knowledge about the ability and suitability of a candidate, definitely, his views deserve due deference. 
The object of the above participatory consultative 
process should be to arrive at a consensus to select best persons for the judgeship of a superior Court keeping in view the object enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution, which is part of the Constitution by virtue of Article 2A thereof, and ordained by Islam to ensure independence of judiciary.” 
The above role and functions of the Chief Justice of Pakistan will 
become redundant and superfluous if the rule of seniority is held 
applicable to the appointment of the Judges of the Supreme Court 
because in that eventuality the process would become automatic and Const.P.1/2002 etc.  59
mechanical.  Such a situation would certainly affect the self-
operativeness and independence of judiciary adversely.   
25.  The mode of appointment of the Judges of the Supreme 
Court, the requisite qualifications for appointment and instances of 
appointment of retired Judges of the High Court as Judges of the 
Supreme Court also exclude the application of the principle of 
seniority.  Under Article 177 of the Constitution a person shall not be 
appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of Pakistan and - 
(a) has for a period of, or for periods aggregating, 
not less than five years been a judge of a High Court (including a High Court which existed in 
Pakistan at any time before the commencing 
day); or 
(b) has for a period of, or for periods aggregating, 
not less than fifteen years been an advocate of a 
High Court (including a High Court which 
existed in Pakistan at any time before the commencing day). 
 26.  It is not necessary that the appointment of the Judges in 
the Supreme Court should invariably be made from amongst the 
Judges of the High Courts.  An advocate of the standing of fifteen 
years in the High Court, subject to his suitability in the opinion of the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan, can also be appointed as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court.  There are also instances of appointment of retired 
Judges of the High Court as Judges of the Supreme Court.  Mr. Justice Muhammad Sharif, Mr. Justice Qaiser Khan, Mr. Justice G. 
Safdar Shah, Mr. Justice Rustam S. Sidhwa, Mr. Justice Manzoor 
Hussain Sial, Mr. Justice Muhammad Ilyas, Mr. Justice Ch. Fazal 
Karim, Mr. Justice Zia Mahmood Mirza and Mr. Justice Qazi 
Muhammad Farooq were appointed permanent Judges of the 
Supreme Court after their retirement.   
27.  There are yet two other factors which give the rule of fitness and suitability an edge over the principles of seniority and 
legitimate expectancy.  First, the appointment of a Judge of the High Const.P.1/2002 etc.  60
Court as a Judge of the Supreme Court is a fresh appointment and 
not a promotion and, secondly, supersession of senior Judges of the 
High Court is not unprecedented as is evident from the following 
chart:- 
 
S.No. Name of the Supreme Court Judge Date of 
appointment as 
Permanent Judge 
of Supreme 
Court Name of High 
Court from 
where elevated Name(s) of Senior Judges of High 
Court who were bypassed 
 Before the Judges case    
1. Mr.Justice Abdul Rehman 07.02.1950 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Muhammad Munir 
2. Mr.Justice Fazle Akbar 18.05.1960 East Pakistan 
High Court Chief Justice I.H.Chawdhury 
3. Mr.Justice B.Z.Kaikus 25.07.1960 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice M.R.Kayani 
Mr.Justice Shabbir Ahmed 
4. Mr.Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman  22.12.1960 East Pakistan 
High Court Chief Justice I.H.Chawdhury 
5. Mr.Justice Sajjad Ahmad Jan 18.03.1968 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Waheeduddin Ahmed 
6. Mr.Justice Abdus Sattar 04.06.1968 East Pakistan 
High Court Chief Justice Murshed 
Mr.Justice K.M.Hassan 
7. Mr.Justice M.R.Khan 18.11.1968 East Pakistan 
High Court Chief Justice B.A.Siddiqui 
8. Mr.Justice Salahuddin Ahmad  01.03.1971 East Pakistan 
High Court Chief Justice B.A.Siddiqui 
9. Mr.Justice Qazi Muhammad Gul 14.04.1973 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal 
Mr.Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
Mr.Justice A.R.Sheikh 
Mr.Justice Muhammad Akram 
10. Mr.Justice M.Afzal Cheema 08.10.1974 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal 
Mr.Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
Mr.Justice A.R.Sheikh 
Mr.Justice Muhammad Akram 
11. Mr.Justice Abdul Kadir Sheikh 08.10.1974 High Court of 
Sindh Chief Justice Tufail Ali A.Rehman 
Mr.Justice Noorul Arfin 
12. Mr.Justice Malik Muhammad Akram 26.12.1975 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal 
Mr.Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
Mr.Justice A.R.Sheikh 
13. Mr.Justice Dorab Patel 07.10.1976 High Court of 
Sindh Chief Justice Abdul Kadir Sheikh 
14. Mr.Justice Muhammad Haleem 07.01.1977 High Court of 
Sindh Chief Justice Abdul Kadir Sheikh 
15. Mr.Justice Karam Elahi Chauhan 14.06.1979 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
16 Mr.Justice Muhammad Afzal Zullah 14.06.1979 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
Mr.Justice Shamim Hussain Kadri 
17. Mr.Justice Dr.Nasim Hasan Shah 14.06.1979 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
Mr.Justice Shamim Hussain Kadri 
18. Mr.Justice Shafi ur Rehman 31.07.1981 Lahore High 
Court Mr.Justice Shamim Hussain Kadri 
19. Mr.Jutice S.A.Nusrat 04.08.1981 Lahore High 
Court Mr.Justice Abdul Hayee Qureshi  
Mr.Justice Naeemuddin 
20. Mr.Justice Zafar Hussain Mirza 04.08.1981 High Court of 
Sindh Mr.Justice Abul Hayee Qureshi 
21. Mr.Justice Muhammad Saleem Akhtar 25.03.1991 High Court of 
Sindh Mr.Justice Saeeduzzaman Siddiqui 
Mr.Justice Nasir Aslam Zahid 
 After the Judges case    
22. Mr.Justice Mukhtar Ahmed Junejo 31.03.1996 High Court of 
Sindh Mr.Justice Nasir Aslam Zahid 
Mr.Justice Mamoon Kazi 
23. Mr.Justice Raja Afrasaib Khan 31.03.1996 Lahore High 
Court Mr.Justice Sh.Ijaz Nisar 
Mr.Justice Sh.Riaz Ahmed 
24. Mr.Justice Muhammad Bashir 
Jehangiri 31.03.1996 Peshawar High 
Court Mr.Justice Syed Ibne Ali 
Mr.Justice Abdur Rehman Khan 
25. Mr.Justice Tanvir Ahmed Khan 27.09.2000 Lahore High 
Court Chief Justice Falak Sher 
 
NOTE  
  
¾ The names of those who were not elevated as permanent 
judges are not included in the list. Const.P.1/2002 etc.  61
 
It has been rightly pointed out by the learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan that out of 93 appointments made in this Court so far, six 
being those of ad-hoc and acting Judges, the principle of seniority 
was not followed in the case of 9 retired Judges and 25 serving 
Judges. 
28.  It was held in the Judges case  that the views of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan cannot be rejected arbitrarily for extraneous consideration and if the executive wished to disagree with his views, 
it has to record strong reasons which will be justiciable.  In the 
present case while making the impugned appointments the President 
of Pakistan had fully adhered to the recommendations made by the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan. The main and vital question which arises 
for decision, therefore, is whether the recommendations of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan in the process of constitutional consultation in 
the matter of appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court are 
justiciable. This question had arisen in the Judges case
 as well and 
was determined with the observation that the recommendations of 
the Chief Justice were not justiciable. The opinion rendered by Ajmal 
Mian, J. (as he then was) reads as under:- 
“In any case, it is a matter for consideration by the 
Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan. They have to decide, 
whether a particular candidate has requisite experience and once they form the view that the candidate has the requisite experience as envisaged by sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 193, this issue will not be justiciable before the Court of law. The Court cannot sit and decide, whether a particular 
person has the requisite experience or not? It is a 
matter of subjective satisfaction of the Chief Justice of Const.P.1/2002 etc.  62
the High Court concerned and the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan.” 
 
This question had again arisen in Ghulam Hyder Lakho’s case  and 
was answered in the negative by reiterating the law on the subject 
laid down in the Judges case . The observations made in this context 
are worded thus:- 
“In view of the above-quoted observations of Ajmal 
Mian, J. it is quite clear that the recommendations of the Chief Justice of the High Court and that of Chief Justice of Pakistan are not justiciable.” 
 
The rationale behind making the recommendations of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan non-justiciable is multifaceted. The main 
justification is contained in the above-quoted observations of Ajmal Mian, J. (as he then was) in the Judges case
 that the 
recommendations are the outcome of subjective satisfaction of the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan. The other dimensions are that if the 
recommendations are made justiciable the primacy of the opinion of 
the Chief Justice of Pakistan will be undermined directly or 
indirectly, embarrassment will be caused to the judicial consultee as 
well as the recommendees, independence of judiciary and smooth 
working of the Court will be affected, pressure groups will emerge at 
different levels and we will go back to the situation prevailing before the Judges case
, which will be more unsavoury than the one 
portrayed in these petitions. 
29.  The next question for determination is equally important. 
It relates to advance appointment of Judges against the the 
anticipated vacancies and has arisen from the second common 
contention of the petitioners that the Chief Justice of Pakistan who 
had made the recommendations was not the judicial consultee to the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  63
extent of two vacancies which had occurred after his retirement and 
as such appointments against the said vacancies were void ab initio .  
It is true that appointments against two anticipated vacancies were 
made in advance but the appointments cannot be termed as illegal or 
void as an anticipated permanent vacancy can be filled in advance.  
Reference in this context may be made to the observations made at 
page 501 of the judgment in the Judges case  which read as under:- 
“I am, therefore, of the view that a normal 
permanent vacancy should be filled in advance and, in any case, not later than 30 days whereas 
vacancy occurring on account of death or for any 
unforeseen cause, at the most, should be filled in within 90 days, which is generally considered to be a reasonable period period.” 
 
No doubt, the words “in advance” are not mentioned in Para 7(iii) of 
the Short Order in the Judges case
 but the omission is immaterial 
inasmuch as in the absence of any inconsistency between the short 
order and the detailed reasons, both are to be read together.  The 
view gets support from the following observations made in Ghulam 
Hyder Lakho’s case :- 
“4. Before considering the above contentions, it 
would be appropriate to first decide the plea of the petitioners that only short order dated 20
th March 
1996 in Judges’ case is to be treated as the order of 
the Court and that the reasons recorded subsequently by the learned Judges separately are to be ignored while implementing the direction of the Court. We are unable to subscribe to this view. The short order in a case is the summary of the findings of the Court while detailed reasons are elaboration of that summary. 
Unless there is any conflict between the short order 
and the detailed reasons, both are to be read together to understand the real import and scope of the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  64
judgment. We have carefully gone through the short 
order and the detailed reasons recorded in support of the short order by Sajjad Ali Shah, C.J. and Ajmal Mian, J. and are of the view that there is no conflict 
between the short order and the detailed reasons 
recorded subsequently by the learned Judges of the Bench in support of the short order. We are, therefore, of the view that the short order dated 20
th March, 
1996 and the reasons recorded in support thereof by the learned Judges (Sajjad Ali Shah, C.J. and Ajmal Mian, J.) subsequently are to be read together to give 
effect to the judgment in Judges’ case.” 
 
30.  Appointments in advance were not made for the first time 
in the present case.  Several appointments were made in the past in 
advance against anticipated vacancies. Mr. Justice Fazle Akbar was 
appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court vide notification dated 
25
th April, 1960 against the post which was to fall vacant on 12th 
May, 1960 on the retirement of Mr. Justice Shahab-ud-Din.  Mr. 
Justice Hamood-ur-Rehman assumed the office of Judge of the 
Supreme court on 22nd December, 1960 vide notification dated 16th 
June, 1960 against the vacancy occurred on 21st December, 1960 on 
the retirement of Mr. Justice Amir-ud-Din Ahmed.  Mr. Justice 
Mujib-ur-Rehman Khan was notified on 21st October, 1968 to be the 
Judge of Supreme Court against the vacancy to occur on 18th 
November, 1968 on the retirement of Mr. Justice Hamood-ur-
Rehman. Mr. Justice Saleem Akhtar was appointed as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court vide notification dated 7th February, 1991 against the 
post to fall vacant on 24th March, 1991 on the retirement of Mr. 
Justice Abdul Kadir Shaikh. The appointment of Mr. Justice Waheed-
ud-Din Ahmed was notified on 30th August, 1969. The notification 
provided that he will assume the office of a Judge of the Supreme Const.P.1/2002 etc.  65
Court on his retirement as the Chief Justice of the High Court of 
West Pakistan. He accordingly entered upon office as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court on 22nd September, 1969. The appointment of Mr. 
Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal and Mr. Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
as Judges of the High Court of West Pakistan was notified on 13th 
September, 1962 with effect from 1st October, 1962. Mr. Justice 
Muhammad Yaqoob Ali was notified as a Judge of the Supreme Court 
on 5th August, 1965 but had entered upon office on 4th January, 
1966 on the retirement of Mr. Justice B.Z. Kaikaus. These 
appointments were made before the Judges case  and thereafter vide 
notification No. F.2(1)/99-All. dated 11th May, 1999 Mr. Justice 
Saeed-uz-Zaman Siddiqui was appointed as Chief Justice of Pakistan 
with effect from 1st July, 1999. 
31.  Last but not the least the appointments in question had 
the blessings of the succeeding Chief Justice and judicial consultee 
Mr. Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri who was consulted by the 
then Chief Justice of Pakistan at the initial stage and before whom all 
the four Judges made oath at the final stage i.e. on 10th January, 
2002. The impugned notification was issued on 26th December, 2001 
with an explicit recital that the appointments will take effect from 
10th January, 2002, namely, the day when four vacancies were 
available.  Mr. Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri had taken oath 
as Chief Justice of Pakistan on 7th January, 2002 but he did not 
make any move for withdrawal of the impugned notification. Had he 
not endorsed the recommendations and the appointments he would 
have certainly asked for a back reference or sent his own 
recommendations or refused to administer the oath of office to the appointees. Another noteworthy circumstance which points to 
ratification by Mr.Justice Muhammad Bashir Jehangiri of the Const.P.1/2002 etc.  66
appointments made in advance is that on 31st January, 2002 he had 
presided over the Bench which had heard one of the above-mentioned 
Constitution Petitions but had not suspended the impugned 
notification. 
32.  This brings us to the next common contention that the 
senior Judges of the Lahore High Court were condemned unheard 
and even in these petitions notices have not been issued to them.  It 
is rather unnecessary to consider the contention as we have already 
held that the recommendations of the judicial consultee are not 
justiciable.  Be that as it may, the contention is misconceived.  The 
recommendations in question were manifestation of subjective 
satisfaction of the judicial consultee, therefore, the principle of 
natural justice ‘ audi alteram partem ’ was not attracted.  Moreover, 
the contention in essence is identical with contentions No (iv) and (vii) raised in the case of Ghulam Hyder Lakho
 which read as under:- 
“(iv) That the petitioners were de-notified or the 
appointments were nullified by the Government 
without hearing them and as such the action of Government nullifying their appointments as Judges of the High Court offended against the principles of natural justice.” 
“(vii) That the removal of the petitioners from the office 
of Judges of the High Court in the above manner 
amounted to a stigma and as such the petitioners 
were entitled to be heard.” 
 
The above contentions were held to be devoid of force as is evident 
from the following observations at page 196 of the judgment: - 
“In these circumstances, we are inclined to hold that 
where the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned and the Chief Justice of Pakistan do not recommend a particular incumbent for confirmation or appointment Const.P.1/2002 etc.  67
as a Judge of the High Court and these 
recommendations are accepted by the President/ Executive the same cannot be brought under challenge in the Court on the ground that the 
incumbent was not heard before making such 
recommendations.” 
 
33.  As regards the question of notices we are of the 
considered view that issuance of notices to the concerned Judges will 
do more harm than good.  This question was considered in the 
Judges case
 also and it was clearly held at page 534 of the judgment 
that the principle of natural justice is not violated if notice is not issued to the concerned Judges.  The observations in Asad Ali’s case
 
at page 327 of the judgment are also relevant which read as under:- 
“It must be borne in mind  that Judges of superior 
Courts by their tradition, maintain high degree of comity amongst themselves. They are not expected to go public on their differences over any issue. They are also not expected to litigate in Courts like ordinary 
litigant in case of denial of a right connected with their 
offices. Article VI of the Code of Conduct signed by every judge of the superior Courts also enjoins upon them to avoid as far as possible any litigation on their behalf or on behalf of others. Therefore, in keeping with the high tradition of their office and their exalted image in the public eye, the judges of superior Courts 
can only express their disapproval, resentment or 
reservations on an issue either in their judgment or order if the opportunity so arises….” 
 
34.  We will now take up the contention urged by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners against the appointment of Mr. Justice 
Faqir Muhammad Khokhar who was serving as Secretary, Law, 
Justice and Human rights Division at the time of his elevation to the 
Supreme Court.  The precise contention is that having not performed Const.P.1/2002 etc.  68
judicial functions as a Judge of the Lahore High Court for a period of 
five years he was not qualified for appointment as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court and his appointment was also hit by the cardinal 
principle of natural justice ‘no one should be a judge in his own 
cause’ on account of the pivotal role of the incumbent of the office of 
Law Secretary in the process of the constitutional appointments.  
This contention too is without any substance as it is incompatible 
with the provisions of Article 177 of the Constitution and ignores the 
law laid down by this Court in Malik Ghulam Jilani  v. Mr Justice 
Muhammad Gul  (1978 SCMR 110).  With regard to experience, Article 
177 of the Constitution only provides that a person shall not be 
appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he has been a 
Judge of a High Court for a period of or for periods aggregating not 
less than five years and does not prohibit appointment of a Judge of 
a High Court as a Judge of the Supreme Court who has not worked 
as a Judge of the High Court for a period of five years.  The 
disqualification set up by the petitioners cannot be read into Article 
177 of the Constitution.  Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar was 
appointed as a Judge of the Lahore High Court on 10th December, 
1996 and as Secretary Law, Justice and Human Rights Division on 
1st January, 2000.  Having held the office as a Judge of the Lahore 
High Court for a period of five years he fulfilled the experience-related 
constitutional requirement on the eve of his appointment as a Judge 
of the Supreme Court.  Besides, the issue was addressed and settled 
in the  c a s e  o f  J u s t i c e  M u h a m m a d  G u l  wherein it was held that 
contention that a person in order to be qualified for appointment as a 
Judge of the Supreme Court must have had experience of functioning 
as a Judge of High Court for five years was not correct.  In that case 
also Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul was Secretary, Ministry of Law and Const.P.1/2002 etc.  69
Parliamentary Affairs, Government of Pakistan at the time of his 
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the appointment 
was challenged through a writ petition under Article 199 of the 
Constitution on the ground that he did not fulfill the requirement of 
Article 178(2) of the Interim Constitution, 1972 that a person shall 
not be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he has for 
a period of or for periods aggregating not less than five years been a 
Judge of a High Court.  The writ petition was dismissed in limine  by a 
Division Bench of the Peshawar High Court and the petition for 
special leave to appeal was dismissed by this Court, inter alia , with 
the following observations: - 
“The phraseology of Article 178(2) of the Interim 
Constitution does not bear out the intent attributed to 
it by the petitioner.  The words used are “he has for a 
period of, or for periods aggregating not less than five years been a Judge of the High Court’.  If the authors of the Constitution had so intended they would have used some other words to indicate that not only has he held the office of a Judge but also functioned or worked as a Judge”.    
 
35.  Article 177(2) (a) of the Constitution is pari materia  with 
Article 178 (2) (a) of the Interim Constitution, therefore, the ratio of the case of Justice Muhammad Gul
 is fully applicable to the present 
case and cannot be termed as a weak precedent as contended by Mr. 
Hamid Khan.  Mr. Justice S.A. Nusrat was also serving as Secretary, 
Ministry of Law and Parliamentary Affairs when he was elevated to 
the Supreme Court.  We would, therefore, reiterate that appointment 
of a Judge of a High Court as Secretary Law, Justice and Human 
Rights Division cannot stand in his way for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court if he has been a Judge of the High Court for a Const.P.1/2002 etc.  70
period of or for periods aggregating not less than five years.  The 
period of his service as Secretary, Law Justice and Human Rights 
Division has to be counted towards his tenure as a Judge of the High 
Court and not excluded therefrom. 
36.  It was repeatedly submitted by the learned counsel for 
the petitioners that the record pertaining to the appointments in 
question should be made public to enable them to meet the views of 
the judicial consultee and the appointing authority in regard to the 
concerned Judges.  The insistence was based on the ground that the 
said record being public record, the petitioners as also the concerned 
Judges cannot be deprived from its inspection.  The submission was 
opposed by the learned Attorney General and the learned counsel for 
the Federation.  It has already been held that the recommendations 
culminating in the impugned appointments are not justiciable in the 
absence of difference of opinion between the President and the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan.  In the face of these findings the issue of inspection of record has become redundant.  In any case, we are of 
the view that apart from the element of confidentiality, making the 
record of the impugned appointments public would not be in the 
interest of the institution, the judicial consultee and the concerned 
Judges for reasons which are too obvious to need elucidation.  In the 
Judges case
 also the relevant record was made available pursuant to 
the order of the Court but was not perused even by the members of 
the Bench.  The relevant observations appear at page 369 of the 
judgment and read as under: - 
“The Federal Ministry of Law cooperated and made the 
record available to be produced in the court on an 
hour’s notice. We did not feel it necessary to peruse the record.” Const.P.1/2002 etc.  71
The learned Attorney General and the learned counsel for the 
Federation have advanced sound and convincing reasons in support 
of the proposition that making the record of appointments public 
would not be in the interest of the judiciary.  Disclosure of such 
record if adverse to a Judge would indeed block his way for elevation 
in future.  Furthermore, such course of action would not only put a 
Judge under the vestige of a stigma but also militate against the 
public interest and shake public confidence in the judiciary. 
37.  Now two questions remain to be considered.  The first 
question pertains to severability or otherwise of the impugned 
notification and the second to the collegium of Judges comprising the 
Chief Justice of India and four senior-most Judges of the Supreme 
Court which is consulted by the Chief Justice in the process of 
appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court of India.  The first 
question need not be determined in view of settled proposition that 
recommendations of the judicial consultee are not justiciable.  As regards the second question suffice it to say that the consultative 
process in vogue in India cannot be adopted in Pakistan as there  
exists no provision in our Constitution akin to Article 124(2) of the 
Constitution of India on the strength whereof collegium of Judges has 
been formed in India.  Article 124(2) of the Constitution of India reads 
as under:- 
“(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be 
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand 
and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and shall hold office until he attains the age 
of sixty-five years: 
 Provided that in the case of appointment of a 
Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of India shall always be consulted:  Provided further that- Const.P.1/2002 etc.  72
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand 
addressed to the President, resign his office; 
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in 
the manner provided in clause (4).” 
 It may, however, be observed in passing that a practice 
has emerged over the years that while making recommendation for 
appointment of a Judge of the Supreme Court the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan consults the senior puisne  Judge, as was done in the 
present case. 
38.  In view of the judgment passed by this Court, no order is 
required to be made in respect of the writ petitions summoned from the Lahore High Court, which may be returned. 
39.  The above are the reasons in support of the Short Order 
dated 10
th April, 2002 of this Court whereby these petitions were 
dismissed.  The Short Order reads as under: - 
 
“For reasons to be recorded later in the detailed 
judgment, the above petitions are dismissed.” 
  
40.  Before parting with the judgment we would like to record 
our appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by the learned counsel for the parties and the learned Attorney General for Pakistan 
and their associates.  
        C . J .  
 
           J .  
 
           J .   
           
   J.  
 
           J .   Islamabad 
April 10, 2002 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING
 