 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION ) 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan . 
Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez .  
 
H. R. C. NO. 14158 -G OF 2016 AND H.R.M.A. NO. 16 OF 2016 AND H.R.M.A. 
NO. 17 OF 2016 AND H.R.M.A. NO. 21 OF 2016.   
(Alleged gross co rruption in supply of Oxygen. Nitrogen gas and theft of 
medicine from hospital).  
     
In attendance :   Dr. M. Arshad.  
    Dr. Sartaj Ali.  
    Dr. Aftab Ali Malik.  
    Syed Zulfiqar Abbas Naqvi, ASC.  
    Dr. Iftikhar Nar u. 
    Syed Nayyab Gardezi, Standing  Counsel.  
    Dr. Waqar.  
    Aysha Farooq, J.S. CADD (Health)  
    Farhan Sikandar, S.O. CADD.  
Date of hearing:   28.07.2016   
 
O R D E R  
  The concern raising factor in this case , at the time of taking 
suo motu action was the price of oxygen cylinder  which according to the 
person filing complaint was procured in the Poly Clinic for a sum of 
Rs.22,000/ - in spite of the fact that it was available in PIMS for an amount of 
Rs.7500/ - and in private hospitals for an amount of Rs.3000/ - but CMAs 
submitted by the se nior doctors and citizens disclosed many revealing facts 
about the state of hospitals , pharmacies  and the mode and manner of 
giving treatment to the ailing humanity. A great deal of facts ha s been 
brought to light but there are many things which need to be  highlighted 
with details and the data from all the concerned quarters . It is by now 
extensively known that each District Headquarters Hospital in the country is 
equipped  with latest machines and laboratories  but unfortunately almost 
all of them are out of  order. Result is that every ailing poor man has to pay 
in thous and to the laboratory  outside the hospital even for diagnosis and 
detecti on of the disease he is suffering from. We in the first instance would 
direct the law officer appearing on behalf of Fe deration to provide us the H. R. C. NO. 14158 -G OF 2016 AND H.R.M.A. NO. 16 OF 2016 AND  
H.R.M.A. NO. 17 OF 2016 AND H.R.M.A. NO. 21 OF 2016.  
 
 2 
data about the price of oxygen cylinder from 2013 upto date and its 
varying prices in Polyclinic, PIMS and private hospitals . How so gross and 
glaring irregularities escaped the piercing eyes of audit and other 
establishment s set up for their prevention and punishment ? Would health 
be a privilege for the rich and a cry for the moon for the poor in the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan when every passing day takes the means of treatment 
of even an ordinary fever beyond his reach ? Would the hospitals despite 
being in public sector continue to be managed by the vested interest for 
adding to the riches of those who are already filthy rich; who would take 
stock of such state of thing and make effort to bring it to an end and who 
would tweak ears of those who despite doing odious and obnoxious things 
enjoy immunity and impunity. Task is of Himalayan proportion  but someone 
has to do it before the poor perishes once and for all.      
2.  How are the life saving dr ugs dealt with  and how are the 
pharmacies in the hospitals managed are some of the important aspects to 
be attended and inquired into. We would , thus,  direct the law officer to 
collect data in this behalf of the hospitals at least in the capital and submit 
a detailed report before the ne xt date of hearing . Dr. Muhammad Arshad , 
the mover of CMA. No. 16/2016 is also directed to provide the necessary 
details in the matter which is being pored over by this Court. Dr. Waqar is 
also eager to prov ide data in this behalf. He too is directed to su bmit a 
CMA setting out all the irregula rities he happens to be posted with. CMA. 
No. 17 of 2016 may further be vouched and documented to lay ba re the 
necessary details. We also direct the  Advocates General of the Provinces  
to collect details from the Chief  Executives of the hospitals as to the state of 
laboratories  and the other equipment s installed therein to show whether 
they are in functioning  order or otherwise.  The needful be done within two 
weeks. Relist on 12.08.2016 .           
         Judge  
 
 
 
Judg e 
ISLAMABAD  
28.07.2016  
M. Azhar Malik  