  MAQBOOL BAQAR,  J.- The above petition brought into 
question the legality, propriety and justification of Presidential 
Reference No. 1/2019 ( “the purported Reference” ), sent to the 
Supreme Judicial Council ( “SJC” ), under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan ( “the 
Constitution” ), against the petitioner, who is the third senior most 
puisne Judge of this Court, and is legitimately expected to become 
the Chief Justice of Pakistan on 17.09.2023. It was contended tha t 
the Reference has been filed with mala  fide intent and for collateral 
purposes, through colourable exercise of powers , and that it suffers 
from malice of law , as well as of facts, and from lack of jurisdiction.  
2.  The Reference, according to the petiti oner, in addition to 
being derogatory to the Constitution in multiple ways, manifests utter 
misconception, and mis -construal of the relevant law, i.e. The Income 
Tax Ordinance, 2001 ( “ITO 2001” ), and particularly Section 116 
thereof, the alleged/perceived violations/breach whereof, forms the 
very basis of the purported Reference.  
3.  Before going into the details and elaboration of the above, 
it may be noted that the purported Reference has alleged that the 
petitioner ha d failed to declare in his wealth sta tements , three 
different properties, jointly owned by his wife and children in London, 
as was  required of him in terms of Section 116(1)(b) of the ITO  2001 , 
and ancillary thereto, had claimed that the source of acquiring the 
said three properties  has not been disclosed/accounted for. It was 
contended that it can therefore not be ruled out that the properties 
may have been acquired through money laundering. As per the 
documents annexed to the Reference, it was a complaint dated 
10.04.2019, sent by o ne Abdul Waheed Dogar  (“the complainant 
Dogar ”), that triggered the Chairman, Asset Recovery Unit ( “ARU” ), 
the respondent No. 8, and the Law Minister, the respondent No. 4, 2 
 
into action which culminated in the purported Reference. However, 
the basic theme o f the petitioner’s case was that the complaint was 
merely a ruse to camouflage the fact that the purported Reference 
was a product of the animus and ill -will harboured by the main 
ruling political parties , and some government agencies against the 
petitione r, and of their desire to remove the petitioner from his office, 
whom they perceived as an obstacle in their riding this country 
roughshod, and also to over owe the other Judges of the superior 
Courts of this country into subjugation.  
4.  The learned couns el submitted that as a judge of the 
Supreme Court, the petitioner was appointed as a one -man 
commission to investigate the Quetta carnage where 75 people 
(mostly lawyers) lost their lives due to a suicide bomb attack. His 
Report was unsparing of the role o f the various intelligence agencies 
operating in Balochistan  at the time and raised many hackles. The 
learned counsel then referred to the judgment authored by the 
petitioner in Suo Moto Case No.7 of 2017 ( Faizabad Dharna case ) and 
submitted that it was th is suo motu  that triggered a chain of events 
that eventually led to the filing of th e purported Reference.  
5.  He highlighted certain portions of the judgment where 
the petitioner recorded certain facts and made some strong 
observations relating to PTI, MQM and ISI , inter alia, as follows: - 
 “Para 21 : General Musharraf was 
determined to stop CJP Iftikhar Chaudhry from 
visiting the SHC in Karachi on 12.5.2007. MQM 
was supporting him. Containers were placed on 
roads to stop the CJP and his supporters. When 
this did not stop them, gunmen fired upon them 
and more than 50 people were killed.  3 
 
Para 22 : PTI & PAT camped for several months on 
Islamabad’s Constitution Avenue in 2014 causing 
great inconvenience to residents and others. They 
not only achieved the form ation of a Commission to 
probe the election results but received months of 
free publicity.  
Para 24 : The TLP must have been emboldened in 
their decision to embark upon the dharna  by the 
State’s failure to bring the principal conspirators 
and perpetrators of  12th May 2007 to task as well 
as the absence of any consequences (rather 
conferment of political benefits) to PTI and PAT 
following their 2014 dharna . 
Paras 30 – 33: ECP had failed to act upon TLP’s 
breaches of the Election Act and Rules.  
Para 34 – 41: Both electronic media and the print 
media had legitimate grievances about informal 
censorship and restrictions upon their 
distribution. The State and PEMRA appeared to 
have looked the other way.  
Para 42 & 43 : The mandate of the ISI must not be 
a secret. Not only is this contrary to international 
practice relating to intelligence agencies but it 
gives rise to the impression that it exceeds its 
domain – especially given previous SC observations 
in Air Marshal Asghar Khan’s case where the ISI 
was found to be eng aging in political activities. It 
was observed that the distribution of cash 
handouts by uniformed military officers to TLP 
protestors reinforced the impression that the 4 
 
military was interfering in politics. This was 
reinforced by the DG ISPR’s comments ab out 
political matters such as his comment that the 
2018 elections were the fairest in history. It was 
emphasized that the oath of military officers 
requires them to abstain from politics and the 
impression that they favoured any political party 
undermined the reputation of the Armed Forces.  
Para 53(12) : Intelligence agencies (including ISI, 
MI, IB) and ISPR must not interfere with the 
freedom of the media.  
Para 53(15) : Proceedings should be taken by the 
concerned Head of Department against any 
military offi cer who violated his oath of office by 
engaging in any political activity. ” 
Mr. Malik submitted that w hile otherwise unexceptionable in 
law, the inconvenient truths mentioned in the judgment sparked the 
fury of not only the ruling political parties , but also the various State 
agencies and departments mentioned therein. A ccording to the 
learned counsel an unprecedented number of review petitions  were 
filed against the Faizabad  dharna  judgment, including by  PTI, MQM, 
and the Minist ry of Defence (“ MoD”) on behalf of the Armed Forces 
and the ISI  and that it was, quite evidently, a coordinated exercise by 
various actors within the executive branch . The learned counsel 
further submitted that the  MoD’s review petition  claimed that the 
judgment threatened the  morale of the Armed Forces and ISI, tended 
to drive a wedge between soldiers and officers and could destroy their 
cohesion as a fighting force . In other words, the Faizabad dharna  
judgment ha d placed the national security and defence of Pakistan at 
risk. All “explicit and implicit adverse observations ” in relation to the 5 
 
Armed Forces and the ISI were sought to be removed. Mr. Malik 
submitted that he do es not find it appropriate at that juncture to 
argue whether such plea was baseless hyperbole or not; non etheless 
the very fact that such plea was raised shows the level of ire and 
passion against the judgment (and its author) aroused within the 
departments/agencies for whom the MoD was holding brief.  
6.  Referring to the PTI’s initial review petition, the le arned 
counsel submitted that through their petition, PTI claimed the 
judgment, as one -sided, biased, politicized, in violation of 
fundamental rights and natural justice, an abuse of judicial power 
and thoroughly improper. According to them, Mr. Malik submi tted, 
merely by rendering such judgment the Petitioner violated his Oath of 
Office , and Articles 3 and 5 (as well as the Preamble) of the Code of 
Conduct for Judges, and was liable to be removed under Article 209. 
He then referred to the MQM’s petition and  submitted that the same 
also claims that merely by passing such judgment, the Petitioner 
committed misconduct rendering him liable to be removed under 
Article 209 , and pointed out  that MQM’s review petition reiterates the 
allegations made in the PTI petit ion and that most of the grounds and 
questions of law in both petitions are in identical language . He 
contended that identical language used by PTI and MQM clearly 
establishes that the PTI and the MQM petitions calling for the 
removal of the Petitioner wer e a coordinated and collaborative 
exercise  between the two parties of the ruling coalition. It was 
according to Mr. Malik not just the ranting of a single aggrieved 
litigant  rather a  joint deliberate decision was taken by these two 
ruling coalition parties , not only to seek review of the judgment itself, 
but to levy allegations of professional misconduct against the 
Petitioner and demand his removal . It is also important to note that 
both review petitions allege misconduct and violation of the Code of 6 
 
Condu ct. In the facts and circumstances of the case, as thoroughly 
examined by me, the submission of the learned counsel seems to be 
just, fair and correct.  
7. Though nothing is known about the complainant Dogar, 
neither had he furnished  his address or telephone number , nor had 
he disclosed as to for whom he works as a journalist, which he claims 
to be. The official respondents also have not claimed knowing the so 
called journalist/complainant in any way. There is absolutely nothing 
on th e record to show that the complainant is a public spirited 
person, or has in any manner be en involved in any public or national 
cause , and or has done any press/media reporting. All that is known 
about the complainant Dogar is that he once concocted a stor y 
published in dail y “Jinnah” , a local newspaper of Islamabad, 
regarding an incident in which famous journalist Mr. Ahmed Noorani , 
was in broad day light , attacked by six assailants with iron rods near 
Aabpara, Islamabad, which incident was reported by nat ional and 
international media, including New York Times and BBC, as a likely 
retaliation  of Mr. Noorani ’s report ing the activities of intelligence 
agencies. The complainant Dogar in his story has claimed that Mr. 
Noorani was in fact attacked by the brother s of a girl with whom he 
(Mr. Noorani ) was involved. However, subsequently the complainant 
Dogar retracted his concoction  and apologized for it . It may also be 
relevant to note here that the purported complainant has also not 
disclosed as to how, in the fi rst place, he came to know about the 
alleged ownership  of the properties , particularly when he did not even 
know the name s of the petitioner’s wife and children, the alleged 
owners of the properties , and more intriguingly , as to how he 
discovered that the properties were not disclosed by the petitioner in 
his wealth statements, which is a confidential information, protected 
under the income tax law , unauthorized disclosure whereof is a penal 7 
 
offence. The complainant Dogar a lso did not explain as what made 
him so eager and keen to secure the information and to divulge it 
before the Chairman ARU who , as shall be discussed in detail in a 
while , has had absolutely no authority to obtain and entertain the 
same. However the purpor ted complaint was found so credible , and 
was entertained with such a great zeal and fervour  that the 
Chairman, somehow located the hitherto, complete stranger , with 
absolutely no information regarding his whereabouts , and no 
knowledge of his credentials and, (as disclosed by Chairman  in his 
report dated 10.5.2019) , held a meeting with him , and asked him 
(Dogar ) about his motivation , and also sought from him the evidence 
that he may have in support of his allegations. Though nothing has 
been disclosed about the complainant’s motivation as yet, however 
the report claimed that the complainant Dogar furnished to the 
Chairman ARU a copy of the regi ster of title obtained from the 
website of the UK Land registry , of the property bearing No.40 
Oakdale Road, London E11 4 DL, registered in the name of Mst. 
Zarina Mon serrat  Khos o Carrera and A rslan Isa Khoso, which copy 
was though said to be annexed to the  Chairman’s above report, but 
was not placed either before the SJC or the Court , nor was it 
supplied to the petitioner, though the petitioner made an application 
seeking the same, and was furnished only through CMA No.3312 of 
2020 dated 01.6.2020, As per t he report, though the complainant 
claimed that those in whose name the said property is registered , are 
the wife , and son of the petitioner, he however evidently did not 
furnish any proof of the relationship , and also did not explain  as to  
how he came to k now about it . 
8.  On 15.4.2019, the Chairman ARU held a meeting 
regarding the purported complaint with Mr. Ashfaq Ahmed, Chief 
International Taxes, Federal Board of Revenue (“Mr. Ahmed”), 8 
 
Mr.Muhammad Rizwan, Director FIA, Barrister Zia ul Mustafa Nasim , 
an expert on international criminal laws  (“Barrister Zia”) , and the 
Secretary ARU , and on the next date i.e. 16.4.2019, held a meeting 
with the Law Minister, the respondent No.4, along with the above 
officers, at the end of which meeting the Law Minister and  the 
Chairman ARU, directed Barrister Zia to verify the details of the 
property mentioned in the complaint , and also to carry out an 
extensive search to identify any other properties that may belong to 
the persons named in the purported complaint. They also directed 
Mr. Rizwan of FIA to obtain copies of the identification documents of 
the said persons, including those of their CNICs, pa ssports, visas and 
their family trees , as well as their travel history. The Chairman ARU, 
in pursuance of the above meeting , and on the advice of Mr. Ahmed , 
forwarded a copy of the purported complaint to the Chairman FBR, to 
check the veracity of the claim  made therein . As is evident from the 
“record note” of the afore said meeting , not only the purported 
complaint and its ramification  were disc ussed during the meeting , 
but the relevant copy of the extract of the UK Land Registry was also 
perused , whereafter  the Law Minister requested the Chairman ARU 
and the officers present to call the complainant in person to assess 
the veracity of his allegations, and it was in this backdrop that the 
Chairman ARU’s above mentioned meeting with the complainant 
Dogar took p lace, and thus the Chairman ’s claim in his report dated 
10.5.2019, that it was the complainant Dogar who furnished to him 
the extract , does not seem to be correct, as evidently he possessed a 
copy of the extract before he met Dogar, which copy as noted abo ve 
was placed before the Law Minister during the meeting dated 
16.4.2019. In the light of the above, the fact that copy of the said 
extract was neither submitted by the complainant Dogar, the 
respondent No.10 , along with the purported complaint or at any time 9 
 
subsequently , nor was it filed by any other respondent , until the  
official respondents did so through CMA  No.3312 of 2020 , as shall be 
seen in the later part of this judgment , gains an a dded significance.      
9.  On 10.5.2019, Zia Ahmed Butt, Assistant  Commissioner 
Income Tax, prepared and sent his report to the Commissioner (IR), 
AEOI Zone/International Taxes Zone , LTU, Islamabad, Zulfiqar 
Ahmed, who forwarded the same along with his covering letter to the 
Secretary, EOI, FBR, Sajida Kausar, the same d ay i.e. 10.5.2019.  The 
said letter also was received at the FBR head office, the very day , and 
then reached the desk of Mr. Ahmed, the DG, International Taxes, 
again on 10.5.2019, who was able to review and summarise all of this 
information , received from his field officers , and to communicate it 
onward to the Chairman ARU through his letter dated 10.5.2019. 
This letter from DG also reaches the Chairman ARU , the same da y, 
i.e. 10.5.2019. The Chairman also manages to review it immediately 
and to make his own  comprehensive summary dated 10.5.2019 , for 
the Law Minister, incorporating not only the information received 
from the FBR but also the report of 08.5.2019, prepared by Barrister 
Zia of ARU, and the identity and the travel history by FIA, submitted 
also on 10.5.2019. The Law Minister then forwarded this report, as a 
summary to the Prime Minister, who then advised the President to 
file a reference. Such a long drawn and extensive exercise involving 
so many officers cannot possibly be concluded within a single day, 
one can only guess as to whether these officers signed on the 
proverbial dotted lines or were the purported report s and summaries 
prepared much before the magical date of 10.5.2019. Certainly, as 
submitted by Mr.Malik , 10.5.2019 was the longest  day for the 
petitioner.      
10.  The case against the petitioner, as set out in the 
purported reference, proceeded on the premise that in terms of the 10 
 
provisions of section 116 of the ITO 2001, the petitioner was required 
to disclose the properties owned  by his wife and children in his 
wealth statement, but he and so also his wife and children , failed to 
do so , and as a corollary thereof , it was claimed that it remained 
unexplained as to how were these properties acquired, and thus , it 
was contended that the possibility that these properties were 
acquired through money laundering cannot be ruled out , the above 
allegation s and insinuation s were, solely based on the purported 
report obtained by the Chairman ARU from the FBR. However, as 
rightly submitted by Mr.Muneer A. Malik, the purported reference did 
not allege any dishonesty or corruption in the acquisition of such 
properties and that it was also not alleged that the petitioner did not 
have sufficient tax paid/white money to acquire the said properties, if 
he wanted to. Absolutely nothing was placed on the record that there 
has been any money laundering on the basis whereof it could be said 
that the case against the petitioner is of money laundering. It was not 
even explained as to what is the basis for m aking such a serious 
allegation against a senior Judge of the Supreme Court. There is also 
no allegation that the petitioner failed to pay any tax due.  
11.  Now before proceeding to examine the merits and 
veracity of the allegations, it will be appropriate  to peruse and 
analyse the provisions of section 116 of the ITO 2001, which reads as 
follows: - 
“116.  Wealth statement. - 
(1)   The Commissioner may, by notice in 
writing, require any person to furnish, on the 
date specified in the notice, a statement 
(hereinafter referred to as the "wealth 
statement") in the prescribed form and verified 
in the prescribed manner giving particulars of –   
 (a)    the person’s  total assets and liabilities as 
on the date or dates specified in such notice;  11 
 
 (b)    the total assets and liabilities of the 
person’s spouse, minor children, and other 
dependents as on the date or dates specified in 
such notice;    
(c)    any assets transferred by the person to any 
other person during the period or periods 
specified in such notice an d the consideration 
for the transfer;  
(d)    the total expenditures incurred by the 
person, and the person’s spouse, minor 
children, and other dependents during the 
period or periods specified in the notice and the 
details of such expenditures ; and  
(e) the reconciliation statement of wealth.    
  
(2)    Every resident taxpayer , being an 
individual, filing a return of income for any tax 
year shall furnish a wealth statement and 
wealth reconciliation statement for th at year 
along with such return . 
 Provided that every member of an 
association of persons shall also furnish wealth 
statement and wealth reconciliation statement 
for the year along with return of income of the 
association.  
(3)    Where a person, who has furnished a 
wealth statement, discovers any omission or 
wrong statement therein, he may, without 
prejudice to any liability incurred by him under 
any provision of this Ordinance, furnish a 
revised wealth statement , along with the revised 
wealth reconciliation and the reasons for filing 
revised wealt h statement, under intimation to 
the Commissioner in the prescribed form and 
manner, at any time before the receipt of notice 
under sub -section (9) of section 122, for the tax 
year to which it relates .  
Provided that where the Commissioner is 
of the opinio n that the revision under this sub -
section is not for the purpose of correcting a 12 
 
bona fide  omission or wrong statement, he may 
declare such revision as void through an order 
in writing after providing an opportunity of being 
heard.  
Explanation  — For the removal of doubt it 
is clarified that wealth statement cannot be 
revised after the expiry of five years from the due 
date of filing of return of income Tax for that tax 
year.” 
 
12.  In terms of clause ( e) of sub -section 2 of Section 114 ITO 
2001, a return of income has to essentially accompan y a wealth 
statement as required under section 116. This mandat ory 
requirement of filing of a wealth statement along with the return is, 
in terms of section 2A of sec tion 118 ITO 2001, maintained , also 
where the return is required to be filed electronically.  While sub -
section (4) of section 11 8, envisages two different occasions for filing 
of wealth statement s, one with reference to  sub-section (2) of Section 
116, which reiterates the requirement of section 114, that the wealth 
statement filed thereunder shall be filed by the date due for 
furnishing the return of income for that year , and the other where a 
person files a wealth statement in compliance of a notice under sub -
section (1) of Section 116 , and reaffirms the time prescribed by the 
said sub -section for compliance, being the date as specified in the 
notice.   
13.  Section 114(1) ITO 2001, provides for furnishing the 
return of income for the tax year, sub -section (2) thereof , as noted 
above, require that, the return of income, (a) shall be in the 
prescribed form and shall be accompanied by such annexures, 
statements , or documents as may be prescribed. The said provision 
itself prescribes certain essential s for the said return, one such 
essential requirement, has been specified through clause (e) of the 
said sub -section which reads, “ shall be accompanied with a wealth 13 
 
statement as required under section 116 ”. Now section 116 is 
composed of two parts, one is contained in sub -section (2) thereof, 
which is merely a reiteration of what has been specified through the 
above quoted clause (e) of sub -section (2) of section 114 ITO 2001, 
whereas the other part, which  is composed of sub -section (1), 
empowers the relevant Commissioner to require “ any person ” 
through a notice in writing, to furnish on the “ date specified in the 
notice ” the following information, through the prescribed wealth 
statement: - 
(a)    the person ’s total assets and liabilities as on 
the date or dates specified in such notice;    
  
(b)    the total assets and liabilities of the person’s 
spouse, minor children, and other 
dependents as on the date or dates specified 
in such notice;    
 
(c)    any asset s transferred by the person to any 
other person during the period or periods 
specified in such notice and the 
consideration for the transfer;  
 
14.  Now the two statements, though both called wealth 
statement , are patently different and distinct from each other. They 
cater to two different requirements and are filed in/on two different 
situations /occasions , having different features, and containing 
distinct information and details, one of the two is an essentia l part of 
the income return under section 114 ITO 2001, required to be filed 
by “every resident tax payer ”, “for the tax year ”, “by the due date for 
furnishing the income for that year ”, whereas the other , undoubtedly 
is not a part of the income return, bu t is filed only when required by 
the concerned Commissioner in writing , which demand , in contrast 
to sub -section(2), which, as noted  earlier makes it s filing an 
obligation on a “resident tax payer ”, could be made from “ any 
person ”, whereas the due date for  filing the statement under section 
(1) is not the due date prescribed for filing the income return, but the 14 
 
statement thereunder is to be furnished “ on the date specified in the 
notice ”. 
15.  Pakistan is a federal republic,  its governance structure is 
based on provincial autonomy and trichotomy of power. Our 
constitutional scheme secures and guarantees independence of 
judiciary in a meticulous , effective and robust manner. Amongst the 
main objective s espoused through the pre amble to the Constitution, 
professes independence of judiciary, as one of the prime objective s, 
and thus states “….. the independence of judiciary shall be fully 
secured”. Such has also been our resolve, expressed through the 
objective resolution, which by  virtue of Article 2A forms substantive 
part of the constitution. One of the most significant safeguard, 
ensuring the professed and committed independence of judiciary, has 
been provided by way of protecting the tenure of office of the judges 
of the Suprem e Court and the High Courts, through articles 179 and 
195 of the Constitution, respectively. Article 179 thus reads: - 
“A Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he 
attains the age of sixty five years, unless he sooner 
resigns or is removed from office in accordance with the 
Constitution. ” (emphasis supplied )  
  
16.  Article 195 secures the tenure of a High Court  Judge in 
similar terms. Whereas clause (7) of Article 209 of the Constitution 
provides that, “ a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall 
not be removed from office except as provided by this Article ” 
(emphasis supplied ). The possibility of remo val of these Judges is 
envisaged by clause (6) of Article 209, in two successive eventualities, 
(a), being, a Judge, after the inquiry by the Supreme Judicial Council 
(SJC), (composition of which council has been prescribed by the said 
Article itself), is found incapable of performing duties of his office, or 
to be guilty of misconduct, and (b) in view of such incapability or 
misconduct, the SJC forms an opinion that the Judge be removed 15 
 
from office, and its only then that the President may remove him from 
office. Clause 6 thus reads: - 
“ (6) If, after inquiry into the matter, the Council 
reports to the President that it is of the opinion - 
(a) that the Judge is incapable of performing the 
duties of his office , or has been guilty of misconduct, and  
(b) that he should be removed from office.  
the President may remove the Judge from office. ” 
 
17.  An inquiry against a Judge can only be initiated as 
envisage d and prescribed by sub -clause (5) of Article 209 of the 
constitution, which reads as follows: - 
“  (5) If, on information from any source, the Council or 
the President is of the opinion that a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or of a High Court - 
(a) may be incapable of properly performing the 
duties of his office by reason of physical or mental 
incapacity; or  
(b)  may have been guilty of misconduct,  
the President shall direct the Council to, or the Council 
may, on its own motion, inquiry into the matter .” 
 
18.  However in the present case, the conduct of the 
President, who is the head of the State, was neither in co nsonance 
with the provisions of Article 209, nor was it in conformity with the 
requirements of Article 90 and 91 of the Constitution. Article 90 
reads as follows: - 
“90. (1) Subject to the Constitution, the executive 
authority of the Federation shall be exe rcised in the 
name of the President by the Federal Government, 
consisting of the Prime Minister and the Federal 
Ministers, which shall act through the Prime Minister, 
who shall be the chief executive of the Federation.  
(2) In the performance of his functio ns under the 
Constitution, the Prime Minister may act either directly or 
through the Federal Minister .”   
 
19.  The above provisions clearly mandates that the executive 
authority be exercised by the Federal Government, it also 16 
 
unambiguously lays down that the Federal Government is composed 
of the Prime Minister , and the Federal Ministers, which composition, 
in terms of the Article 91(1), has been described as Cabinet. Article 
91(1) reads as follows: - 
“91. (1) There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers, with the 
Prime Minister as its head, to aid and advise the 
President in the exercise of his functions. ” 
 
20.  Sub-Article (6) of Article 91 provides that “ The Cabinet, 
together with the Ministers of State, shall be collectively responsible to 
the Senate and the Nat ional Assembly ”.   
21.  In the first place, the President erred in ignoring, the 
flagrant violation of Article 90, inasmuch as the purported 
complaint/ information , was submitted to him by the Prime Minister, 
without the approval of the Cabinet, which appr oval was essentially 
required thereby  (Article 90) . This Court in the case of M/s Mustafa 
Impex  v. Govt. of Pakistan  (PLD 2016 SC 808 ), has examined and 
expounded the status and role of the Cabinet in view of the above 
article , as follows: - 
“79. We begin with the postulate that the constitutional 
definition of Federal Government under Article 90 is 
absolutely clear in its scope and ambit - it means the 
Prime Minister and the Federal Minister, which, in turn, 
means the Cabinet. The Cabinet is a composite concept 
and its components are the Prime Minister and the 
Federal Ministers. Together they constitute the Cabinet. 
Article 91, as it stands at present, bears the heading 
“The Cabinet”, and restate the same proposition from a 
slightly different pe rspective. Under Article 90 it was 
posited that the executive authority was to be exercised 
by the Federal Government i.e. the Cabinet. But, it was 
added that the Cabinet was to exercise the executive 
authority in the name of the President.  In brief, the 
executive authority of the state was to be exercised by 
the Cabinet, as a collective entity, in the name of the 
President. ……………… The central role in both 
theoretical formulations is played by the Cabinet which 17 
 
is, in fact, a re -description of the Federal Government. 
The Prime Minister is the head of the Cabinet but he can 
neither supplant it nor replace it. …………. He cannot 
exercise its powers by himself. ……….. If we treat the 
office of the Prime Minister as being equivalent to that of 
the Cabinet, it would  follow that the Prime Minister, by 
himself, as a single individual, becomes the Federal 
Government. This is simply inconceivable. It is the 
antithesis of a constitutional democracy and would 
amount to a reversion to a monarchical form of 
Government remini scent of King Louis XIV’s famous 
claim that “I am the State” (literally “L’etat, c’est moi”). It 
is most emphatically not the function of this Court to 
surrender the hard won liberties of the people of 
Pakistan to such a fanciful interpretations of the 
Constitution which would be destructive of all democratic 
principles. We have no doubt in rejecting it, in its 
entirety. ” 
 
22.  The foregoing has been reiterated through para 80 of the 
judgment in the following words: - 
“……………………The Prime Minister cannot take 
decisions by himself, or by supplanting or ignoring the 
Cabinet because the power to take decisions is vested 
with the Federal Government i.e. the Cabinet, and 
unilateral decisions taken by him would be a usurpation 
of power  …………………………………………. The 
decisions  of the Federal Government are the decisions of 
the Cabinet and not of the Prime Minister. Any decisions 
taken by the Prime Minister on his own initiative lack the 
authority of the law or the Constitution .”  
 
23.  Holding as above, the Court declared Rule 16(2) of the 
Rules of Business, 1973, which enable d the Prime Minister to 
dispose of matters by bypassing the cabinet , as ultra vires to the 
Constitution.  
24.  The judgment in its earlier part at page 846 , para 46, 
held that in view of clause 6 of Rule 20 of the Rules of Business, 
1973, which provided that no case shall be discussed in the cabinet, 18 
 
nor any issue raised, without a summary relating to it, first being 
circulated, mere formal consent of the Cabinet without following the 
detailed provisions in the Rules may render the decision open to 
question and that t he Cabinet, being the supreme body of the 
Executive, with a high constitutional status, cannot , and ought not 
to be treated as a mere rubber stamp for  decision making by the 
Prime Minister. It was observed that Article 90 envisages a 
parliamentary form of Government which is based on decision 
making by the Cabinet. To turn the Cabinet into such a rubber 
stamp in pursuit of decision making by the Prime M inister to the 
exclusion of his Cabinet would violate the letter and spirit of our 
Constitution. That would be to reduce a cabinet form of government 
into a prime ministerial one , which is a concept alien to the 
Constitution.  So as per this judgment, and a s prescribed by Rule 20, 
it is not just the approval of the Cabinet that is required , but such 
approval has to be made after due deliberation with full awareness of 
the matter approved/sanctioned .  
25.  The effective participation and contribution of the 
Cabinet in decision making becomes necessary also in view of the 
fact that in terms of sub -Article (6) of Article 91, the Cabinet has 
been made collectively responsible/liable for the decision made , and 
the policies formulated , by the executive.  
26.  Howev er in the present case, the Prime Minister by -
passed the Cabinet altogether and sent his purported advice to the 
President for forwarding the purported reference to the SJC , without 
the sanction of the Cabinet.  
27.  Mr. Bilal Minto, the learned counsel for  the petitioner in 
CP No.20/20 19, has drawn our attention to another fundamental 
constitutional flaw which too goes to the very root of the matter , that 
needs to be considered. He submitted that the President lacked 19 
 
jurisdiction al and constitutional authority to entertain the purported 
reference, also for its having been filed by a private person, instead of 
a government, and that a private compla int, seeking to invoke Article 
209 of the Constitution, cannot be lawfully entertained , even by a 
government functionary , what to say about a non -entity  like ARU . 
According to the learned counsel a private complaint can be received 
and entertained only by SJC. He submitted that under the original 
Article 209 (5) of the Constitution, informa tion in respect to a 
possible misconduct of a superior court judge could only be 
presented to the President. Even the Supreme Judicial Council had 
to first submit information about a judge to the President who then 
had to form an “opinion” as to whether th e information comprised 
“misconduct”. If he formed the opinion that it did comprise 
misconduct, he would have to send the matter back to the SJC to 
inquire. The learned counsel referred to the original article 209(5) , 
which read as follow s:- 
“209(5)… If, o n information received from the Council or 
from any other source, the  President is of the opinion 
that a Judge…etc ” 
He submitted that t he LFO (of 2002) amended the original sub article 
(5) as follows (inter alia):  
“209(5)…If, on information from any sourc e, the Council 
or the President is of the opinion that a Judge… etc ”  
 
The learned counsel pointed out that t he 18th Amendment, did not 
change this part of 209(5) , as it stood amended by the LFO and 
therefore it continues to read today as above . 
28.  As amended, clause (5) enabled the SJC to receive 
information from any source and proceed with inquiry on its own. 
This meant that the SJC no longer needed a direction from the 
President. However, even though the SJC could now receive 
information from any source, the President was still retained in this 20 
 
clause as one of the sources from which the SJC could receive 
information. According to Mr. Minto  this is significant. If the SJC 
could now receive information from any source, why was the 
President retained  as a specific, separate source in this amendment? 
Why was he not considered covered by the words “ any source ”? 
29.  The learned counsel submitted that u nless it is held that 
this part of the clause is “ redundant ”, it would be necessary to 
discover a reason behind the fact that the President has been 
retained here. In other words, it would be necessary to determine a 
specific role for which the President was retained.  
30.  Answering the query that he raised, the learned counsel 
submitted that the President has been retained in clause 5 to act as 
a “buffer ” i.e. a neutral entity between the executive/political 
government(s) and the judiciary  which, to my mind also, is the only 
plausible explanation . Mr. Minto rightly recalled that t he need for 
there to be a neutralizing buffer between the executive/political 
government and the judiciary was also underscored by Mr. Raza 
Rabbani Sr. ASC , while arguing for the petitioner in CP No. 26 of 
2019 , where  he has pointed out th at a tension between these two 
organs of the state is obvious in view of the fact that the government 
is a party before the judiciary in the vast majority of cases. The 
purported reference , the tone, language and contents of the pleadings 
filed by the Atto rney General before the SJC, as well as the vast 
machinery employed by the government to “ build ” a reference, make 
it even clearer how such a tension exists between the government 
and the judiciary. He thus, submitted that it is in acknowledgment of 
the na ture of relationship, between the government and the judiciary 
that the President has been retained as a “ buffer ”. This ensures that 
all information coming from the government(s) in respect to perceived 
“misconduct ” of a judge of superior court must pass t hrough the 21 
 
President. The President is expected to act neutrally and must form 
an “opinion” on information received from a government, before 
sending the matter to SJC.  
31.  The logical conclusion of the foregoing discussion is  that 
unless it is held that the retention of the President in this 
constitutional provision is redundant , which certainly is an 
impossibility, the only plausible reason to retain the President that 
one can perceive is that he is meant to act as a buffer between the 
judiciary and the  government, then it follows that information from 
the government about alleged misconduct of a judge must always 
pass through the President and cannot be submitted to the SJC 
directly. Conversely, if this is the role that the President is to play, 
then pr ivate persons , i.e. everyone except the government(s) must 
approach the SJC directly with their information and not through the 
President.  
32.  The learned counsel submitted that there is nothing odd 
in suggesting that two organs of the state can be hosti le to each 
other, President Andrew Jackson of the USA is said to have 
expressed his displeasure at the Supreme Court’s ruling in Worcester 
v Georgia by uttering the words  
“John Marshall (CJ) has made his decision, Now let him 
enforce it ”. 
  
33.  The presen t case (especially submissions regarding mala 
fides made on behalf of Justice Isa) , itself sufficiently demonstrates 
how important it is for the President to play the role of a buffer and a 
neutralizer between the government and the judiciary.  
34.  Howeve r the President has not applied his independent 
mind while forwarding to the SJC the purported reference, which as 
noted earlier also, contain s the allegation that the petitioner has 
failed to declare certain foreign properties , owned by his wife and 22 
 
children, as was perceived to be required of him in terms of section 
116 of the ITO 2001 . As patently manifest from the plain reading of 
the provisions of section 116 ITO 2001, and the Performa of wealth 
statement prescribed thereunder, and reinforced through t he notes 
contained therein, which shall be discussed in a while, the petitioner 
in the fact and circumstances of the case, was not at all obliged to 
make the disclosure as contended , and therefore no case can 
possibly be made out against the petitioner , for any non -compliance , 
or breach of the said provision. Had the President applied his mind 
independently, he would have readily and surely appreciated that 
reliance of the Chairman ARU, the Law Minister and the Prime 
Minister, on a purported report obtai ned by the Chairman ARU was 
wholly unconstitutional, unlawful, illegal, inappropriate, 
misconceived and mala fide . The same is  patently deleterious to the 
constitutional mandate , and the relevant law i.e. ITO 2001, and is 
gravely  misleading . It has been  prepared in utter disregard of the 
entire scheme of the ITO 2001, and the detailed and elaborate 
procedure laid thereby. No notice was issued either to the petitioner 
or even to his wife and/or children , and no opportunity of hearing 
was provided to either o f them before proceeding to prepare the 
purported report, certainly no adjudication was done with regard to 
the allegation by the competent hierarchy , or otherwise. Even in case 
there would have been a determination regarding the alleged non -
compliance aga inst the petitioner,  through due process , as 
prescribed , and by a designated officer, such initial determination 
also would not have been sufficient to proceed against the petitioner 
under Article 209 (5) of the Constitution, as that also would have 
been p re-mature , and would have deprived the petitioner of his right 
of appeal(s) , under the Statute , and from availing his remedy before 
the High Court and then before this Court. It may also be crucial to 23 
 
note here that even the ultimate finding of non -complia nce with the 
provisions of section 116 of the ITO 2001, shall not be sufficient to 
make the petitioner amenable before the SJC, unless it is held that 
that the same was deliberate and with ill intent, and the nature of 
the infraction found was such as to j ustify initiation of the 
proceeding under Article 209. In the absence /disregard  of all the 
above, the purported reference cannot be said to be bona fide .  
35.  Even a cursory reading of the provisions of section 116(1) 
and (2) together makes it abundantly clear, which view , as noted 
earlier,  is reinforced with the perusal of the wealth statement form 
filed along  with  the income return, that a filer is certainly not 
required to disclose the assets of his independent spouse and 
children through the wealth s tatement that he/she is required, to file 
along with his/her income return, otherwise there was no need for 
the provisions i.e. sub -section (1) of section 116, enabling the 
Commissioner to seek such information through a notice. The 
analysis of the provisi ons of clause (e) of sub -section (2) of Section 
114, sub-section (2A) and (4) of section 118, and comparison of sub -
section (1) and (2) of section 116  of the ITO 2001 , leaves no manner 
of doubt that the wealth statement, filed along with the income 
return,  is not the same as required to be filed in compliance with the 
notice under section 116(1). As also noted earlier, the above sub -
section (1) of section 116 clearly enumerates, the information that 
the Commissioner may seek thereunder. However none of the 
provisions of the ITO 2001, specifies the information that is to be 
furnished through the wealth statement required in terms of clause 
(e) of sub -section (2) of section 114, so the statute by itself does not 
require the filer to disclose the properties own ed by his or her spouse 
or children , along with the income return under section 114. We 
therefore have to peruse the Performa of the wealth statement filed 24 
 
along with the income return , as specified in part (iv) of the second 
schedule to the Income Tax Rul es 2002. Clause 12 of which 
Performa, though provide s for “particulars/description of Assets, if 
any standing in the name of the spouse, minor children and other 
dependents”, but as is evident from note seven (7) of the notes 
incorporated in the performa, which particular note is in the context 
of the aforesaid column , and reads “Give details of assets of the 
spouse, minor children and other dependents , and state whether 
such assets were transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse or 
minor children , or other dependents , or was acquired by them with 
funds provided by you”, the plain and simple meaning of this note, 
which is instructive and explanatory in nature, is that, only such 
assets are to be mentioned in the relevant column which, though 
stand in t he name of the spouse and minor children , and other 
dependents, but have either been transferred to them by the filer, 
whether directly or indirectly , or were acquired by them with the 
funds provided by the filer, otherwise the query would have been , as 
to whether the assets were acquired by them (spouse, minor children 
or other dependents) directly or indirectly, or were acquired by them 
with the funds provided by you. The query , as explained/elaborated 
through the said note, pertains to acquisition, eithe r by way of 
transfer by the filer  directly, or through a route of third party, or from 
the funds provided by the filer . The use of word “transfer” in the 
earlier part of the note, instead of the word “acquired”, as used in the 
later part is significant. It may be relevant to note here that the 
assets or the properties are obtained not only through transfer , but 
are often acquired by way of allotment, lease, grant and/or sanction 
etc. The reference to transfer in the note, is in fact to a transfer from 
a filer, either directly or through some intermediary. It may also be 
beneficial/instructive to note here that in order to make compliance 25 
 
of the mandate as contained in the provisions of section 114 and 116 
of ITO 2001 simple  and straight and in order to remov e the remote st 
possibility of any confusion , or ambiguity , in that regard, the relevant 
query as set out in Column -12 of the wealth statement, has been re -
casted, in the performa introduced in the year 2014  and placed at 
S.No.13 , to read, “Assets created b enami in the name of spouse(s), 
children and other dependents”, whereas the “instructions for filing 
the return “ Part-11(E)”, which seems to have replaced the “note s” on 
the reverse of the wealth statement , at S.No.8 , instructs , that the 
“Assets created in  the name of spouse(s), children and other 
dependents , at S.No.13 , are to be declared only if acquired by them 
with funds provided by you”. It is also crucial to note here that the 
change s in clause 12 of the performa , and the notes/instructions , 
have not been brought as a consequence of any change in the 
relevant provisions of the statute , as none has occurred , but for the 
purpose and objective as noted above, and to bring the performa in 
perfect conformity and harmony  with the relevant provision s of the  
ITO 2001, particularly those of section 114, 116 and 118 thereof, the 
foregoing as shall be discussed further is the only rationale and 
logical conclusion one can draw.  
36.  Although as noted above, the performa , before it was 
changed in 2014, by itself, required disclosure of the assets which 
were acquired by the wife and children only from the filer or through 
him. However, the modified performa and instructions would also 
have been beneficial to the petitioner had the earlier performa been 
other wise as it is now well laid down that beneficial notifications, 
executive orders and instructions have retrospective effect , Messrs  
Army Welfare Sugar Mills Ltd and others  v. Federation of 
Pakistan and others  (1992 SCMR 1652) and Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd 26 
 
and others  v. Federation through Secretary, Ministry of Finance, 
Islamabad and others  (PLD 1997 SC 582).  
37.  As submitted by Mr. Babar Sattar, the learned ASC, who 
argued for the petitioner in relation to the relevant provisions of the 
ITO 2001,  if the filin g of wealth statement necessarily required, from 
“every resident taxpayer ”, in every instance, the submission of 
additional information that could only be sought by the 
Commissioner after issuing a notice in writing then section 116(1) 
would be redundant, at least with respect, to the resident taxpayer . 
According to the learned counsel t he only natural reading of the two 
provisions is that the wealth statement as required in section 116(2) 
has to specify the wealth and assets of the taxpayer only. Under 
Section 116(1), however, the Commissioner is empowered to issue a 
notice and seek information regarding the assets of the dependents, 
after having specified the dates in the notice.  Further, the 
Commissioner may require “ any person ” not just the “ resident 
taxpayer ” to provide this information. Section 116(1) creates an 
obligation, subject to notice by the Commissioner, for every person to 
whom such notice is issued, in contrast to section 116(2), which 
creates the obligation to file a wealth statement for ‘ta x payers’. 
Pursuant to 116(1), a non -resident Pakistani who has no income 
taxable in Pakistan can be required to file a wealth statement and 
reconciliation statement. The object, purpose and scope of sections 
116(1) and 116(2) is manifestly distinguishable . 
38.  Mr. Sattar further submitted that t he annual wealth 
statement filed electronically along with income tax return is filed 
under Section 116(2). To state that Petitioner has breached section 
116(2) of the ITO, the President had to be convinced that as a matter 
of law and practice the content of Section 116(1) is to be read into 
Section 116(2) and every taxpayer filing a wealth statement is obliged 27 
 
to disclose within such statement all assets of a spouse (whether 
dependent or not) and the assets of non -dependent adult -children 
and whether or no t such assets are the products of the taxpayer’s 
income i.e. including assets that are products of inheritance, gift,  
etc., this, he submitted is neither the law nor the practice. The above 
submission s of Mr. Sattar are in consonance with the view as 
expre ssed hereinbefore, that neither was the petitioner obliged to 
make any declaration as suggested, nor has  he committed any 
breach of the provision of Section 116 or for that matter any other 
provision of ITO 2001. In support of his contention, the learned 
counsel relied upon the of  case titled Miss Sabira B. Nanjiani, 
Karachi v.  Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Salary Circle -
03, Zone -D, Karachi  (2007 PTD 1810) the Sindh High Court while 
interpreting Sections 58(1) and (2) of Income Tax Act, 1979 (the 
predecessor provisions of Section 116(1) and (2) of the ITO) 
recognized that these two subsections created separate requirements, 
thus supporting the above interpretation of section 116(1) and (2) of 
the ITO.  
39.  If the interpretation in the Reference is accepted then 
every taxpayer (including each Judge, the Prime Minister and the 
President) is mandated to disclose each and every asset of his/her 
spouse and children in their wealth statements, whether or not 
creat ed out of the tax payer’s income and whether or not the spouse 
or children are dependents. This would throw almost every taxpayer 
in breach of Section 116(2), to the extent that the wife owns any 
property (including jewellery) that has not been created out  of the 
husband’s income or that the husband is unaware of. Conversely, it 
would also throw most married female tax filers to be in breach of 
section 116, as most wives do not have details of the assets of their 
husbands and don’t report their husband’s as sets on their wealth 28 
 
statements; section 116 uses the word ‘spouse’.  The interpretation 
accorded in the Reference makes no sense in view of the purpose of 
inclusion of requirement of wealth statement under the law. The only 
purpose a wealth statement serve s is to act as a balance sheet for 
reconciliation of income to ensure no income escapes tax.  
40.  The Petitioner could not possibly have disclosed/  
declared the assets of his non -dependent spouse and non -dependent 
adult -children under section 116(2) or eve n under section 116(1) for 
that matter unless the assets were a product of his income, as such 
declaration/inclusion would make it impossible to reconcile the 
wealth statement and provision of reconciliation statement which is a 
mandatory part of and ratio nale for filing of the wealth statement. 
And if he did disclose such assets he would be filing a false return. 
Moreover, the law cannot possibly require both spouses to declare 
identical assets on their wealth statements as in doing so their 
wealth stateme nts would never reconcile their incomes. Section 116 
of the ITO cannot be conceived to have proposed such an absurdity.  
41.  The purpose of law is to add certainty to the lives of 
citizens. The proposed interpretation of section 116 of the ITO is 
intention ally dishonest as it suffers from an impossibility. Legal 
liability cannot be affixed on the basis of fanciful misconstruction 
and uncertainty. It would be rare for one spouse to know with 
exactitude the details of all assets of the other spouse, and be 
virtually impossible where a husband has more than one wife. 
Hanging penal liability on such assumed knowledge and mandatory 
disclosure (and the impossibility of avoiding it, unless the other 
spouse voluntarily shares such information) defies rationality.  
42.  As rightly submitted by Mr. Babar Sattar, t he only two 
circumstances in which a Section 116(1) notice in relation to the said 
properties could be issued to the Petitioner were, (i) if the 29 
 
Commissioner believed at the relevant time that the Petitioner’s 
income had escaped taxation and was not accounted for in his wealth 
statement under 116(2) or (ii) if the Commissioner issued a notice to 
the spouse of the Petitioner and she stated that she purchased the 
properties in question from money received from her  husband, which 
he had not disclosed in his wealth statement.  
43.  According to Mr. Babar Sattar, t he underlying object of 
the taxman in issuing section 116 notice is to detect any income that 
may have escaped taxation. Thus such income and the asset made 
from it would be converted back into income and then taxed. 
However, undisputedly the petitioner has a pristine record in 
declaring substantial income and paying tax on it, therefore, in view 
of the Petitioner’s tax record and lack of motivation to acquire  
properties in the name of his spouse or children when he had 
legitimate tax -paid means to acquire such property, the Petitioner 
could never be served with a tax demand in lieu of such properties 
(especially in view of section 90). There is also no suggest ion that the 
properties in question were purchased by the Petitioner or were 
purchased on his behalf.  
44.  In view of part IV and Recovery of Tax provisions in the 
ITO, especially, section 138, tax can only be recovered from the 
taxpayer, his estate or any one holding property on behalf of the 
taxpayer, and no tax liability gets transferred to the spouse of a 
delinquent taxpayer. In the present case there is no allegation that 
the spouse/children of the Petitioner are holding property on his 
behalf, therefor e, the provisions of section 90 are not attracted. Any 
tax liability of a spouse cannot be transferred to the other spouse nor 
adverse presumptions be drawn against them, as there is neither any 
concept of collective responsibility under the ITO nor one of  joint tax 
filling (as in the US, which then also has the Innocent Spouse Rule, 30 
 
where non -declaration of tax by one spouse is not known to or for the 
benefit of the other).  
45.  Any adverse presumption against the spouse of an 
allegedly delinquent taxpaye r would undermine the doctrine of 
individual responsibility in Article 5 of our Constitution that provides 
the foundational basis for rights and responsibilities under our 
constitutional order.  
46.  A very serious constitutional abrasion in this case, is the 
President’s sending the purported reference to the SJC on the advice 
of the Prime Minister, without applying himself, and without forming 
an independent opinion, as to whether, in the facts and 
circumstances of the case it was desireable to send the pu rported 
reference to the SJC. By following the advice of the Prime Minister, 
and not applying himself independently, the President has committed 
a gross violation of the constitution. There is absolutely no concept of 
any “advice” in the constitutional sch eme of initiating and 
maintaining any proceedings against a Judge. Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution, recognises the role of only two offices/entities, the 
President, and the SJC. The Prime Minister has absolutely no role or 
participation in the entire pr ocess. The term “advice” is alien to the 
proceedings, under Article 209. Clause 5 of the said Article, which 
has been reproduced herein earlier, says, “the President is of the 
opinion”, it does not say opinion to be formed on the advice of the 
Prime Minist er, so it is the exclusive domain and prerogative of the 
President to form an opinion, either to send or not to send the matter 
to the SJC, for it to hold an inquiry. The language employed in clause 
5 of Article 209 is plane, simple and unambiguous, it doe s not allow 
any room for an interpretation other than its literary meaning. 
Importing into the said provision any word, or phrase shall not only 
be violative of the elementary principle of interpretation, but shall 31 
 
also hurt the very spirit of the said pro vision, and shall further be in 
conflict with the entire constitutional scheme, and the principle of 
trichotomy of power and independence of judiciary. As discussed 
herein before, it is with a certain purpose, that despite an 
amendment, whereby SJC has bee n empowered to receive 
information “from any source”, the President has been retained in 
this clause , such is for him to act a s a buffer,  and insulate the 
judiciary from the executive’s onslaught, by way of misconceived, 
untenable, malicious and mala fide,  complaints/allegations. As 
observed earlier also, government happens to be party in a vast 
majority of cases and tension between these two organs of state is not 
unnatural.  
“In a democracy governed by rule of law under written 
constitution, judiciary is sentinel on the qui vive to protect the 
fundamental rights and to poise even scales of justice between the 
citizens and the State or the S tate inter se. Rule of law and judicial 
review are basics of the constitution. ” …………………  “under the 
Constitution it is the judiciary which is entrusted with the task of 
keeping every organ of the State within the limits of the law and 
thereby making the rule of law meaningful and effective ”. …………. 
“The judiciary seeks to protect the citizen against violation of his 
constit utional or legal right or misuse or abuse of power by the State 
or its officers. The judiciary stands between the citizen and the State 
as a bulwark against executive excesses and misuse or abuse of 
power by the executive. It is therefore absolutely essent ial that the 
judiciary must be free from executive pressure or influence which has 
been secured by making elaborate provisions in the constitution with 
details. Independent judiciary is therefore most essential when liberty 
of citizen is in danger. It then  becomes the duty of the judiciary to 
poise the scale of justice unmoved by the powers (actual or perceived) 32 
 
undistributed by the clamour of the multitude ”. ……………………..  
“The extra ordinary complexity of modern litigation requires him (a 
Judge) not merely to  declare the rights of citizen but also to mould 
the relief warranted under given facts and circumstances and often 
command the executive and other agencies to enforce and give effect 
to the order, writ, or direction or prohibit them to do unconstitutional  
acts.”1  
47.  It is the above role, functions and obligations of the 
judiciary, that cause friction and give rise to tension between the 
executive and the judiciary, and thus a unique role of neutral buffer, 
as described above, has been assigned by the co nstitution to the 
President. It is not a function that falls within the executive authority 
of the Federation. The president must personally and independently 
apply his mind as to whether a Judge has committed misconduct 
and, if so, whether it justifies th e sending of reference against him. 
Sub-article (2) of Article 48 of the Constitution provides for the 
president to “act in his discretion in respect of any matter, in respect 
of which he is empowered by the constitution to do so”, it is his 
exclusive doma in and prerogative to form an opinion and decide as to 
whether it is desireable to send a matter under Article 209 of the 
Constitution to the SJC. In Al -Jehad -II case (PLD 1997 SC 84, at 205 
and 206), the power of the President to ask the Prime Minister to  
place his decision before the Cabinet (Article 46(c), prior to 18th 
amendment), or the power to ask the parliament to reconsider a bill 
(Article 75), were held to be obvious examples of presidential power to 
be exercised independently, and without the adv ice of the Prime 
Minister, despite the absence of any reference to the word “discretion” 
in the said Article  
                                                
1 C.Ravichandran Iyer v. Justice A. M. Bhattacharjee & Ors 1995 SCC (5) 457, J T 1995(6) 339  33 
 
48.  Another serious issue involved in this case pertains to 
collection of material and covert surveillance, as justly submitted by 
Mr. Muneer A.Malik,  it hardly needs to be emphasised that all, and 
every state power must rest in some law, some provision of the 
constitution, or the rule of business prescribed thereunder. Our 
constitution does not vest in the state, any prerogative power, and 
does not allow space for any inherent power, such being an 
underlying principle of the concept of the rule of law. The power and 
authority of all the various organs of the State are conferred by law 
and are regulated and structured thereby in a well -defined m anner. 
These powers are to be exercised by the various functionaries of the 
State, in the manner and to the extent prescribed. A citizen is free to 
do anything not prohibited by law, but a State functionary can 
perform only those acts which are permissible  for him to perform 
under some law. The case law relied upon by the learned counsel 
have very succinctly enunciated the above constitutional principle of 
governance. Thus in  the case of  PML-N v. FOP (PLD 2007 SC 642 ), 
has been held, that:  
“It may not be out of place to mention here that there 
is no inherent power in the executive, except what 
has been vested in it by law, and that law is the 
source of power and duty. The structure of the 
machinery of government, and the regulation of the 
powers and duties which belong to the different 
parts of this structure are defined by the law, which 
also prescribes, to some extent the mode in which 
these powers are to be exercised or those duties 
performed. From the all pervading presence of law, 
as the  sole source of governmental powers and 
duties, there follows the consequence that the 
existence or non -existence of a power or duty is, a 
matter of law and not of fact, and so must be 
determined by reference to same enactment or 
reported case. Consequentl y there are no powers or 34 
 
duties inseparably annexed to the executive 
Government.  It cannot be argued that a vague, 
indefinite and wide power has been vested in the 
executive to invade upon the proprietary rights of 
citizens and that such invasion cannot be  subjected 
to judicial scrutiny if it is claimed that it is a mere 
executive order…” (p. 673 at para 26).  
  
49.  In the concurring note of Kaikaus J. in the case of Jamal 
Shah (PLD 1966 SC 1 at 52, 53) this proposition was expressed  as 
follows:  
"Before proceeding to examine it however let me 
state what I believe to be the object of Article 2. I 
have little doubt that its object was to negative any 
claim by the Government that it had inherent power 
to take action which was not subject to law or tha t it 
could deal with individuals in any manner which 
was not positively prohibited by law.  Governments 
have frequently been making such claims. The King 
of England could do no wrong and what he did as a 
King was above the law and beyond the jurisdiction 
of Courts. Representative Governments too have 
been claiming that in some spheres they possess 
powers of action which are not subject to law...”  
It was further held that: -  
“While it cannot be said that Article 2 makes a 
change in the existing law for even a ccording to the 
previous decisions there could be no act of State in 
relation to citizens, its importance should not be 
under -estimated. It embodies an important charter. 
It prevents the Government from taking any action 
in this country for which there is no legal sanction , 
and it at the same time debars the Legislature from 
creating an authority whose actions are not subject 
to law. ” 
50.  The same view was expressed in  Province of Punjab v. 
Gulzar Hassan  (PLD 1978 Lahore 1298 at 1316, 1317) in the 
followin g words: - 35 
 
 “...in respect of citizens the Government has only 
such powers as are granted to it by the municipal 
law, that is, the law of the country ”. And, “no 
executive authority can take any executive action 
without the support of a valid law and any act ion 
taken in violation of the above rule can be struck 
down... ”. 
51.  This formulation was subsequently approved and cited 
by the Supreme Court in FOP v. Shaukat Ali Mian  (PLD 1999 SC 
1026 at 1054).  Please  also see  Ghulam Sabir’s  case (PLD 1967 
Dacca 607 at 610, 611)  and Iftikhar Chaudhry’s  case (above) (at p. 
153-155, paras 120 to 122).   
52.  However, in the present case, as rightly pointed out by 
Mr. Malik in detail, not only the material was collected absolutely 
without any sanction or authority, in an illegal manner, and in 
breach of certain specific prohibitions placed by law, but was so 
done, also against the categorical mandate of the Constitution, and 
more disturbingly, was done by, and at the stance of a body, and a 
person, the ARU and its Chairman , who both are unknown to law, 
Constitution and the rules of business framed thereunder. ARU and 
its purported Chairmanship do not owe their existence to any law. 
Both are non -entities. All of their acts were wholly without 
jurisdiction. Faced with the abo ve objection raised by Messrs Muneer 
A.Malik, and Raza Rabbani, Mr. Faroogh Nasim, the learned counsel 
appearing for the official respondents, in his endeavour to justify the 
creation and the existence of ARU, referred to and relied upon clause 
(5) of Rule  4 of the Rule of Business, 1973, however the said Rule, 
which is reproduced below, is of no avail to him in the present case: - 
“4 …………  
 (5) The business of government, other than the 
business done in the Federal Secretariat or the Attached 36 
 
Departments, shall be conducted through such agencies 
and offices as the Prime Minister may determine from 
time to time. ” 
    
53.      One can readily see that the above rule certainly does 
not provide for creating any new entity, it merely requires that the 
government al business, which is not done in a federal secretariat or 
an attached department, be conducted through such agencies and 
officers as the Prime Minister may determine. The rule undoubtedly 
does not deal with the creation or the establishment of any new 
agency or office, but only enables the Prime Minister to 
assign/allocate such business which is not conducted in the Federal 
Secretariat or the attached departments to some government agency, 
or officer and nothing beyond. Mr. Farough Nasim, the learned ASC, 
however could not refer to any other rule, law and/or any provision 
of the Constitution, which may have been helpful in 
creating/establishing the ARU. Though the Chairman ARU, at the 
relevant time, was also a Special Assistant to the Prime Minister, but 
nothing was referred to or placed before us, justifying his conducting 
himself in the manner he did, however despite the fact that the 
Chairman and the ARU were bereft of any legal status and had 
absolutely no power or authority to collect the material that they did, 
but the Chairman misused his so -called office and did so at his 
whims.  
54.  Even the notification dated 06.11.2018, referred by Mr. 
Farough Nasim, the learned counsel for the official respondents, in 
terms wherof the ARU is purportedly created a nd empowered to 
perform certain functions, as enumerated therein by way of its 
“terms of reference”, through its clause/term 5 provides “Where no 
evidence seems to suggest any criminality other than untaxed foreign 
assets of Pakistani abroad, the same may be referred to the FBR for 37 
 
taxation purposes under the applicable provisions of law. 
……………………….”  
55.  Indeed nobody can have any cavil to the contention of 
Mr. Muneer Malik that t he very process of investigation or collection 
of material about a citizen, i nherently and invariably, involves a 
collision with his rights guaranteed under Articles 4 and 14. 
Certainly a State functionary can only embark upon the investigation 
or collection of material about a citizen under (i) the authority of an 
enabling law , (ii) by a functionary designated under the law ; and (iii) 
then too, only for a justifiable cause or reason . 
56.  As is apparent from the discussion herein , there was 
absolutely no cause, reason or justification for initiating the process 
of investigating a Judge, much less to embark on a fishing expedition 
against him and his family. The State has no business to pry upon or 
collect personal information abou t its citizen, unless there is a just 
cause and legitimate purpose for doing so. No State functionary, 
much less a body or a person, which/who has absolutely no legal 
sanction to act on behalf of the State, can embark upon an 
investigation or collection of  material without the sanction of an 
enabling law, and that even where such sanction and authority is 
available, the power and mandate thereunder is well regulated, 
neither can such power be exercised whimsically, nor can it travel 
beyond certain specified  limits, and is always designed to be 
invoked/exercised under certain specified circumstances , and only 
where grounds and reasons justifying such exercise occurs or exist, 
and in a just, fair and a reasonable manner. Non -compliance of 
which prescription sh all render the investigation, or collection of 
material, violative of Articles 4 and 14 of the Constitution. In this 
regard one may keep in sight the different provisions of law referred 
by Mr. Malik, like sections 156 and 157 of th e Code of Criminal 38 
 
Proce dure, 1898 (“ Cr.P.C. ”) whereby investigations are authorised 
and the officer(s) who will perform it are specified, along with the 
conditions on which an investigation will be launched: i.e. if there is 
reason/sufficient grounds to suspect commission of a c ognizable 
offence  (whether through registration of FIR or otherwise). So that all 
of the three requirements mentioned are met. Albeit, section 156 (2) 
also contains savings clause in case a police officer acts beyond his 
jurisdiction. Sections 254 to 259 o f the Companies Act, 20 17 
empowers the Registrar or the Securities and Exchange Commission 
of Pakistan ( “SECP ”) to conduct investigations and to seek and collect 
information about companies and their officers but this it can  only 
do if certain conditions a re met . Similarly, sections 175 and 176 of 
the IT O authorizes the investigation and allows the State to collect 
information about any particular assesse. It designates the person  
who will conduct the investigation (i.e. the Commissioner of relevant 
jurisdi ction or his delegate). And, the Commissioner’s exercise of this 
power has to be reasonable and for the purposes permitted by the 
ITO itself . Under  section 16 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 and Rules 
2 (2) & (3) read with Rule 7 of the Civil Servants E&D Rules  it is the 
parent statute which authorizes disciplinary action to be conducted 
in the manner specified by the Rules. The Rules designate an inquiry 
officer. The Rules confer upon such inquiry officer the power to 
inquire and also regulate the exercise  of his power.  
57.  In fact even a law that may permit a State functionary to 
investigate and collect personal information about a citizen, 
whimsically, and without cause shall be violative of Article 4 of the 
Constitution  which provides, that, “(a) no action detrimental to the life, 
liberty, body or reputation  or property of any person shall be taken 
except in accordance with law. ” 39 
 
58.  Any information about a citizen, received by the 
government functionaries in connection with their official du ties, is 
so received by way of a trust, there is a general duty of confidentiality 
imposed on all government servants in relation to such information 
in terms of the Fundamental Rights, and  as per Rule 18 of the Civil 
Servant Rules of Conduct, 1964, which provides :  
“No government servant shall, except in accordance 
with any special or general order of the Government, 
communicate directly or indirectly any official 
document or information to a government servant 
unauthorized to receive it, or to a non -official person, 
or to the press. ”  
 
59.  They cannot handover such information to an 
unauthorized person (even if he be a government servant). This 
general rule is, of course, subject to the exception in cases of a 
request for information under the Right to Access of Information Act 
and, in such cases, the procedure under that Act would be followed. 
The present case, of course, does not fall under that Act.  The 
common law also itself recognizes a duty of confidentiality on the part 
of public bodies and functi onaries that receive information in the 
course of their public duties or in exercise of their legal powers – not 
to disclose it or use it for any other purposes.  
60.  Over and above this general duty in common law, and 
the Civil Servant Rules, some statut es including the ITO and the 
NADRA Ordinance impose a statutory duty of confidentiality and a 
specific statutory prohibition on sharing such information (except 
under certain exceptions that were not met here). Nevertheless, 
information about the Petitione r and his family from  the FBR and 
NADRA were freely accessed, obtained and shared by/with the ARU 
and the media in violation of the respective statutory provisions.  40 
 
61.  The ITO confers a high degree of confidentiality to data 
collected by the FBR. Tax returns (including wealth statements) are 
afforded this high degree of confidentiality. One of the reasons, 
clearly, is to remove any inhibition for people to fully and free ly 
disclose their financial information. It can only be shared for specified 
reasons. Reference may be made to certain sections regarding 
confidentiality under ITO:  
 
“Section 198 : Prosecution for unauthorised 
disclosure of information by a public : 
“A perso n who discloses any particulars in 
contravention of sub -section 1B of section 107 or 
section 216 shall commit an offence punishable on 
conviction with a fine of not less than five thousand 
rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one 
year, or both. ”  
 
Section 216 : Disclosure of information by a public 
servant :  
“(1) All particulars contained in –  
(a) any statement made, return furnished, or 
accounts or documents produced under the 
provisions of this Ordinance;  
shall  be confidential and no public servant save as 
provided in this Ordinance may disclose any such 
particulars. ” 
 
62.  Even the Prime Minister of Pakistan cannot  ask an 
Income Tax Officer/Commissioner to provide a tax returns of any 
person unless the request falls within the four corners of one of the 
exceptions to section 216. Obviously, the Chairman ARU does not 
enjoy a better position.  The only exception clause relevant in this 
case would be:  
“(p) as  may be required by any officer or department 
of the Federal Government or of a Provincial 
Government for the purpose of investigation into the 
conduct and affairs of any public servant, or to a 41 
 
Court in connection with any prosecution of the 
public servan t arising out of any such investigation. ” 
 
63.  Similarly, sections 28 and 29 of the NADRA Ordinance 
2000 make it a criminal offence to share NADRA data without lawful 
authorization.  
64.  As discussed in detail hereinbefore, a Judge of the 
superior Court can be removed from the office only in terms of Article 
209 of the Constitution. Indeed as rightly submitted by Mr. Malik and 
the other learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in the above 
constitution petitions, Article 209 does not strip away the p rotection 
that a Judge enjoys as a citizen. Any inquiry against a Judge can 
only be initiated as envisaged by sub -clause (5) of Article 209. There 
is no other law that authorises investigation or collection of material 
in respect of the alleged misconduct.    
65.  Article 209 re cognises only two state functionaries , the 
President and, the SJC  and assign s certain roles to them, The ARU 
and its Chairman are non-entities, and complete stranger s, and 
could not have received any complaints against Judges, let alo ne 
start collecting material about them.  The plain language of Article 
209 suggests that  it is only the SJC which has the power to 
undertake an enquiry against a Judge for misconduct. Hence, only 
the SJC could have asked for the records that were unlawfull y 
obtained by the ARU.  But even if one takes a more relaxed view of the 
safeguards of Article 209 as adopted in Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry ’s 
judgment and accepts that some collection of material about a Judge 
can take place even before the Reference , only the President can  
authori se that collection of material, as the President is the only  
other authority mentioned in Article 209.  But he too cannot ask a 
stranger or a private person, or a non -entity like the ARU to verify, or 
collect material. The president  can direct only the 42 
 
designated/authorised agencies like the FBR, FIA, NADRA, police 
and SBP etc. to do so, and that again, within their sphere and 
domain, as the “designated functions can only be conferred on officer 
or authorities who are sub -ordinate to  the federal government. They 
cannot for example, be conferred on private entities or companies, 
official power can be exercised through official channels “(Mustafa 
Impex’s case (PLD 2016 SC 808)”. However, evidently the President 
did not authorise  the FBR  or any  authority under it, to share any tax 
information , or any other information , with the Chairman ARU.  The 
Chairman ARU, its officers, the Law Minister, and officers of FBR 
who provided the said information violated the confidentiality 
provisions of IT O, i.e. sections 198 and 216 and are liable 
thereunder.  
66.  The learned counsel for the respondents has not been 
able to explain to us, under what legal authority, Barrister Zia of the 
ARU was asked to “ verify the property details attached with the 
Compla int” and “ further to conduct wider property search in the names 
of persons mentioned in the Complaint along with their family 
members ”.  
67.  As noted earlier , also a longside this scrutiny of UK 
property records, the Chairman ARU simultaneously ordered 
investigation by the FIA and directed them to dig out from the 
NADRA database and the integrated border management system, and 
share the personal and confidential data – not only of the Petitioner 
but his wife, his son and daughter including their CNIC details, 
passport details and travel history. The Chairman ARU, as noted 
earlier, had no legal authority to ask for such data and the FIA and 
NADRA etc. had no legal author ity to share it with him . The chairman 
ARU and the officers of FIA and NADRA involved in the matter have 43 
 
exposed themselves to be proceeded under section 28 and 29 of the 
NADRA Ordinance 2002.  
68.  Furthermore the Chairman ARU and his ‘legal expert ’ 
Barris ter Zia have claimed that they hired private investigators  to 
track down the Petitioner’s children, go through their credit history, 
find out their past and present residences and dig out the names and 
details of all the persons who had resided in the properties  owned by 
them over the last 10 years, which again was a brazen violation of 
the fundamental rights of the petitioner, his wife and children . 
69.  Mr. Muneer A.Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner in 
support of his contentions that a case built on the basis of illegally 
collected evidence is liable to be quashed for such illegality alone, 
relied upon the following judgment: -  
 Megatech case (2005 SCMR 1166)  where  though 
the sale tax officer, who searched and seized the 
records was competent to do so, but had failed to 
obtain a search warrant from the Magistrate as 
required in terms of section 40 of the Sales Tax 
Act, this Court, while upholding the Lahore High 
Court’s judgment, declaring the search and seizure 
as without authorization and whimsical, and 
directing restoration of the seized record, 
dismissed the petition filed by the department.  
 To the same effect is this Court’s judgment in  Food 
Consult’s Case  (2007 PTD 2356).  
 In M.D. Tahir v. State Bank of Pakistan  (2004 
CLD 1680, 1 699 to 1702), a single bench of the 
Lahore High Court observed that it can hardly be 
doubted that when one’s private details are taken, 
it affects the life of the person, making him 
particularly vulnerable, and insecure. The 
degradation of life thus occurs. It was held that the 
SBP’s direction to banks (at the behest of the CBR) 
to provide details of all the account -holders who 
received profit/interest in excess of Rs.10,000/ - 44 
 
annuall y, violated Article 14 and 9 of the 
Constitution and that “ taking of private information 
without any allegation of wrongdoing ” was an 
“extraordinary invasion ” of the Fundamental Right 
to privacy. The Court further held that a citizen, in 
the absence of any  wrongdoing, has a right to be 
protected from the “ prying eye of tax collection 
agencies ”. 
 In the case  of Muhammad Sadiq Umrani v. 
Government of Sindh  (PLD 1993 Kar. 735) , an 
unnamed “law enforcement agency” detained the 
petitioners and carried out investigation against 
them , and then handed over their custody and the 
evidence collected , to the police , who then 
registered an FIR. It was h eld by a division Bench 
of the High Court of Sindh , that the investigation  
could only take place after the registr ation of an 
FIR and, in any event, the “agency” had no power 
to investigate , and that the material collected by 
the “agency” could not be utilized by the police as 
it would amount to post -facto validation of an 
unlawful act . The proceedings were quashed.  
70.  On the other hand, Mr. Farough Naseem , the learned 
counsel for the official respondents submitted that as a matter of 
fact, no illegality and/or mala fide is involved in obtaining any 
information or material in this case. He contended that even in case 
the same would have been obtained illega lly, then also, the 
respondents’ reliance thereon, could not be objected to, as it is the 
relevance and the truth of the evidence that is material for its 
admission, and not the means whereby it was obtained. Mr. Naseem 
further submitted that since neither  the authenticity or the 
genuineness of the documents in question, nor the factum of 
ownership manifested therefrom have been challenged/denied, and 
thus there is no fact in issue, and therefore the nature of evidence 
and the manner in which it was obtaine d is, in any view of the 45 
 
matter, of no significance. According to the learned counsel the 
respondents’ case in the circumstances, is on a far better footing 
than the cases, which support his view that the material 
consideration for the admissibility of evi dence, is its truthfulness and 
relevance, and not the manner in which it is obtained, such as: - 
 Noor ul Islam v. The State  (1986 SCMR 1836)  
Where the petitioner ’s convict ion for offence under 
The Prohibition (Enforcement of Hadd), Order 1979 
was challenged, inter alia, on the ground that the 
Police Officer who investigated the case was not , 
amongst the officers designated to proceed in the 
matter. This Court held that an illegality 
committed in the course of investigation does not 
affect the compe tence and the jurisdiction of the 
Court , and dismissed the petition.  
 (PLD 1992 SC 96)  Bisvil Spinners v. Pakistan  
Where , in a case pertaining to levy of excise duty , 
this Court held that where a person was in the 
wrong and had made wrongful gain, he woul d not 
be entitled to retain the wrong gain , because of 
failure on the part of the State machinery to 
perform a procedural act , and that evidence in the 
form of documents, which are otherwise relevant 
and pertin ent for the decision of an issue, 
recovered or  obtained from a party could be 
examined or relied upon irrespective of the fact 
that certain formalities were not observed in taking 
them into possession.  
 Magraj Patodia v. R.K. Birla and others  (AIR 
1971 SC 1295)  
Where it was held that the fact that a document 
was procured by improper or even illegal means 
will not be a bar on its admissibility, if its relevance 
and genuineness is proved.  
 
Similar view was expressed in the cases of 
R.M.Malkani v. The State Maharas htra AIR 46 
 
1973 SC 157 , Umesh Kumar v. State UP  (AIR 
2014 SC 1106)  and R.V. Sang (1979 ) 2 All ER  
 
71.  From the perusal of the case law cited by M/s. Muneer 
A.Malik and Farough Nasim , in support of their respective 
contentions, one can see that the principle followed by this Court in 
the cases of Noorul Islam and Bisvil Spinners (supra), where , in the 
first of these two, this Court refused to interfere in the matter for the 
reason tha t the police officer who investigated the case was not an 
officer designated to do so , and in the other the petitioner was found 
to have made wrongful gain through the offence alleged, could not 
subsequently sustain , as manifest from the cases of Megatech and 
Food Consults (supra), which are later in time and where search and 
seizure of record and the proceeding initiated on the basis thereof 
were declared illegal , for lack of compliance of the procedural 
requirement , and similarly in the case of Muhammad S adiq Umrani 
(supra), the proceedings were quashed by the Division Bench of a 
High Court on the ground that investigation in that case was done by 
an agency which was not empowered to investigate , and also that the 
investigation was initiated before the reg istration of the FIR , whereas 
the Indian Judgment cited by Mr. Farough Nasim, in the face of  
Megatech and Food Consults (supra), are of no effect. In any view of 
the matter , the cases cited by Mr. Farough Nasim are not applicable 
to the present case becau se material collection in the present case 
does not suffer from mere irregularities , but the collection made in 
the present case was wholly illegal, unathorised, contrary to the 
mandate of the Constitution and by those whose purported status, 
position is n ot recognized by law.    
72.  Mr. Munner A.Malik, also argued at length in respect of 
the petitioner’s allegation that the petitioner and his family have al so 
been subjected to covert surveillance, since after the Faizabad 47 
 
Dharna  case judgment. In this regard it may be recalled that as per 
the purported reference, it was the complainant Dogar who through 
his complaint dated 10.04.2019, informed the Chairman ARU that 
the petitioner’s wife and children own some properties in London,  
which have not been disclosed by the petitioner to the income tax 
authorities. However, till date, there is absolutely no clue as to how 
the complainant Dogar came to know about the subject ownership, 
and discovered about the alleged non -disclosure. Altho ugh in his 
complaint, Dogar has mentioned that “documentary evidence is 
enclosed” but neither any such document was annexed to the 
reference, nor was it placed before this Court, despite an application 
seeking the same by the petitioner. However an online copy of a UK 
land registry entry in respect of the Oak dale Road Property registered 
in the name of Zarina Montserrat Khoso Carrera and Arsalan Isa 
Khoso, said to have been furnished by the complainant Dogar, was 
belated filed through a CMA . The fact that n o document was 
furnished by the complainant Dogar along with the purported 
complaint, and also that an online copy of the UK registry was 
already with the Chairman ARU, as discussed in para 8 herein 
before, is also evident from the Chairman’s report dated 10.5.2019 . It 
may be noted here that n either the above document nor any 
information regarding the title/ownership was publicly available or 
accessible, these were rather confidential , and the complainant 
Dogar had no concern with , or means to obtain the sa me.  
73.  The absence of any specifics and any proof or 
documentary record along with the Dogar’s complaint and the 
Government’s failure to produce the same , as noted above, is 
significant , and confirms , the Petitioner’s allegation, that Dogar was 
merely a  proxy who was set up by the Government itself. The 48 
 
complainant Dogar  did not  and indeed could not, have had any 
information about the Petitioner and his family  by himself . 
74.  It was also in pursuance of meeting dated  16th of April 
2019, that ARU’s, Barrister Zia was instructed to carry out a wider 
search for the properties of the Petitioner’s family members. By the 
23rd of April 2019, he had not only traced down the other two 
properties but had also applied for, and obtained the official certi fied 
extracts from the property register for all three properties. It may also 
be noted that by 23rd April 2019 , Barrister Zia had not been informed 
by the FIA/NADRA of the names of the Petitioner’s wife and children. 
How did he therefore  know under whose name to even start looking?  
75.  Nevertheless, Barrister Zia was able to promptly and 
expeditiously furnish a report on 8.5.2019 identifying three properties 
in UK owned by the Petitioner’s family members and annexing official 
certified copies of relevant entries in the UK Land Registry duly 
notarized on 25.4.2019  i.e. less than 9 days after he was asked to 
verify , with respect to all the three properties situated in Lo ndon .  
76.  Barrister Zia does not explain in his report how he knew 
the names of all of the Petitioner’s family members , even before the 
FIA had identified them through its report of 10.5.2009. Nor does he 
explain how he arrived at, and knew to ask specifically for, the Land 
Register entries of the remaining two properties, namely 90 Adelaide  
Road and 50 Coniston Court.  
77.  As explained by Mr. Muneer Malik the UK Land Registry 
allows for two ways of getting information regarding the title of a 
property. The first is through an online register search. The second is 
through a search of an onlin e map. In both cases, one needs to 
enter/provide the Land Registry with either the exact address of a 
property or its precise location on a map. It is not ordinarily possible 
to do a search of the title of UK properties merely with reference to 49 
 
the name of  the owner. To do so, one needs the permission of the 
Registrar, which is only granted to either the owner himself or an 
authorized person on his behalf such as a trustee in bankruptcy 
proceedings or the holder of a probate or letters of administration. 
Clearly, therefore, neither the complainant Dogar nor Barrister Nasim 
could have done a name search of the Petitioner and his family 
members, even if they knew the names of the Petitioner’s family 
members, to arrive at the said properties.  
78.  The responde nts however neither denied the above said 
essential requirement of feeding the exact address, and the precise 
location for getting the information regarding title of a property and 
the fact that one cannot find out as to whether someone owns any 
property i n UK just by resorting to name search, nor have they 
claimed to have adopted the procedure as explained above. The 
respondents also did not claim to have used any of the so called open 
source /website, like “192.com” for making the discovery, however 
throug h CMA No.3312/2020 dated 01.6.2020, they filed a photo copy 
of the screen shot of the home page of the said website i.e. “192.com” 
and of “ukphonebook.com” which display a search bar wherein one 
can feed the name of the person, whose properties are being s ought 
to be discovered and as can been seen from annexures “A” to “I” filed 
by Mr. Muneer Malik through CMA No. 3505/2020 , the website then 
displays , only the partial address of the person named. Neither does 
it reveal the full address , nor does it , at any stage reveals the title of 
the property , situated at the said address, and it is only upon 
payment of certain amount that the source disclose s the full address 
of the person named, and as noted earlier, then too it does not reveal 
the title. Furthe rmore for retrieving information regarding title one 
has to make certain payment to the HM Land Registry also, however 
not a single document, either by way of any email or the requisite 50 
 
receipt s have been filed, which documents are essential to show that 
the above procedure was in fact adopted and the requisite payments 
were made and if by whom. In fact such was also not been claimed.  
79.  As such, it is clear that the Government already had the 
specifics of the properties and the names of the Petitioner’s family 
members prior to the purporte d complaint  and the purported ARU 
“investigation ”. As rightly submitted by Mr.Muneer A.Malik, it is 
indeed clear that this whole rigmarole of “ complaint ” followed by an 
“investigation ” was to cover up the fact that this information was, in 
fact, obtained by government agencies through covert surveillance .  
80.  The Federation has itself filed documents showing the 
utter lack of respect they have for the privacy of a Judge and his 
family and their cavalier attitude towards covert surveillance of a 
Judge. The Federation’s Reply itself shows that the ARU hired a 
private investigation agency in the UK to find out every place that the 
Petitioner’s children had resided in th e last 10 -years ( p. 272 to 282 of 
CMA No.8921 of 2019, Part II), Mr. Malik submitted that if the 
Federation is willing to pay a private investigation agency to surveil 
the Petitioner – is it farfetched to imagine that they also used State 
intelligence agen cies for such purpose . 
81.  Mr. Muneer A.Malik, referred to the case of Mohtarma 
Benazir Bhutto (PLD 1998 SC 388), where a seven members Bench of 
this Court held that covert surveillance of Judges by intelligence 
agencies was in and by itself a sufficient ground for the dissolution of 
a government. The learned Judges discussed in detail how covert 
surveillance violates the constitutional principle of judicial 
independence, as well as the right of dignity and privacy guaranteed 
under Article 14, and held it to be “ a direct interference in the 
independent functioning of Judiciary and is a grave violation of the 
principle of trichotomy of power ”. It was further observed that 51 
 
surveillance is also contrary to the Islamic injunctions; in particular 
verse 12 of surah Al -Hujurat  which reads, “ O ye who believe! Avoid 
suspicion as much (as possible): for suspicion in some cases is a sin: 
and spy not on each other ”, and that “ [I]f a person intrudes into the 
privacy of any man, pries on private life, it injures the digni ty of man, it 
violates the privacy of home, it disturbs the tranquility of the family 
and above all it puts such person to serious danger of blackmail ” and 
that the same is “ wholly destructive of the independence of judiciary ”. 
The learned Judges proceeded  to hold that the privacy of home 
mentioned in Article 14, could not be restrictively defined to apply to 
the home alone but signified the citizen’s right to privacy wherever he 
lived or worked and even in public places.  It was ordered that u ntil 
such time  as a proper law was framed in this regard, no tapping or 
eavesdropping of any person  should take place without permission of 
this Court or a commission formed by it. It was further held that “ If 
the executive interferes with the judiciary in any manner… [ i]f the 
privacy of the Judges and their communications is not ensured, then it 
is not possible for them to discharge their duties in the manner 
envisaged and mandated by the Constitution ”.  
82.  Twenty -two years have passed since this judgment but it 
conti nued to be disregarded. Such disregard is at the nation’s peril, 
destructive of the Judiciary’s independence and in negation of the 
Constitution.  
83.  In a civilized democratic dispensation, where dignity of 
man, and his privacy, has been secured by a writ ten constitution 
inviolably, covert surveillance is an anathema, and is extremely 
reprehensible. However because of the strong wave of terrorism that 
engulfed this Country as a consequence of the so called Afghan war, 
posing threat to our very existence, a nd in order to curb and control 
the same, it was felt necessary to allow covert surveillance, but 52 
 
keeping in view the intrusive and abrasive nature of such act, and in 
order to lay down a complete mechanism so that it be exercised very 
sparingly and in a w ell-regulated manner, leaving no room for  
excessive, arbitrary or whimsical exercise of such power, a law was 
enacted by the name of Fair Trial Act, 2013 (the Act). The preamble to 
the Act recognizes the need to prevent our law enforcement and 
intelligenc e agencies, from using such power arbitrarily. In terms of 
the Act, the covert surveillance can only be carried under a warrant 
issued by a High Court. In order to obtain such warrant, the officer 
concerned, in terms of section 5 of the Act, is required to  prepare a 
report in that regard supported by relevant material, and on the basis 
thereof to seek approval of the Federal Minister for Interior, before 
making an application to the Judge of the High Court for issuance of 
surveillance warrant, whereas in te rms of section 8 of the Act, the 
application submitted to the High Court Judge, is required to be 
supported by an affidavit of the authorized officer, to the effect that 
the contents of the report and the application are true and correct 
and that the warra nt sought shall be used only and exclusively for 
preventing or lawfully investigating the schedule offence or to collect 
evidence in support thereof, and further that the same shall neither 
be misused in any manner, nor shall the approval of the warrant be  
abused to interfere or intervene in the privacy of any person. Sub -
clause (2) of Section 10 of the Act, inter alia, provides that the Judge 
while passing the order for issuance of warrant shall ensure that (a) 
the authorized officer is properly authorized  to represent the 
applicant agency; and (b) the issuance of warrant shall not unduly 
interfere in the privacy of any person or property. Whereas section 15 
of the Act prescribes that where a Judge is of the view that any 
request for the issuance of warrant  is based on insufficient or 
irrelevant considerations and has resulted in undue and 53 
 
inappropriate interference in the privacy of any person, or that the 
material and information collected, or received under the warrant, 
show that the officer concerned did  not apply himself fully while 
making an application for the warrant, then he may recommend 
departmental action against the officer concerned. In terms of section 
27 of the Act, a review committee comprising Ministers of Defence, 
Interior and Law, are, on a six monthly basis, required to call for 
reports from all the applicants about the warrants obtained by them 
and assess as to whether the evidence collected pursuant to the 
warrant of surveillance, or interception, has been helpful in 
prevention of offenc es and of aid to prosecution or has been able to 
achieve the object and purposes of the Act.   
84.  The above review and analysis clearly shows that even in 
cases of terrorism, covert surveillance, cannot be exercised without 
the permission of an authority as high as a High Court Judge, and 
that for obtaining such permission the officer concerned has to make 
out a strong case, justifying the same. The application and report 
prior to its submission before the High Court has to be approved by 
the Minister of Interior, and all care and caution is to be exercised to 
ensure and demonstrate that not only the su rveillance is inevitable 
but also that the same shall not be misused. Very rigorous and 
stringent conditions are attached to the permission/warrant for 
surveillance so that the same may not be executed whimsically, and 
may not be exploited for any unrelate d purposes. The above also 
shows that our lawmakers are highly conscious of the fact of how 
damaging intrusive and abrasive covert surveillance may prove and 
therefore the relevant law itself discourages and makes it very 
difficult to obtain a permission f or the same through the various 
provisions/requirement noted above . However, the Respondents have 
violated all of the above and carried covert surveillance of the 54 
 
Petitioner and his family without any rhyme or reason, wholly 
illegally, unauthorizedly and i n violation of law and fundamental 
rights of the Petitioner and his family, secured by our Constitution.     
85.  As contended by Mr. Malik, normally, it is next to 
impossible to prove that an official act was actually motivated by a 
personal animosity, or by a desire to exact vengeance, or by some 
improper consideration. State of mind and mala fides  in fact are a 
hard thing to prove. But this is one of the extraordinary cases where 
the respondents have themselves given proof of their state of mind 
and the a ctual consideration behind their acts,  just one month before 
the so -called complaint was received and a simultaneous 
investigation launched into the affairs of the Petitioners, his wife and 
his adult children . 
86.  It was j ust two months before the purport ed Reference, 
both parties of the ruling coalition (PTI an d MQM ), stated on record 
that the Petitioner does not deserve to be a judge because the 
Petitioner ‘authored’ the Faizabad dharna  judgment. The dates are 
important here. PTI and MQM filed their revi ew petitions  on 7.3.2019. 
By 10.4.2019, the Government’s proxy, the complainant Dogar, had 
submitted his complaint against the Petitioner. By 16.4.2019, the 
formal  collection of material and investigation against the Petitioner 
by ARU, FBR, and FIA, was al ready in full swing. By 20.5.2019, this 
culminates in the purported Reference. Naturally, if the Petitioner is 
not a judge of this Court, he cannot hear the reviews either. Through 
their petitions, the Respondents have themselves furnished the 
ulterior mot ive and collateral purpose behind the Reference. Indeed it 
was never a question about the properties . 
87.  The review petitions filed by the PTI and MQM clearly 
and expressly show their hostility and ill -will towards the Petitioner. 
They have themselves articulated in so many words the reason why 55 
 
they don’t want to see Petitioner as a Judge – they consider him to be 
biased against their parties and they think that the Faizabad dharna 
judgment is sufficient ground to remove him as a Judge. They do not 
want the Petitioner to hear the review.  
88.  Indeed direct proof of a collateral purpose, an ulterior or 
improper motive is exceedingly rare, however, this is one of those rare 
cases where the relevant actors have actually submitted their 
collateral purpose and motive to the Court in writing. The eme rgence 
of this complaint and the filing of this Reference, regarding purchases 
made back in 2004 and 2013, barely a month after these review 
petitions is not a mere coincidence.  
89.  It is also relevant to note here that in order to obtain a 
report, which they obtained, the respondents through a Notification 
dated 7th May 2019, arbitrarily changed the petitioner tax officer 
without even informing him. The said Notification also discloses that 
the Petitioner’s wife’s tax officer too was changed from Karachi to 
Islamabad.  
90.  Also significant to note, with regard to the mala fide 
conduct of the official respondents is that though the purported 
reference was signed by the President on 20.5.2019 and through 
letter dated 23.5.2019, forwarded by the Law Secretar y to the 
Secretary of SJC under the seal and strict confidence. It was then put 
up before the Chairman, SJC on 29.5.2019, who ordered that it be 
fixed before the SJC on 14.6.2019, and notice be issued to the 
Attorney General for Pakistan, h owever, by the a fternoon of 
28.5.2019 (i.e. a day earlier), the Reference against the Petitioner and 
its contents had already been leaked to the media. At the time, the 
only persons in possession of a copy of the President ’s Reference were 
the President, Prime Minister, L aw Minister, Attorney -General , Law 
Secretary and the Secretary SJC. It is thus so obvious that  the leak 56 
 
was by the executive, which shows their malice . Even the precise 
addresses of the properties  and their purchase prices had reached 
the public domain, by  discriminating the contents of the Reference, 
and two days thereafter on 30.5.2019, the Special Assistant to PM for 
Information, M s. Firdous Ashiq Awan, held a press conference in 
which she states that the Reference was the “ ehtisaab ka shakinja ” 
against the Petitioner as he had “ played a shot by stepping out of the 
crease ”. The ARU and Law Ministry also issued separate press 
releases on 1.6.2019 in relation to this secret and confidential 
Reference, announcing that they had filed the Reference after due 
verification and obtaining evidence from the UK. Both the Law 
Minister and the Chairman ARU are barristers and thus supposed to 
know the law and their Ministerial responsibilities. The Petitioner’s 
image was systematically damaged through these selected lea ks and 
press conferences by members of the Cabinet. By the time the 
contents of the Reference were published by the media i.e. on 28th 
May 2019, there were only five people who knew of the Reference, the 
President, the Prime Minister, the Law Minister, the  Attorney -General 
and the Chairman ARU. There were also the then Chief Justice and 
the SJC Secretary, but even the Federation has not alleged that the 
leak came from them. One or more of these five State functionaries at 
the highest level leaked this infor mation or sanctioned its leak. This 
was clearly an act of malice.  
91.  Mr. Muneer Malik submitted that a fter the horse had 
already bolted and the Petitioner and his family had been exposed to 
public vilification and disgrace, PEMRA made an ostensible attem pt 
to close the stable door by issuing an advice dated 30.5.2019 to all 
channels to stop programmes about the Reference. According to him 
it is clear that this advice was merely a ruse  to stop coverage of voices 
criticizing the Reference and the Government ’s action . Bar 57 
 
Associations and Bar Councils across the country held multiple press 
conferences and general bodies and meetings criticizing the Reference 
but they were not given media  coverage. On the other hand, a 
handful of unelected lawyers under the na me of ‘Lawyers Action 
Committee ’ in Lahore and Karachi were, despite the PEMRA advice, 
given live coverage by multiple channels for their press conferences in 
support of the Reference. The mala fide  nature of the executive’s 
campaign to destroy the Petitio ner’s credibility prior to the SJC 
hearings is thus patently clear. In true G oebellion fashion the 
Government team defamed and vilified the Petitioner and then 
suppressed the truth and the counter -narrative through a controlled 
media . To this day, no government inquiry or investigation into the 
source of this leak has taken place.  
92.  The above narrated facts leaves absolutely no room for 
any doubt that the purported Reference springs from actual malice 
and ill -will harboured against the Petitioner by the concerned State 
functionaries on account of the Faizabad  dharna  judgment and a 
common desire to ensure his absence from the review thereof. It is 
submitted that this was a collusive exercise involving at the very least 
President Arif Alvi, Prime M inister  Imran Khan, Law Minister Farogh 
Naseem, Chairman ARU Mirza Shahzad Akbar and AG Anwar 
Mansoor Khan and they have been personally impleaded in the 
instant petition.  As rightly submitted by Mr. Malik, malice can be 
inferred from their de eds and actions and the surrounding context. 
This Court in case of Muhammad Yousuf v. Abdul Qayyum  (PLD 2016 
SC 478 , 483) in the context of malicious prosecution held that the 
absence of reasonable cause for one’s actions can be used as 
evidence to establi sh malice . It was also observed that “ [m]alice is a 
state of mind and can be inferred from the circumstantial evidence ” as 
well as the contextual background. In State v. Ataullah Mengal  (PLD 58 
 
1967 SC 78 , 91) this Court held, “Intention, as has often been 
observed, is a state of mind and it can only be gathered from the 
evidence of his overt acts and expressions. The Court cannot look into 
the minds of the persons… ”. Similarly, in the case of Shahbaz Khan  
(PLD 2016 SC 1 , 9), this Court observed that “a state of mind cannot 
be proven by positive evidence or by direct proof ” but it can only be 
inferred. In the case of Aftab Ahmed Memon v. Chairman NAB  (2019 
YLR 1865 , 1870) regarding the mala fides  of NAB referring to an 
unreported judgment of th is Court in the c ase of Khalil Ahmed 
Soomro v. State,  it was  held “It is often difficult to prove mala fides and 
thus it may be inferred from the facts and circumstances surrounding a 
particular case. ” The cases of Khawaja Ahmed Hassan  (2005 SCMR 
186) and Jan e Alam  v. State  (PLD 1965 SC 640), are also beneficial 
in this regard.  
93.  We have already held that the Law Minister and the 
Chairman ARU are liable under the relevant provisions of ITO, 2001, 
and the NADRA Ordinance. In addition to the said two respondents, 
the Prime Minister himself is liable under the above law as it was 
ordered by him and by his team that all the illegalities noted in the 
present judgment were committed . He is also liable for sending the 
purported advice to the President , which in the facts  and 
circumstances of the case was in fected with malice. Whereas, Mrs. 
Firdous Ashiq Awan, the former Special Assistant to the Prime 
Minister is liable for committing contempt of Court for the uncalled 
for and disrespectful comments she made in her press c onference as 
noted above.  
94.  Mr. Farough Naseem, the learned counsel for the official 
respondents, being an expert on Income Tax law, and perhaps 
knowing  fully well that Section 114, read with Section 116 of the ITO 
does not at all require a filer to d eclare the assets of his non-59 
 
dependent wife , and children, nor is there any other provision in the 
ITO, 2001 creating any such obligation on a filer, i.e. requiring him to 
disclose the assets of his non -dependent wife and children along with 
his/her income  returns, has in his attempt to justify the claim of the 
Federation, that the petitioner was instead so required, which claim 
forms the very basis of the purported Reference, and in his endeavor 
to save the Reference from being quashed, has referred to thr ee 
different Asset Declaration Acts, being, Asset Declaration Act 2019, 
Voluntary Declaration of Domestic Assets Act, 2018, and Foreign 
Assets (Declaration and Repatriation) Act, 2018, under which Acts, 
amnesty was offered in respect of undisclosed assets to all, except 
“holders of public office”, which phrase, in the context of the said 
three Acts, according to the learned counsel, included the Judges of 
the superior Courts, their spouses and dependents, without any 
distinction between a dependent and a no n-dependent spouse. He 
submitted that the above description of the term “Holder of Public 
Office”, may be used as a guideline to treat a Judge of a superior 
Court along with his/her spouse (whether dependent or not), and the 
dependent children, as holder o f public office, as one single distinct 
class, in the context of those other dispensation , dealing with similar 
situation , and where the relevant terms have not been defined, and 
may well be employed to treat the spouse of a Judge of a superior 
Court, whet her dependent or not, as of the same class and category, 
as a Judge himself. Mr. Farough Nasim in his endevour to draw a 
similar analogy went on to refer to Regulation 31 of the Money 
Laundering and combating of financial terrorism regulation for banks 
and DFIs, issued by the State Bank of Pakistan, where according to 
the learned counsel, the term politically exposed person (PEPs) have 
been defined to include senior judicial officials, and their close 
associates and family members also, irrespective of the spouse being 60 
 
dependent or non -dependent. Mr. Farough Nasim also referred to 
Security and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (Anti Money 
Laundering and countering financing of terrorism) Regulation 2018, 
where also PEPs as defined through its regulation 2(t)(i i), includes 
senior judicial officials, and the formalities and requirements 
thereunder in terms of its regulation 10(4), extends to the family 
members and close associates of PEPs, and in the same vein referred 
to Martial Law Regulation 59, dated 02.12.19 69. The learned counsel 
submitted that the foregoing shows that in ordinary and popular 
sense the Judges of the superior Courts and their spouses, whether 
dependent or not, are clubbed, to fall into one class or category. So 
the learned counsel was suggest ing to us to read the word “Judge”, 
as employed in Article 209 of the Constitution, as meaning not only 
the judge himself, but also his/her spouse and children and on the 
analogy of the provisions of the regulations referred by him, 
expand/stretch the mean ing of the word, so as to include even the 
“close associates” and family members” of the Judge, which defies 
even the common sense, and to say the least is absolutely 
preposterous. It shows the hollowness of the case made up against 
the petitioner. Through  his above submission, the learned counsel is, 
in fact, seeking certain purported descriptions in some statutes 
enacted for a very limited purpose, scope and application and for a 
very short life span, to be enforced as guidelines for stretching the 
meanin g of a straight forward simple word, with an unnatural result, 
and also to control the meaning , scope, application, and 
interpretation of one of the most significant provision of the 
Constitution, based on a sacred principles of our jurisprudence and 
polity, being the independence of judiciary. The learned counsel has 
perhaps lost sight of a well settled proposition of law that 
interpretation of a word or a phrase cannot be transported from one 61 
 
statute to another and that it is unsafe to compare the langua ge of 
one statute with that employed in another, even though the subjects 
covered by the two may involve similarities -Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi v. 
Additional & Sessions Judge (1994 SCMR 1299), Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Finance v. Haj i Mohammad 
Sadiq & others (2007 PTD 67).  
95.  Mr. Naseem also referred to certain provisions of some 
presidential orders and rules and submitted that the said provisions 
which prescribe pension and various allowances for the widows of the 
Judges also do n ot discriminate between the dependent and non -
dependent widows which again does not make any sense in the 
present context and is wholly irrelevant.       
96.  Mr. Farough Naseem further contended that his above 
submissions establish a sense of proximity be tween spouses. 
According to him, Islam also recognizes such proximity. He referred 
to Surah Al -baqarah  (II:187) with regard to the relationship of 
husband and wife. It is said that “they are clothing for you and you 
are clothing for them”. He submitted tha t the Holy Quran describes 
universal principles which are applicable across the board and that 
the above verses establish that spouses are inseparably and 
inextricably linked together. He also referred to “Tadabbur -e-Quran”, 
Volume -I by Amin Ahsan Islahi i n this regard. However, the above 
verse is in a different specific context and cannot mean to say that a 
person would be liable for misconduct of his spouse in the present 
context. Responding to the above, Mr. Hamid Khan, the learned 
counsel for the petiti oners in Constitution Petitions No. 19, 23, 25 & 
32/2019, submitted that the doctrine of proximity as canvassed 
before the Court is totally repugnant to the Islamic Law particularly 
the Muslim law of Inheritance which strongly emphasizes and 
stresses upon the individuality of the spouses particularly in relation 62 
 
to the holding of the properties by the two separately. Separation of 
entities of the spouses regarding the holding of separate properties by 
them individually is clearly ordained in the following v erses of the 
Holy Quran:  
○ Verse 7 of Surah An Nisa  directs as under:  
“unto the men (of a family) belongeth  a share of that 
which parents and near kindred leave, and unto the 
women a share of that which parents and near kindred 
leave, whether it be little or much -a legal determine 
share”  
 
○ Verses 11 and 12 of Surah An Nisa  ordain:  
 
“Allah chargeth you concerni ng (the  provision for) your 
children: to the male the equivalent of two females, and if 
there be women more than two, then there is two -third of 
the inheritance, and if there be one (only) then the half. 
And to his parents a sixth share of the inheritance  to 
each if he have a son; and if he have no son and his 
parents are his heirs, then to his mother appertaineth 
the third; and he have brethren, then to his mother 
appertaineth the sixth, after any legacy he may have 
bequeathed, or debt (hath been paid). Y our parents or 
your children; Ye know not which of them is nearer unto 
you in usefulness. It is an injunction from Allah . Lo! 
Allah is knower; Wise”.  
 
“And unto you belongeth a half of that which your wives 
leave, if they have no child; but if they have a  child then 
unto you the fourth of that which they leave, after any 
legacy they may bequeathed, or debt (they may have 
contracted, hath been paid). And unto them belongeth 
the fourth of that which ye leave if ye have no child. But 
if ye have a child then t he eighth of that which ye leave, 
after any legacy ye may have bequeathed, or debt (ye may 
have contracted, hath been paid). And if a man or woman 
have a distant heir (having neither parent nor child), and 
he (or she have a brother or a sister (only on the  mother’s 
side) then to each them twain (the brother and the sister) 
the sixth, and if they be more than two, then they shall 
be sharers in the third, after any legacy that may have 
been bequeathed or debt (contracted) not injuring (the 
heirs by willing aw ay more than a third of the heritage) 
hath been paid. A commandment from Allah. Allah is 
knower, Indulgent”.  
 
○ Verse 32 of Surah An Nisa  directs:  
“Unto men a fortune from that which they have earned, 
and unto women a fortune from that which they have 
earned”.  
  
○ Verse 176 of Surah An Nisa  directs:  
“They ask thee for a pronouncement Say; Allah hath 
pronounced for you concerning distant kindred. If a man 
die childless and he have sister, hers is half the heritage, 63 
 
and he would have inherited from her had s he died 
childless. And if there be two sisters, then theirs are two -
thirds of the heritage; and if they be brethren, men and 
women, unto the male is the equivalent of the share of 
two females”.  
 
97.  It is thus evident that Islam stipulates separate identities 
of the spouses particularly in relation to their entitlement for holding 
of their properties separately from one another. There is no 
application of the so called doctrine of proximity to the properties of 
spouses as pleaded by the learned couns el for the respondents.  
98.  The foregoing contains my reasons for the order, as 
contained in paras 13 and 14 of the short order dated 19.6.2020, in 
terms whereof, I, along with my learned brothers Mansoor Ali Shah 
and Yahya Afridi, JJ, joined the other le arned brothers of the Bench 
in quashing the purported Reference against the petitioner (Qazi Faez 
Isa, J.), and declared that the proceedings and the show cause notice 
in relation thereto, stand abated.  
99.  We, (m yself, Mansoor Ali Shah and Yah ya Afridi, JJ.) 
have however not been able to persuade ourselves to agree with the 
part of the short order, as contained in paras 3 to 11 thereof, 
whereby directions have been issued to the FBR, to issue notices, 
and initiate proceedings, against the wife and childr en of the 
petitioner, and for submitting the report of the said proceedings to 
the SJC, for the later to proceed in the matter as contemplated in the 
aforesaid paragraphs, and with various other directions contained 
therein, for the following reasons.  
100.  In the first place the Court having unanimously quashed 
the reference, and as a result declared that the proceedings and the 
Show Cause Notice issued in respect thereof, stood abated, there 
was, I may very respectfully observe, absolutely no justificatio n for 
the above directions, and guidelines. The said directions were/are 64 
 
clearly beyond the scope of the petition allowed/disposed of through 
the short order.  
101.  The questions involved in the above petition filed before 
us under Article 184(3) of the Co nstitution, were , as to whether the 
petitioner in terms of section 116 of the ITO 2001, was obliged to 
disclose to the tax authorities, the properties , held by his wife and 
children in London, and as to whether the petitioner resorted to 
money laundering i n the acquisition of the said properties, s o was 
alleged in the purported reference sent by the President of Pakistan 
against the petitioner under Article 209(5) of the Constitution. The 
petitioner challenged the reference on multiple grounds, his response  
to the above allegations was that neither was he liable to make the 
disclosure as contended, nor has he committed any breach of any 
obligation under the ITO 2001, or under any other law. It was 
claimed that the reference has been filed with mala fide  intent, and 
collateral purposes, through colourable exercise of power, and was a 
product of animosity, of the main coalition parties of the ruling 
alliance, and certain government functionaries towards the petitioner. 
The petitioner further claimed that the pu rported reference stream ed 
from malice of law, as well as of facts, and ill -will harbored by the 
aforesaid persons against the petitioner. The Reference, according to 
the petitioner, ha d been filed in derogation of the mandate of the 
constitution, and the same also suffers from jurisdictional error and 
is liable to be quashed.  
102.  After examining and analyzing the various allegations, 
claims, and contentions of the parties, and the facts and 
circumstances of the case , as evident from the record , and in th e 
light of the relevant statute, and the case law placed before us, by 
both the sides, I found that the allegations against the petitioner were 
wholly unfounded, baseless, frivolous, misconceived and mala fide , 65 
 
and that the petitioner was  right in claiming the purported Reference 
to be a product of animosity, malice of law as well as of facts and that 
it streams from the ill -will harbored by some functionaries of the 
executive against the petitioner.  It was found that despite 
commissioning the entire government machinery, to somehow ferret 
some excuse  to proceed to dislodge the petitioner, and misusing the 
government departments, and resources, in unconstitutional  and 
unlawful manner,  in that pursuit, including covertly surveilling  the 
petitioner , and his family, the official respondents have neither been 
able to show any illegality or misconduct on the part of the petitioner, 
nor that the wife and children of the petitioner are his dependents. As 
discussed in detail earlier, neither any prov ision of the ITO 2001, nor 
of any other law, require s the petitioner to make the disclosure as 
was contended. There is no concept of any vicarious liability under 
the income tax law as was suggested by the respondents.  
103.  Upon quashment of the purported  reference and 
abatement of the proceedings in relation thereto, and in view of the 
clear finding as recorded herein before, that the petitioner has not 
misconducted himself and has no concern, either with the properties 
held by his spouse and children in London, or their tax affairs, if any, 
no question of public importance with reference to the fundamental 
right, amenable before this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, remained to be decided, or dealt with by this Court. The 
matter dealt with through para 4 to 11 of the short order, I may 
humbly observe, are extraneous to the proceedings disposed of 
through the short order.  
104.  The properties having been acquired by the wife and 
children of the petitioner in the tax years 2004 and 2013, and f ive 
years period of limitation prescribed by law for opening of the tax 
assessment with regard thereto having expired several years before, 66 
 
they cannot be lawfully required to furnish the source of funds for 
acquiring the said properties, or any income inf ormation for the said 
years. The assessments that have attained finality with the afflux of 
time cannot be ordered to be re -opened. The FBR’s reopening the 
same shall be in violation of the legal prohibition and disability. Such 
would also violate the vest ed rights of the wife & children. The order 
requires the wife and children of the petitioner to do what the law 
does not oblige them to do, and instead prohibits the FBR from 
seeking information, the wife and children have been obligated to 
furnish. It may  be observed here that obligations can only be rooted 
in law – National Commission on the status of Women v. 
Government of Pakistan  (PLD 2019 SC 218).  
105.  The order has been passed against the person who were 
neither before the Court nor were they put to  notice, as to why FBR 
be not directed, as directed in terms of the order. No opportunity was 
provided to them to submit as to why the FBR be not so directed.  
106.  The wife and children being private citizen, their tax 
matters have no nexus with the essen tial pre -requisite for invoking 
and maintaining any proceedings under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, and were thus not amenable to the proceedings that 
were invoked thereunder, and dispose d of through the short order 
dated 19.6.2020. As the role and j urisdiction of the SJC is limited to 
the matters relating to the conduct and capability of the superior 
Court Judges. It is not mandated to delve into the affairs of someone 
who is not a judge of a superior Court. The order tends to stretch the 
scope of SJ C beyond its mandated jurisdiction, it rather vests in the 
SJC the jurisdiction and authority not granted to it by the 
constitution.  
107.  ITO 2001 certainly prohibits reopening of the tax 
assessment matters after expiry of a period of five years. Through the 67 
 
short order, the wife and children of the petitioner have been 
obligated to furnish to the FBR information regarding the assessment 
which have attained finality much earlier than the prescribed period. 
Our governance structure is based on the principle  of trichotomy of 
power. The role of the three organs of the state, the Executive, the 
Legislature and the Judiciary, are well defined by the Constitution. 
Judiciary being the guardian of the Constitution has to ensure this 
principle is maintained by all t he three. The onus of maintaining the 
prescribed balance is heaviest on the judiciary. Judiciary therefore 
has to be most conscious and sensitive in this regard, and to proceed 
in the matters, very carefully, so that it may not step out of its role 
and jur isdiction as prescribed by the constitution, and avoid entering 
the realm of legislation. This Court has persistently reiterated the 
well-established principle that the courts cannot and should not 
create any right, liability or obligation that is not foun ded in law. One 
may refer to the case of the State v. Ziaur Rehman  (PLD 1973 SC 
49), in this regard. This principle is applied in the realm of taxation 
with even greater force, and thus while “construing taxing statutes 
the language used is not be either stretched in favour of the state, or 
narrowed in favour of the tax payer” ( Yousaf Rerolling Mills v. Collector 
of Customs  PLD 1989 SC 232 ), and that while interpreting tax laws 
“Courts must look to the words of the statute and interpret it in light 
of what  is clearly expressed” and in the words of Rowlett J., in Brady 
Syndicate  v. Land Revenue Commissioner  [(1921) 1QB 64, 71], 
quoted by Hamoodur Rehman, J., in Nawabzada Amir Khan  v. 
Collector of Estate Duty  (PLD 1962 SC 335), “in a taxing Act, one 
has to lo ok merely at what is clearly said. There is no room for any 
intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no presumption 
as to a tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied. One can 
only look fairly at the language used.”  68 
 
108.  The orde r tends to create an anomalous situation,  for it 
provides that the proceedings before the SJC as contemplated 
thereby, shall not be effected by the filing or pendency of any appeal 
under ITO 2001 against the order/report of the Commissioner, or 
against an y order made or decision taken at any appellate stage, as 
in the event the SJC , on the basis of the report submitted by the 
Commissioner in pursuance of the short order, recommends removal 
of the petitioner, but subsequently the petitioner succeeds in his 
challenge to the order of the commissioner, and the said report is 
found not sustainable, the time for the retrieval may have passed, as 
by then the petitioner may have reached the age of superannuation. 
Even otherwise the damage inflicted upon the petitio ner, and suffered 
by this institution, shall be irretrievable. In a reverse scenario where 
the SJC may not agree with the findings of the Commissioner , but 
such findings are upheld by forums before which the Commissioner, 
finding may be amenable to correct ion, an anomalous and 
embarrassing situation . 
 
       (Justice Maqbool Baqar)  
“APPROVED FOR REPORTING”  