IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB  
 
CIVIL PETITION NO. 2226  OF 2016  
(On appeal against the judgment dated 20.04.2016 
passed by the Isl amabad High Court, Islamabad in 
Customs Reference Application No. 31/2015 ) 
 
M/s Al -Haj Enterprises (Pvt) Ltd  
    … Petitioner  
VERSUS  
 
Collector of Customs, Model Customs Collectorate (MCC) etc  
     … Respondents  
 
For the Petitioner :  Mr. Wasim Sajjad, Sr. ASC 
    Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
 
For the Respondent s: Mr. Muhammad Habib Qureshi, ASC  
    Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
    Mr. Shahid Jan, Deputy Collector Customs  
 
Date of Hearing:   22.05.2017  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
 
  FAISAL ARAB, J .- Under some arrangement, Attock Petrol eum 
Limited exports POL products to International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)  
in Afghanistan , which is transported by road through bonded carriers who hold 
license for such purpose under the Customs Rules, 2001. One such bonded 
carrier is the petition er who transports POL products on its fleet of tankers . 
Rule 564 (4) of the Customs Rules, 2001 requires that in case there is a 
variation of more than one percent  in the quantity  declared in terms of Rule 
563 of the Custom Rules and the one certified by IS AF at the place of 
destination , action  under appropriate  provisions of the Customs Act, Sales Tax 
Act and other applicable  law shall be taken against the concerned carrier and 
other persons found involved.  
 
2.  In a post export audit of Attock Petroleum L imited, it transpired 
that POL products exported to Afghanistan were short supplied. To be precise, CIVIL PETITION 2226/2016  2
16,985 liters  of HSD, 396,921 liters of JP8 and 4083 liters of PMG were short 
delivered  that did not reach the destination . These shortages were in excess o f 
the one percent  permissible under Rule 564(4) . This resulted in issuance of 
show cause notice s to Attock Petroleum Limited as well as to the petitioner to 
whom Attock Petroleum Limited entrusted the consignment s for transportation 
to Afghanistan , which w ere found short. Thereafter, the matter was adjudicated 
by the Collector of Customs, who passed Order -in-Original dated 28.03.2014  
requiring the petitioner to pay taxes and duties of the short supplies amounting 
to Rs. 6,070,342/ - along with default surchar ge. The petitioner appealed before 
the Customs Appellate Tribunal, Islamabad, which was partially allowed only 
to the extent of downward revision of the quantum of duties and penalty from 
Rs.6,070,342/ - to Rs.3 ,622,683/ -. The petitioner then filed Customs Reference 
Application in the Islamabad High Court which upheld the decision of the 
Tribunal. Hence, this petition.  
 
3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that a strict regimented 
procedure is followed for delivery of POL product s as the tankers ar e locked 
and sealed and yet evaporation in hot weather is bound to take place that 
could reach beyond one percent  limit for which the petitioner cannot be held 
responsible . With regard to the restriction contained in the provisions of Rule 
564(4) of the Cu stoms Rules , 2001 , he submitted that the correct interpretation 
of the Rule ought to be that in case of variation beyond one percent , then there 
should be some adjudication  as to the real cause behind the shortage . He 
submitted that in case the carrier justifies the loss for no fault of his own then 
he should not be penalized for the breach of the limit  provided in the Rule . He 
lastly submitted that in the present case, in absence of allegation that the locks 
and s eals of the tankers were broken or it was a  case of pilferage or theft en-
route to Afghanistan then merely on account of excessive evaporation beyond 
the control of the carrier, ought not to have been made basis for imposition of 
liability under the Rules.  CIVIL PETITION 2226/2016  3
 
4.  The argument of learned counsel would have been worth 
considering had the consequence for short supply beyond one percent not been 
provided in Rule 564 (4) of the Custom Rules, 2001 . As the provisions of the 
said Rule were fully attracted to the case of the petitioner and accordingly 
applied in the present case, we find that no legal error was committed by any of 
the forums below, which require interference from this Court. This peti tion is, 
therefore, dismissed and leave is refused.  
 
 
   
CHIEF JUSTICE  
JUDGE  
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
22nd of Ma y, 2017  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  
 