 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Civil Petition No.3465 -L of 2022 
Against the order dated 25.11.2022 
passed by the Lahore High Cour t, 
Lahore in Civil Revision No. 4911 of 
2016.  
 
Ghulam Fareed (deceased) through his L.Rs., etc  ....Petitioner s 
Versus  
Daulan Bibi  ….Responden t 
 
For the  petitioner s:   Mr. Seerat Hussain Naqvi, ASC through video 
link from Lahore Branch Registry.  
 
For the respondent:  
   
N.R.  
Date of Hearing:   20 November 2023 
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . Learned counsel for the petitioner s states that the 
petitioners’ predecessor had purchased land through sale mutation, 
No.727, attested on 13 June 1994. However, the respondent filed a suit 
on 6 November 2008, which was hopelessly time barred. He further 
states that the respondent had sim ply denied her thumb impression on 
the said mutation and that the report of the Finger Print Bureau, 
Punjab is in itself not sufficient for disproving that the sale mutation  
bore her thumb impression.   
 
2. The suit filed by the respondent was decreed on 16 O ctober 2014 
against which the petitioner filed an appeal which w as dismissed on 29 
October 2016 . Thereafter, the petitioners  invoked the revisional 
jurisdiction of the High Court but the Civil Revision filed by the 
petitioners was dismissed on 25 November 2022. Fifteen  years have 
passed since the suit was filed by the respondent , and at three different 
forums she succeeded and the petitioners lost.  On our query we are told 
that the possession of the subject land remains with the petitioners. 
The petitioner s have disregarded all three decisions of the court s and 
continue to retain the illegal possession of the land .  
 
3. The burden to establish  the purported sale lay upon the 
beneficiary of the sale but this was not discharge d. The respondent was C.P. No.3465 -L of 20 22   
2 
 not required to disprove the sale yet she undertook to do so. She came 
forward and had her purported thumb impression was sent for forensic 
determination by the Finger Print Bureau, Punjab which submitted a 
comprehensive report and the witness from Finger Print Bureau was 
also produced as a witness ( PW-3). It was conclusively established that 
the thumb impression on the sale mutation was not hers.  
 
4. The contention with regard to the belated filing of the suit , the 
respondent had stated in the plaint that she had learnt of the purported 
sale mutation three months earlier. We enquired from the learned 
counsel whether any evidence was produced to show that the 
respondent -plaintiff was aware about the sale mutation much before 
then, and we were not  referred to anything. Issue No.4 pertained to 
limitation and the learned Judge had correctly noted that the onus to 
prove it lay upon the defendant.  In attending to the issue of limitation 
the learned Judge determined that the defendant had not been able to 
establish prior knowledge.  
 
5. All three courts had correctly decided th e matter in accordance 
with the law and the two points urged by the learned counsel are not 
sustainable either in fact or in law.  The courts had dealt charitably with 
the defendant -petitioners by not imposing costs , let alone substantial 
costs which  in our opinion were merited.  This error need s correction 
and we dismiss  this petition with cost s throughout . And, as the 
petitioners have remained in illegal possession of the said land we also 
impose compensatory cost in the sum of one hundred thousand rupees. 
The petitioners are further directed to immediately hand  over the 
subject land to the respondent , and if they fail to do so the concerned 
revenue officer /official  shall ensure that its possession is delivered to 
the respondent immediately. Copy of the order passed today be sent to 
the concerned revenue authorit y for information and compliance  and 
copy be sent to the respondent for information.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad:  
20.11.2023  
(Umair)  
Approved for Reporting  