IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, HCJ  
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
Suo Motu Case No.5 of 2012  
(Suo Motu Action regarding allegation of 
business de al between Malik Riaz Hussain and 
Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar attempting to influence the 
judicial process  
 
On Court Notice:    Mr. Irfan Qadir,  
     Attorney General for Pakistan  
     Mr. Bani Amin Khan, IGP, Islamabad  
 
For Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar:  Sardar M. Ishaq K han, Sr. ASC  
     With Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar  
 
For Malik Riaz Hussain:  Mr. Zahid Hussain Bokhari, ASC  
      
For Compnay Secy.  
Bahria Town:    Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
 
For GEO TV.    Mir Ibrahim Rehman, CE, GEO  
     Mr. Kamran Khan, Sr. Anchor, GEO  
     Mr. Hamid Mir, Sr. Anchor, GEO  
      
Date of Hearing  :  07.06.2012  
 
    ORDER  
 
 In response to notice Mr. Kamran Khan and Shaheen Sehbai 
have filed written statements and extracts of the interview and their 
view point in respect of the instant case. We m ay note that being 
believers and faithful to the Almighty Allah and the Holy Prophet 
Hazrat Muhammad (PBUH) in the presence of Quranic injunctions 
(4.135) where it is strongly held that we should stand firmly for justice 
even against ourselves or our kin e tc. There are glorious examples in 
the Islamic history that whenever there was a call to administer justice 
there had been no distinction between the nearest one and the general 
public. In as much as during the days of Khulafa -e-Rashideen 
sentences were in voked on the direction of father to his son because it 
is the conscious of a person who believes in the Almighty Allah that he 
is performing his duties to administer justice without any fear or 
favour and there are also judgments, (precedented law) which l eave it 
for a Judge to decide on a Bench to hear a case or not. Undoubtedly, the superior judiciary in this country is also guided by the code of conduct 
of the Judges and they are bound to follow the same. In the instant 
case, on having taken notice of a campaign against the Chief Justice of 
the country and his family and the judiciary, the Registrar of this Court 
requested to take some action as such proceedings in terms of Article 
184(3) of the Constitution were drawn. Preliminary hearings were 
conducted  to procure the attendance of Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar and Malik 
Riaz Hussain. Dr. Arsalan is present alongwith his counsel. Malik Riaz 
Hussain, despite notice, did not turn up. Mr. Zahid Hussain Bokhari, 
learned counsel has appeared and stated that he has bee n engaged as 
counsel by Malik Riaz Hussain and he will file power of attorney on his 
behalf as his client is in U.K. in connection with medical treatment. 
The learned Attorney General is also available to assist the Court and 
in due course of hearing atten dance of the same and other responsible 
officers/officials of the Bahria Town, whose names have been mentioned 
in the order of 6th June, 2012 have also been procured. Having gone of 
these proceedings and taking into consideration arguments so put forth 
by the learned Attorney General and also considering the Islamic 
Injunctions the hearing of this case shall continue by this Bench minus 
one of us (Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ) and the case shall be 
fixed before the said Bench after the conclusion of regul ar hearing 
listed before us today.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
ISLAMABAD  
07.06.2012  
M. Azhar Malik  