IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar  Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal  
Mr. Justice Raja Fayyaz Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
 
SUO MOTU CASE NO. 24 of 20 10 
 
[Regarding Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010]  
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASES NO.57701 -P, 57719 -G, 57754 -P, 58152 -P, 
59036 -S, 59060 -P, 54187 -P & 58118 -K of 2010  
 
[Applica tions by Abdul Rasheed & others]   
 
On Court notice:   Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
Attorney Genera l for Pakistan  
Dr. Salahuddin Mengal, A .G. Balochistan  
Mr. As adullah Chamkani, A .G. KPK  
Syed Arshad Hussain Shah, Addl. AG, KPK  
Mr. Ghulam Dastgir, Chief Secretary KPK  
Khwaja Haris Ahmed, A .G. Punjab  
Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser,  Addl. AG Punjab  
Mr. Nasir Khosa, Chief Secretary, P unjab  
Mr. Abdul Fat eh Malik, A . G. Sindh  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
Mr. Ghulam Nabi Shah, Secretary Law  
Mr. Iqbal Ahmed Durrani, Secy . S&G, Sindh  
Mr. Muhammad Tayyab, Addl. Secy . S&GAD   
 
Mr. Tariq Pirzada, Commissioner, ICT  
 
For Member s of  Nemo .  
Committee of  
Parliamentarians:    
 
Former Minister S&T:  Nemo .  
 
For former Minister  Mr. Khurram Latif Khosa, ASC  
Religious Affairs:    Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
    
For M/o Religious  Mr. Shahzad Ahmed, JS Admn.  
Affairs:     (on beha lf of Secretary)  
 
For former Secretary  Nemo .   
Religious Affairs :     
 
For Establishment  Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
Division:    Mr. Abdur Rauf Chaudhry, Estt. Secretary    SMC 24/2010 DT. 11.03.2011  2 
Mr. Khalid Akhlaq Gillani, Addl. Secy.  
Mr. M. Ijaz Ghani, Dy. Secy.  
Mr. Muha mmad Arshad, Dy. Secy.  
 
For NAB:    Mr. Fauzi Zafar, ADPGA  
 
For FIA:    Syed Jaw ed Ali Bukhari,  Addl.  DG 
Incharge Investigation  
Mr. Hussain Asghar, Director   
Mr. M. Azam Khan, Director (Law)  
Mr. Khalid Rasool, Dy. Director, FIA  
Mr. Khalid Naeem, AD, FI A 
Mr. Niamat Ali, AD, FIA  
Mr. Liaqat Ali , S.I. Police with   
Rao Shakeel, former DG Hajj (in  custody)  
 
In C.M.A No.218/2011 : Mr. M. Ikram Chaudhry, AS C  
 
For Tour Operators:  Nemo .   
 
Date of hearing :   11.03.2011    
 
ORDER  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C J – Mr. Jawed 
Bukhari, Additional Director General, FIA has submitted report  and 
stated that significant progress has been made in the investigation of 
the case on the basis of which further incriminating material is being 
collected to ascertain the involv ement of the persons in the 
commission of offence. However, it has been pointed out to him that 
he has to conduct investigation independently and he should make all  
out efforts to bring the culprits to book , whosoever they may be , and 
at the same time pace  of the investigation should also be accelerated 
by collecting evidence as early as possible.  
2.    In response to notice, the Advocates General of all the 
Provinces have submitted details of the persons who have been re-
employed on contract after superan nuation . They are directed to 
deliver copy of the same to the learned Attorney General for Pakistan  
who shall assist the Court. The Commissioner ICT has stated that no 
one is performing duties on contract in the ICT.  SMC 24/2010 DT. 11.03.2011  3 
3.   Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, learned  Sr. ASC stated that on 
having received notice along with the order dated 07.03.2011 , it has 
become necessary to submit reply on behalf of the Federation , as 
according to his version, the scope of re -employment on contract basis 
has been enlarged by applyi ng Article 9 of the Constitution , which 
deals with a Fundamental Right of a person . We pointed out to him 
that the Government of Pakistan was required initially to look into the 
cases of the officers of the Disciplinary Forces , like Police and FIA who 
have been re-employed on contract for different periods  after 
superannuation , including DG FIA . But despite repeated observations 
of this Court except removing/terminating the contract of some of the 
members of the Disciplinary Forces ( Police etc.) including P rovincial 
Police Officer Sindh and others, no further progress has been made . 
Mr. Wasim Ahmed , DG FIA is still continuing against the same post  
although, w ithout prejudice to his case on merits , this Court has made 
observations against him from time to tim e regarding poor 
investigation of the case . While other members of the Disciplinary 
Forces have been removed, his retention , prima  facie, seems to be 
discriminatory, i.e. against the provisions of Article 25 of the 
Constitution because if all of them were serving on contract basis and 
according to the stand of the Federal Government, they were 
performing duties to the satisfaction, their services have been 
terminated but DG FIA, who is also  a similarly placed person is 
continuing  in office . He stated that a ccording to the instructions  
conveyed to him  by the Secretary Establishment, who is one of the 
members of the Committee constituted by the competent authority to 
examine such cases , his services are required in connection with some 
national security matter s. When we inquired from Secretary SMC 24/2010 DT. 11.03.2011  4 
Establishment about the basis of the same, he stated that the 
Secretary Interior had produced some material  in the meeting , which 
was with him, therefore, Secretary Interior was asked to produce the  
same before the Court , who produced a document and claimed it to be 
a classified one. We have seen the document and returned the same 
by putting signature of the Court  Associate on one of the copies  
thereof .  
4.   The learned counsel further stated that today case may be 
adjour ned, enabling him to have some time to file reply and make 
submission in response to the order dated 07.03.2011 because 47 
other employees  whose list has been filed are working on contract 
basis in 22 Ministries whereas in pursuance of order dated 07.03.20 11, 
no information has been received so far from the remaining 24 
Ministries and in the meanwhile the Secretary Establishment shall 
collect such information from them  as well .  
5.   In view of the request made by the learned counsel, case 
is postponed to 1 6.03.2011. Notice in the meanwhile be also issued to 
Attorney General for Pakistan  as the question of interpretation of the 
constitutional provision in this case may be involved.   
 
 
 
   IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
 
 
 
 
 JAVED IQBAL , J.     RAJA FAYYAZ AH MED, J. 
 
 
 
 
ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA , J.   GHULAM RABBANI , J.  
 
ISLAMABAD,  
March 11, 2011  
 