SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice  Gulzar Ahmed , CJ 
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
   Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
   Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
    
Criminal Petit ion No.299 of 2020  
[Against the order dated 20.03.2020, passed by the Islamabad High Court, 
Islamabad in Crl.Misc.No.214/2020 ] 
 
 
Raja Muhammad Nadeem.  …Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
The State and another.  …Respondent(s)  
 
 
For the petitioner(s)  : Syed Nayab Huss ain Gardezi, ASC  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR a/w  
Petitioner.  
 
For the applicant( s) 
in Crl.M.A.399/19  : Mr. Ajmal Raza Bhatti, ASC  
   
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed, Attorney General for 
Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Ahmed, DAG  
Mr. Tariq Mehmood Khok har, Addl. 
Attorney General ( on Court’s notice)  
 
Amicus Curiae  
 : Sh. Zameer Hussain, ASC  
For M/o Interior  
 : Shahid Nawaz, Joint Secretary  
Nisar Ahmed, S.O.  
 
M/o National Health 
Services  : Asif Sohail, Director Legal  
G.M. Jakhrani, Dy. Dir. Legal  
   
For NAB  : Syed Asghar H aider , PG 
Muhammad Hassan Akbar, Addl. P.G.  
 
For ICT  : Mr. Niazullah Khan Niazi, A.G.  
Amer Ali Ahmed, Chief Commissioner  
Hamza Shafqaat, Dy. Commissioner  
Waseem Khan, Asstt. Dy. 
Commissioner  
Waqar ud Din Syed, DIG (Operations) 
Ibd. 
Azhar Hussain Shah, DSP (Legal) Ibd.  Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   2
 
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, A.G. Pb.  
Mr. Faisal Fareed, Addl. A.G. Pb.  
Mr. Arif Kamal Noor, P.G. Pb.  
Mr. Ahmed Raza Gillani, Addl. P.G. 
Pb. 
Mirza Shahid Saleem Baig, I.G. 
(Prisons) Pb.  
Malik Shaukat Fero ze, DIG (Prisons) 
Rwp. Region.  
Rana Zeeshan, Addl. Secy. Prisons  
Saqib Nazir, Supdt. Adyala Jail  
Tahir Siddique, Asstt. Supdt. Adyala 
Jail 
Adnan Yousaf, Sr. Law Officer  
   
For the Lahore High 
Court  : Mr. Khalid Mehmood, Dy. Registrar, 
LHC 
 
   
For Punj ab Bar 
Council  : Mr. Zulfiqar Abbas Naqvi, ASC/ 
Member  
   
For Govt. of Sindh  : Mr. Salman Talibuddin, A.G. Sindh  
Mr. Shabbir Shah, Addl. A.G. Sindh  
Mr. Faiz ul Hassan Shah, P.G. Sindh  
Mr. Hussain Bux Baloch, Addl. P.G. 
Sindh  
Nusrat Hussain Mangan, I.G. P risons, 
Sindh  
Mr. Sibtain Mehmood, Addl. A.G.  
(through video link)  
 
   
For Govt. of KP  : Mr. Shumail Butt, A.G. KP  
Mr. Khalid Rehman, ASC  
Mr. Imitaz Ali AIG (Legal) Police  
Ikramullah Khan, Secretary Home, 
KPK 
Umar Nawaz, Dy. Secy. Judicial, 
Home Deptt.   
(through video link)  
 
For Govt. of 
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Tahir, A.G. Balochistan  
Mr. Amir Hamza Mengal, P.G. 
Balochistan  
(through video link)  
Mr. Muhammad Ayaz Swati, Addl. 
A.G. Balochistan.  
Mr. Baqar Shah, State Counsel.  
 
For Govt. of GB  : Capt. Al i Asghar, I.G. (Prisons) GB  
Dr. Mujeeb ur Rehman, I.G. Police GB  Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   3
 
Date of Hearing  : 01.04.2020  
 
O R D E R 
  Gulzar Ahmed, CJ.— The learned Attorney General 
for Pakistan has filed a criminal miscellaneous application in 
which recommendations are contained  and this Court has been 
called upon to exercise its power under Articles 184(3) and 187 of 
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 in 
dealing with the matters relating to the prisoners in jails all over 
Pakistan, in the wake of Coronavi rus (COVID -19) pandemic. The 
recommendations of the Attorney General with regard to the Under 
Trial Prisoners ( UTPs) is to the following effect: - 
“Accused persons charged for offences under non -
prohibitory clauses or under vagrancy law or offences 
carrying  less than three years sentence may be 
considered for bail subject to the following: - 
(a) the benefit shall not extend in case s 
involving abuse/violent acts against 
children and women.  
(b) benefit shall first be extended to persons 
otherwise suffering from ailmen ts or 
physical or mental disability.  
(c) benefit shall be extended to UTPs who are 
55 years of age or older and then other 
male UTPs provided there is no history of 
past convictions.  
(d) benefit shall be extended to all 
women/juvenile UTPs.  
Bail in the above cases  may be extended on 
personal bonds.  
 And with regard to the convicted prisoners the 
recommendations of the learned Attorney General are as follows: - Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   4
“The following categories of convicted persons may be 
considered for release by the Provincial Governments  
under Section 401 Cr. P.C. : - 
(a) Convicts who have otherwise completed 
their sentences but remain in jail on 
account of non -payment of fine/monetary 
penalty.  
(b) Women/ juvenile convicts who have 
completed 75% of their sentence and have 
no history of past convict ions.  
(c) Convicts whose remaining term in jail is six 
months or less provided offence was not 
violence against women or children.  
(d) Women/juvenile who were sentenced to a 
term of one year or less”  
 As to the question of law is concerned, besides the provisions 
of the Constitution  and section 401 Cr.P.C. , which are noted 
above,  what are the other provisions of law  under which prisoners 
could be released  from jail , the learned Attorney General states 
that for addressing this very issue, some time may be granted.  
2.  The President of the Supreme Court Bar Association of 
Pakistan ( SCBAP ) has submitted a report with the heading “what 
makes Pakistani prisoners more vulnerable through the 
Coronavirus” in which some statistics have been mentioned. The 
most relevant is t hat there are 114 Jails in Pakistan which have 
the capacity of accommodating 57,742 prisoners but in fact, there 
are 77,275 prisoners  in these Jails. These prisoners who are in jail 
have been divided into two categories; one, convicted and the 
other, under  trial. It mentions that there are 25,246 convicted 
prisoners, while 48,008 are under trial prisoners, and amongst 
them, there are 1,184 women prisoners, who also have their 
children in jail, and there are 1,500 elderly prisoners above the age Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   5
of 60 years.  The President of SCBAP has contended that at least 
the vulnerable prisoners, namely, the women prisoners and elderly 
prisoners, above the age of 60 years, may be granted benefit of 
bail, so that they can be saved from being infected from the 
Coronavirus.  
3.  We have heard the learned Advocate General, Punjab 
and the learned Additional Advocate General, ICT, who are present 
in Court, and the learned Advocate General so also the Prosecutor 
General Sindh and the learned Advocate General K.P.  and 
Balochistan  through video link.  
4.  We have also heard Sheikh Zameer Hussain, the 
learned amicus curia e, who has appeared in Court in terms of 
Court’s order dated 30.03.2020. He has made his submissions and 
contended that some mechanism has to be evolved for release of 
prisoners from jails, who are in dire threat of being infected and a 
classification and distinction in this regard may be made, and such 
be laid down by this Court.  He however, contended that the 
impugned order of the Islamabad High Court is without 
jurisdiction and illegal.   
5.  We are informed by the learned Advocate General, 
Punjab that no prisoner has so far been released from the prisons 
in Punjab on account of Coronavirus (COVID -19), rather the 
Inspector General, Prisons Punjab has made internal 
arrangements, where he has ensured that the policy of distancing, 
as announced by the Government, is followed and in this regard 
shifting of prisoners have been made and some have been put Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   6
under quarantine, and that the accommodation of the prisoners in 
Punjab is not so alarming, where the arrangement for securing the 
health of prisoners could not be maintained. Be that as it may, the 
learned Advocate General, however, states that some policy in this 
regard may be devised and appropriate order by this Court m ay be 
passed.  
6.  The learned AG Sindh has stated that 519 prisoners 
have been released from the prisons in the Province of Sindh and 
such orders of release was/were passed by a Judicial Magistrate 
along with the list of prisoners and as stated by the lea rned AG, 
the order of the release was authorized by the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of the Sindh High Court, in his instructions. The learned 
AG states that he is going to provide a complete list of all the 519 
prisoners,  their names , their prisons,  whether they  were under 
trial or convicted prisoners, detail of cases they were facing/faced 
before the Court(s), section(s) of law under which the offences for 
which they were being tried or convicted  with short  summary of 
facts of each case. The orders of the Magist rate with a list of 
prisons, the direction issued by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of the 
Sindh High Court and any other order passed by any of the 
District & Sessions Judge/Additional District & Sessions Judge 
may also be filed by the learned A.G.  
7.  The le arned Advocate General, KP states that no 
prisoner has been released on account of Coronavirus (COVID -19) 
from prisons in KP and similar statement is also made by the 
learned A.G. Balochistan. I.G, Prisons, Gilgit -Baltistan ( GB), who is Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   7
accompanied with th e I.G. Poli ce, GB, also makes a similar 
statement that no prisoner from prisons in GB has so far been 
released  on account of Coronavirus (COVID -19).      
8.  In the circumstances, we direct the Inspector s 
General, Prison, all over Pakistan, to submit their  respective 
reports regarding the population of prisoners in their respective 
prison and the actual capacity of the prisons and also point out 
the categories of prisoners who are under trial or convicted  and 
separate list of prisoners , as has been noted in  the 
recommendations of the Attorney General for Pakistan and also the 
vulnerable prisoners, as have been pointed out by the learned 
President of the SCBAP, i.e., the women prisoners and elderly 
prison ers, above the age of 60 years before the next date of 
hearing.  
9.  So far as the question about the legality of the orders 
passed by the Islamabad High Court and the direction issued by 
the Hon’ble Chief Justice of the Sindh High Court and the 
subsequent orders passed by the District & Sessions Judge s and 
Magistrates, is concerned, arguments on this aspect of the matter 
will be heard by this Court on the next date of hearing. In the 
meanwhile, we expect that the lawyers, who are interested in 
assist ing this Court, besides the learned amicus curiae, may file 
their written synopsis and such be done well before the next date 
of hearing.  
10.  It was pointed out to us during the course of hearing 
that daily a large number of prisoners enter the jail premises and Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   8
the jail authorities have not made any arrangement o f screening of 
these new entrants in the jail , thus, an order may be passed by 
this Court that the new entrants are screened before they are 
allowed to enter the jail premises and if they are found to have any 
sign of Coronavirus (COVID -19), they should be  appropriately 
quarantined and not put in jail directly. In this regard directions 
are issued to the IG, Prisons of all the prisons in Pakistan, 
including IG Prison GB, to ensure that no new prisoner is allowed 
to enter the respective jail, unless he is fu lly screened and they 
shall ensure that the new entrant does not contain any sign of 
being affected by the Coronavirus (COVID -19). In case of any hint 
that he is suffering from such malady, the I.G. of respective prison 
shall ensure that he is properly qua rantined and not allowed to be 
mixed up with other prisoners, as long as the doctor in jail suggest 
otherwise.  
11.  The learned President of SCBAP has also stated before 
us that more than 800 posts of Jail Doctor are lying vacant and no 
steps are being ta ken by the respective governments for filling up 
these posts. All the Provinc ial Governments, ICT so also the GB are 
directed to fill up the posts of Jail Doctors immediately, without 
waste of any time and the governments’ position in this regard be 
put up  before the next date of hearing.  
12.  The learned A.G., KP has informed that the jail 
authorities in the Province of KP have affectively provided 
quarantine centres in their jails and the same, as noted above, has 
also been done by the jail authorities i n the Province of Punjab. Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   9
Whether any such quarantine centres have been established by the 
remaining jails in Pakistan i.e. in the Provinces of Sindh, 
Balochistan, ICT and GB, their position be also stated  in writing  to 
the Court before the next date of he aring ; however, we direct that 
quarantine centres be made by the respective jail authorities, 
immediately, preferably today with all necessary infrastructure.  
13.  We may also observe that while considering and 
dealing with the questions which are noted a bove, we direct the 
Federal Government, the Governments of all the Provinces as well 
as the GB and the Administration of Islamabad Capital Territory, 
to put up a report before this Court, about the measures and 
expected threats of Coronavirus (COVID -19) in  their respective 
territory and the measures that have been adopted by these 
Governments to overcome and tackle this pandemic ; what steps 
have been taken up by these Governments for providing necessary 
training and equipping the doctors and para medic staff  for dealing 
with this  pandemic and also what measures so far have been 
adopted by these Governments for providing medicines, protective 
dresses, kits, medical equipment s, ventilators, hospital beds, etc., 
for treatment of the pati ents affected by this pan demic; w hat is the 
state of readiness of all the hospitals of these Governments, to 
provide adequate treatment to the patients ; what inventory/stock 
these Govern ments are maintaining for the provision of medicines, 
protective dresses, kits, medical equipme nt, ventilators, hospital 
beds, etc., for meeting the looming surge of this pandemic ; and 
whether continuous process of training of doctors and paramedical Crl.P .299 of 2020  
   10
staff for dealing with this pandemic is being undertaken by the 
Governments and if not, what measure s they would adopt for 
doing it now. A comprehensive report regarding the above aspects 
of the matter shall also be made available by the respective 
Governments to this  Court well before the next date of hearing.  
14.  Adjourned to Monday i.e. 06.04.2020. The interim 
order passed on 30.03.2020  shall continue  to operate till the next 
date of hearing.  
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE  
JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE  
Bench -I 
ISLAMABAD  
01.04.2020  
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
Rabbani*/   
 