IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Present:  
 
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
 
 
Crl.O.P.4 -K/2023 in Const.P.09/2010  
 
(Application for Contempt of Court  filed by affect ees of Gujar 
Nallah, Orangi Nallah and Mehmoodabad N allah)  
 
  
Shehri -Citizens for a Better Environment & others .  …Applicants  
                                        Versus  
Murad Ali Shah  …Respondent  
 
  
For the Applicants:  Mr. Faisal Siddiqi, ASC  
Mr. Syed Mahmood Abbas, AOR  with 
Mrs. Ambar Ali Bhai  
Ms. Abira Ashfaq  
Syeda Maria  Raza 
Mr. Abdul Basit Afridi  
Arsalan Anjum  
  
For Respondent : 
 Syed Murad Ali Shah, C.M.Sindh (in person)  
 
On Court Notice : Mr. Muhammad Hassan Akbar, A.G. Sindh  
Mr. Suresh Kumar, Additional A.G.  
Syed Sa ulat Rizvi, Additional A.G  
Barrister Zeeshan Adhi, Addl.A.G.  
Qazi Muhammad Bashir,Addl.A.G with  
Mr. Murtaza Wahab, Mayor, Karachi  
Dr. Muhammad Sohail Rajput, Chief Secretary  
Mr. Muhammad Iqbal Memon, Commissioner  
Syed Najam Ahmed Shah, Additional Chief 
Secretary (Local Government)  
Syed Afz aal Zaidi, Municipal Commissioner  
Syed Mohsin Hussain Shah, Focal Person to C.S.  
Mr. Abdul Qadeer, Consultant to C.S.  
  
Date of Hearing:  17.08.2023 
 
ORDER  
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar , J. This matter was fixed y esterday when t he 
learned c ounsel for the applicants a rgued that the orders passed by 
this Court on 14.06.2021, 22.09.2021 and 25.10.2021  (the “ Orders ”) 
have not been complied with by the Government of Sindh , hence, an 
application has been filed for initiating contempt proceedings against 
the Chief Minister , Sindh. After a preliminary  hearing, we  issued 
notices to the Chief Minister, Sindh , the Advocate  General  Sindh, the 
Chief Secretary,  Government of Sindh,  the Mayor Karachi, and the 
Commissioner Karachi .  
 Crl.O.P.4 -K/2023 in Const.P.09/2010                              -2- 
 
2. The learn ed counsel for the applicants invited our attention to the 
Orders  previously issued, and the directions contained  therein for 
compliance , and expressed their  grievance that the O rders were not 
complied with in letter and spirit . The Chief Minster , Sindh an d Mayor 
Karachi also referred to the previous Orders and explained why the 
timelines fixed in the O rders were not complied with and also 
expressed  regret for non -filing of the progress report in Court. After 
hearing the issue involved at some length , and b efore formally 
initiating  contempt proceedings, the Court asked the Chief Minster 
Sindh, Mayor Karachi and other Gov ernment Official s whether they 
are sincere ly dedicated to  the imple ment ing the O rders passed by this 
Court for compens ating  and rehabilitati ng the affectees  of Gujar 
Nallah , Orangi Nallah  and Mehmoodabad Nallah , who were 
dispos sessed from their abodes . The Chief Minster and other officials 
present in Court in one voice show ed their willingness to resolve the 
matter sincerely and both the parti es exchanged  different proposal s 
vice versa  in order to settle the matter in the best interest  of the 
affectees /disposse ssed persons who are waiting for the fulfillment  of 
the promises made to them for compensation and rehabilitation  and 
such undertaking s were also recorded in the Court’ s Orders , including 
disbursement of amount on account of rental support per household  
in the sum of Rs.15,000/ - for two years . At this juncture, the learned 
counsel for the applicants argued that two ( 02) tranches of cheques , 
each worth  Rs.90,000 /- are due as per Court order dated 14.06.2021, 
which were not released despite lapse of a considerable period. The 
Chief Minster , Sindh assured that the cheques will be prepared and 
delivered.  
 
3. By consent, t he mechanism  of making  payment of rental support 
and proposal of rehabilitation  are jot ted down as under :  
 
i. According to agreed statistics , the total affectees  of Gujjar 
Nallah, Orangi Nallah and Mehmoodabad Nallah stand at  
6932. The cheques of those  affectees who have not rece ived 
their cheques shall be prepared within 7 days ’ time without 
any further delay or excuse.  
 
ii. The cheques will be released in two ( 02) tranches  of 
Rs.90,000 /- each which is due as per the aforesaid Court 
order.   
 
iii. The unpaid affectees may collect their c heques for the 
aforesaid period within 30 days. The timeline of 30 days is 
fixed to ensure timely payment to the affectees  and, in case  
any affectees  due to some reasons beyond his control failed to 
collect the cheque , he will not be deprived  of his right of Crl.O.P.4 -K/2023 in Const.P.09/2010                              -3- 
 
compensation  and may also approach the authority  for the 
disbursement  of his cheque s. 
 
iv. The cheques will be disbursed from the Office of the Deputy 
Commissioner, Karachi (South) under the supervision of the 
Commissioner’s Office ; and the Commissioner Kar achi, 
present in Court , undertakes that he will personally supervise 
the fair disbursement of the cheques amongst the affectees. In 
case of any complaint due to delay or non -release of cheques, 
the affectees may file their complain t to the Additional 
Commi ssioner -II, who is appointed as a focal person by the 
Commissioner , Karachi to ensure that the complaints , if any , 
with regard to non -issuance of cheques, delay in release of 
cheques or any other complaint in this respect shall be taken 
up immediately and resolved.  
 
v. The cheques may be collected by the affectees from the office 
of Deputy Commissioner, Karachi (South) between  10 A.M. 
and 2 P.M. daily in the working days and until all cheques are 
released to the affectees, the Deputy Commissioner, Karachi 
(South) will continue  the window for the affectees. The Deputy 
Commissioner, Karachi (South) is also directed to ensure in 
his office the timely release of cheques, facilitation to the 
affectees in the process and removal of all difficulties that they 
might f ace.  
 
vi. The next issue is with regard to the rehabilitation scheme of 
the dispossessed persons from the Gujjar Nallah , Orangi 
Nallah  and Mehmoodabad Nallah . After due deliberation the 
Chief Minister Sindh, Mayor Karachi and other senior officials 
of the Gov ernment of Sindh, have forwarded two proposals  
which are under: - 
 
a) The Government of Sindh will release the amount to each 
of the 6932 affectees  for purchase of land and 
construction  according to the market value of the piece of 
land from where the 6932 aff ectees were dispossessed. So 
far as the cost of construction is concerned, the standard s 
laid down by the Pakistan Engineering Council for the 
construction of house measuring 80 square yards will be 
followed.  
 
b) In the alternate, the Government of Sindh sha ll allot a plot 
measuring 80 square yards to each of the 6932 affectees 
situated at Malir Development Authority and after handing 
over peaceful vacant possession of 80 square yards piece 
of land , with title  and free from all encumbrances , the cost 
of const ruction will also be paid to each of the 6932 
affectees in accordance with the standard s set out by the 
Pakistan Engineering Council for the construction of 
house measuring 80 square yards.  
 
4. The learned counsel for the applicants has agreed to the exte nt of 
the timeline and the mechanism of rental payment as laid down in 
paragraph 3 clauses (i) to (v) of this order. So far as the proposal s 
recorded in paragraph ( vi) clause s (a) & (b) are concerned , he wants to 
seek instructions from the affectees  and fi le a concise statement in the 
Court  before next date of hearing . Crl.O.P.4 -K/2023 in Const.P.09/2010                              -4- 
 
5. The Officials present in Court also assured  us that i n order to 
ensure the timely disbursement of cheques to the unpaid affectees, the 
Government of Sindh through Information Department shall also 
release Public Notices in the vernacular  newspapers for the 
information of the affectees so that they may easily collect their 
cheques from the Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Karachi (South)  
and also consider the proposal s placed by the Govern ment of Sindh for 
the rehabilitation  scheme and instruct their advocates /representatives  
accordingly . 
  
6. It is clarified this order is without  prejudice to the application 
moved by the applicants for initiating contempt proceedings  which will 
remain inta ct and pending for further proceedings if the matter is not 
resolved in view of the undertaking  and proposals  presented before the 
Court today.  
 
7. The Chief  Minster Sindh has assured us that proper allocation of 
funds have been made for releasing compensa tion on account of rental 
support to the affectees  and before leaving the Office of C.M, Sindh, he 
will also issue necessary instruction s for due compliance of order  to all 
concerned , hence , till further orders, his personal appearance is 
dispensed  with. 
 
 
8. The interim compliance report of issuing cheques shall be filed in 
this Court on or before 11.9.2023 which will be placed by the Office in 
chamber.  
9. The matter may be fixed after one month.  
 
10. Office is directed to upload this order on Supreme Cou rt website 
forthwith for the information of affectees .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
KARACHI  
17th August , 202 3 
Not approved for reporting .  
 
 
 
 
 
 