IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Bench -IV: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
 
C.M.A No.9009/2022 in Civil Petition No. 361 of 202 0. 
(Application for recall of order dated 04.10.2022  
and restorat ion of CP No.361/2020)  
Mehtab Publication (Pvt.) Ltd     
...…. Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA), etc  
….Respondent(s)  
 
For the applicant(s):  Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
For the respondent(s):  Mr. Ahmad Peraiz Ma lik, ASC.  
  (Through V.L. Lahore Registry)  
  Tahir Farooq Tarar (Head Legal PEMRA)  
  Mohsin Hameed Dogar, (Dir. Regulations)  
  Barrister Syed Ali Asghar (Law Officer)  
 
Date of hearing:   26.05.2023  
ORDER  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - This is an application for  
restoration of the titled petition, which was dismissed for non -
prosecution on 04.10.2022 . The sole ground taken in the 
appli cation is that the petitioner , as well as , the learned counsel 
for the petitioner did not receive any information regarding the 
fixation of the case on 04.10.2022.   
2.  It is clarified that the process of inform ing the 
Advocates  regarding fixation of case is through the supply of the 
cause list to the respective  Advocate -on-Record s (AORs) under 
Order IV, Rule 19 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980  (“Rules”) . 
Otherwise, informally as a matter of tradition and by way of 
standing practice, the cause lists are also put up in the Bar Rooms  
and SMS messages are also sent to the learned  Advocates  by the 
Court . However, the procedure covered by the Rules is the supply 
of cause list to the AORs. In case of a petitioner in person, notices 
are served to the petitioner under Order III, Rule 9 of the Rules.  CMA-9009 of 20 22.    - 2 - 
   3.  The instant application does not agitate that the above 
procedure was not followed. In addi tion, c opy of the cause list has 
not been placed on record to show that the case or the name of 
learned counsel did not appear therein. Further, t he application 
states that the AOR failed to inform the learned counsel , as well as , 
the petitioner about fixa tion of the case, however, it does not 
furnish any reason as to why the AOR , who had knowledge of the 
fixation of the case, failed to appear in the case  himself . There is no 
affidavit filed by the AOR affirming the facts mentioned in the 
application . 
4.  For the above reasons, there is no sufficient ground for 
allowing the titled application, which is accordingly dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
26th May, 2023.  
Approved for reporting  
Sadaqat   
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 