Athar Minallah J . I have had the privilege of reading the judgment of my 
learned brother, Qazi Fa e Isa, CJ and I see no reason for not agreeing 
with or endorsing his articulate interpretation of the law and the 
Constitution. However, I felt it necessary to add my additional opinion as 
well.  
2. We have interpreted and held that Article 19A of the Const itution 
guarantees to every citizen the fundamental right of having access to 
information in all matters of public importance. The exercise of this right 
is subject to regulation and reasonable restrictions imposed by law. The 
expression ' subject to regula tion and reasonable restrictions ' does not and 
cannot confer competence upon the legislature to abridge, impair, restrict 
or curtail the scope of the constitutionally guaranteed right by granting 
outright or indiscriminate exclusion to a public entity. The  right under 
Article 19 A is related to access to information in all matters of public 
importance, including information regarding public bodies. A plain 
reading of the Right of Access to Information Act 2017 (' Act of 2017 ') 
shows, prima facie , that the Su preme Court has not been expressly 
excluded from the definition of 'public bodies' under section 2 (ix) ibid. 
The definition of the expression 'public body' in sections 2(i) and 2(h) of 
the Sindh Transparency and Right to Information Act 2019 ( ‘Sindh Act ’) 
and the Punjab Transparency and Right to Information Act 2013 ( ‘Punjab 
Act’), respectively, includes the High Courts in both the Provinces to be 
amenable to the right to access law.  
 
3. It is noted that Article 8 of the Constitution unambiguously 
declare s a law to be void in so far it is inconsistent with the rights 
conferred under Chapter I. It further expressly bars the State from 
making any law which takes away or abridges the fundamental rights or 
has been made in contravention of the explicit command . The State has CP 3532/23  2
been defined in Article 7 and it, inter alia, includes the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) and the legislatures of the respective Provinces.  
4. The Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament), therefore, while promulgating the 
Act of 2017 could not have int ended to take away or abridge the right 
under Article 19A by an outright and indiscriminate exclusion of the 
Supreme Court and thus barring a citizen from having access to 
information relating to its activities of public importance. It appears that 
the Sup reme Court has not been expressly excluded from the purview of 
the exercise of the right of a citizen under Article 19A. As deference to the 
principle of trichotomy, the adoption of the principles and rules relating 
to enforcement of the fundamental right of access to information seems 
to have been left to the Supreme Court, since it enjoys the status of the 
final and highest Court in the country to protect and guard against any 
infringement of the fundamental rights of the citizens. It is vested with 
extra ordinary original jurisdiction under Article 184 (3) of the 
Constitution to grant writs relating to the enforcement of fundamental 
rights. Any interpretation of the Act of 2017, having the effect of giving 
immunity to the Supreme Court from the exercise of  the right of a citizen 
to have access to information would amount to abridging and taking 
away a constitutionally guaranteed right. In such an eventuality and to 
such an extent the Act of 2017 would be void because of inconsistency 
with a fundamentally gu aranteed right. On the touchstone of the 
principles of presumption of constitutionality and saving the law from 
being declared void, the Act of 2017 ought to be construed as not 
granting impunity to the Supreme Court nor barring a citizen to exercise 
the right to have access to information. The Supreme Court exercises the 
extraordinary and unique power of judicial review to examine the actions 
of other branches of the State, the Legislature and Executive, on the 
touchstone of the infringement of fundamental  rights. It is inconceivable CP 3532/23  3
that the Supreme Court would abridge or take away the fundamental 
rights of the citizens. It is also beyond imagination to expect that the 
highest forum, entrusted with the onerous duty to protect the 
fundamental rights, would be involved in its abridgment or outright 
refusal to give effect to or enforce such rights.  
5.  Public confidence will be eroded and the independence of judiciary 
undermined if citizens perceive the custodian of fundamental rights to be 
involved in its abr idgment. The Supreme Court has no control over the 
sword or the purse and its power and strength is solely based on public 
confidence. No citizen should walk away from the Supreme Court 
perceiving the refusal to entertain a request for access to informatio n as 
concealment or suppression of public information. The Supreme Court 
enforces the fundamental rights by ensuring that actions and decisions 
of others are transparent and open. The right of access to information is 
a bulwark against corruption and corru pt practices. It enables the citizen 
to know how they are being served and how the resources that belong to 
them are being utilized and spent. It empowers the citizens and promotes 
democratic values and participatory governance. The internal 
regulations, i nformation relating to human resource, privileges and perks 
enjoyed by judges and the employees, the budget allocated to the 
Supreme Court and its expenditure are some of the areas that are 
matters of public importance and thus of interest to the citizens.  The 
Supreme Court is presumed to be a model for others to follow regarding 
financial discipline and implementation of enforced laws and policies of 
transparency and openness. It is also presumed that the Supreme Court 
would be enforcing the principles tha t it enunciates for others to follow 
more rigorously in its own administrative affairs. There is no reason for 
the Supreme Court to refuse a request of access to information unless it 
falls within the exceptions described under the Act of 2017. The CP 3532/23  4
relucta nce and refusal justifiably leads to giving rise to suspicions and 
adverse perceptions, thus eroding the independence of the judiciary. In 
order to promote the independence of the judiciary, public confidence 
and trust in the transparency and integrity of the administrative actions, 
decisions and policies is inevitable. It is critical that the Act of 2017 is 
rigorously implemented and followed by the administration of the 
Supreme Court because it enforces the right under Article 19A of the 
Constitution  even though it does not expressly apply to it . 
6. To repose the peoples’ trust, the Supreme Court has to adopt the 
principle of proactive disclosure of information by placing all the 
information of matters relating to public importance on its website or 
displa ying it through other means. There should be no need for a citizen 
to request information. Proactive disclosure of information is implicit in 
the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19A of the Constitution. 
Transparency, openness and enforcement of the right guaranteed under 
Article 19A are the tenets of public confidence and an independent 
judiciary.  The Islamabad High Court was also not covered under the Act 
of 2017, yet it voluntarily provided access to information sought by a 
citizen vide letter  dated 29.07.2021, in response to an order of the 
Pakistan Information Commission. It does not behove the constitutional 
courts to withhold or turn down a request of a citizen exercising the right 
of access to information guaranteed under Article 19A of th e 
Constitution. The Supreme Court, therefore, has to set an example for 
others by proactively disclosing information , rather be seen as 
withholding information and thus infringing a guaranteed fundamental 
right.  
 The above are additional reasons in suppor t of the interpretation of 
law and the conclusion recorded by my learned brother , Qazi Faez Isa, 
CJ in his judgment.        CP 3532/23  5
 
       (Justice Athar Minallah)  
‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING’               