IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
Constitution Petition No. 77 of 2010  
 
 (President Balochistan High Court v. Fed eration of Pakistan etc. ) 
 
On Court's Notice : 
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Shah Khawar, Addl. AGP  
For the Govt. of Punjab:  Mr. Hanif Khatana, Addl. A.G.  
For the Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Abdul Latif Kakar, Asstt. A.G.  
For the Govt. of KPK:   Mr. Naveed Akhtar,  Addl. A.G.  
For the Govt. of Sindh:    Mr. Adnan Karim, Addl. A.G.  
For the ECP:    Mr. Ishtiaq Ahmed Khan, Secretary.  
     Syed Sher Afghan, Acting Addl. Secretary.  
Date of hearing:    14.10.2013 (AT LAHORE)  
     O R D E R   
 
   Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  In response to our 
order dated 11.10.2013, the Advocate Generals of all the Provinces 
alongwith the Additional Attorney General for Pakistan have not 
placed on record the view points of all the respective Governments as 
well as the Federal Government to a dopt interim measures for 
enforcing the C onstitut ional provisions under Articles 32 and 140A of 
the Constitution. The relevant paragraph of our order dated 
11.10.2013  is reproduced herein below: -  2
"We adjourn this case to 14.10.2013. To be heard at 
Supreme Court Branch Registry Lahore enabling all the 
learned Advocates General to put up view point of their 
Governments with reference to the instant order and to 
point out that how immediate effect the constitutional 
provision under Article 140A are likely to b e enforced. 
Similarly, the learned Additional Attorney General shall 
also make the statement of adopting the interim measures 
to enforce the constitutional provision in the Federal 
Government".  
 
2.  It may not be out of context to note that this Court , on 
various dates of hearing starting from 5.4.2012 and on 17th, 18th, 23rd, 
24th and 26th September, 2013, had been insisting that the respective 
Governments enforc e the mandatory Constitutional provisions of law 
as n oted herein above. In fact there  should no t have been any 
necessity for this Court to enquire from the concerned Governments 
as to why they are not holding the Local Bodies Elections as all the 
Governments have been created by the Constitution after the general 
elections and the concerned function aries i.e. representations of the 
people of Pakistan are bound to protect and preserve the 
Constitution instead of allowing non -adherence of any one of its 
provisions for one or the other reasons. Needless to observe th at not 
only this provision of the Con stitution but all other provisions are 
required to be enforced fully without any excuse.  
3.  Be that as it may, we provide the respective Governments  
another opportunity to point out on the next date of hearing about  3
the interim steps which now the Governm ents are contemplating  so 
as to enfor ce the C onstitutional provisions noted herein above, 
immediately without any loss of time. We are exercising our judicial 
restraint otherwise in view of our  directions/observations  of various 
dates of hearing, noted her ein above, it is not diff icult for this Court 
to pass an  order but we are of the opinion that let the Governments 
discharge their own functions and duties as the Constitution requires.  
 To come up on 21.10.2013 at Islamabad .         
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lahore  Judge  
 
 
 
14.10.2013.  
‘NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ 
A.Rehman/*  Judge  
 