SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed , CJ 
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
   Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
   Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
  
   
S.M.C. 01/  2020 
(SUO MOTO ACTION REGARDING COMBATING THE PANDEMIC OF CORONA VIRUS 
(COVID -19) 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed  Khan , Attorney General 
for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood , DAG  
Dr. Tanveer Qureshi, Secretary M/o 
National Health  
Asif S uhail, Director (Lit)  
G.M. Jakhrani, Dy. Director (Lit)  
(All from M/o National Health)  
Mirza Mahsoo d, J.S. M/ o Interior  
Shams -ur-Rasool SO Interior.   
   
For ICT  : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi, A.G., 
Islamabad  
Shafaq Hashmi, D.G.,  
(Chief Commissioner Offic e) 
Waseem Ahmed, Asstt. D.C., (I.C.T.A.)  
Amer Naveed, A.D., (Lit), (I.C.T.A.)  
Babar Sahibdin, Director (Admn)  
Azhar Hussain Shah, DSP Legal.  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, A.G., P unjab  
Javed Yaqoob, Addl.AG, P unjab  
Cap (R) M. Usman, Secy. Primary  & 
Secondary Health Deptt. P unjab  
M. Nabeel Ahmed Awan, Secy. 
Specialized, Health Care & Medical 
Education Deptt  
Momin Agha, ACS Home.  
Mirza Shahid Saleem Baig, IG Prisons  
Zeeshan Shabbir, Addl. Secy. Prisons  
Qadeer Alam, AIG Judicial  
(Via Video link from  Lahore Branch)  
Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl.A.G. P unjab  
(In Islamabad ) 
   
For Govt. of Sindh  
 : Mr. Salman Talibudin, A.G, Sindh  
Zahid Abbasi, Secy. Health  
Muhammad Usman Chachar, Addl. 
Chief Secy -Home  
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi,  
(Focal Person to Chief Secy. Si ndh)  SMC.01/20  
   2 
Syed Salman Shah, DG, PDMA  
Qazi Shahid Pervez, SMBR  
Iftikhar Shalwani, Commissioner Khi  
Irshad Sodher, DC South  
Ahmad Ali Siddiqui, DC East.  
(All via Video link from Karachi Branch ) 
 
Muhammad Kassim Mirjat AOR  
(At Islamabad)  
   
For Govt. of KP  
 : Mr. Shumail Butt, A.G. KP  
Syed Imtaiz Hussain Shah, Secy. 
Health, KP  
M. Abid Majeed, Secy. Relief 
Rehabilitation, KP  
Mian Shakeel Ahmed, Secy. Local 
Govt. KP  
Rooh -ul-Amin, Addl. Registrar, PHC  
Amir Sultan Tareen P&D, Deptt - 
EHSAAS, Programme  
Idrees Marwat S ecretary Zakat.  
(All via Video link from Peshawar  Br) 
   
For Govt. of 
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir, A.G, 
Balochistan  
Amir Hamza Mengal, DPG Balochistan  
Hameedullah Peechi, AIG Prisons  
Mudassar Waheed Malik, Secy. Health  
(Via Video link from Qu etta Branch ) 
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl.A.G.  
(In Islamabad ) 
   
For Govt. of GB  : Mr. Muhammad Iqbal, AG, G.B.  
   
  Syed Iqbal Hashmi, ASC a/w  
Professor Abdul Rashid Mian , 
President PMA  
   
  Mr. Samuel Payara  
Chairman, Implementation of Minority 
Rights  Forum  
   
  Senator A Rehman Malik.  
 
  Ch. Haseeb Muhammad, President IHCBA  
Mr. Saeed Khursheed Ahmed, ASC  
 
Muhammad Ashraf Qureshi, ASC, AJK  
   
Date of Hearing  : 20.04.2020  
O R D E R 
  Gulzar Ahmed, CJ: -  We have heard the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan so also the Advocate s General of the four Provinces , 
ICT, and  Gilgit  Baltistan  (G.B.).  Report s have been submitted by the SMC.01/20  
   3 
Ministry of the National Health Services, Regulation and Coordination  
(NHSR&C) , National Disaster Management Authority ( NDMA), Poverty 
Alleviation and Social Safety Division (PA&S SD), as well as the 
Governments of Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan, KP, ICT , G.B. and the 
Cantonment Boards .  
2.  We have gone through these reports and have noted that 
after the passing of the last orde r by this Court, certain necessary steps 
have been taken by the respective Governments to ensure that the people 
of Pakistan are dealt with in accordance with the Constitution , in that , 
their lives are secured in terms of Article 9 of the Constitution and 
further more,  all necessary infrastructure and medical facilities are made 
available to them  in order to  deal with the Coronavirus (COVID -19) 
pandemic . 
3.  All the respective Governments have reported that they have 
made available PPEs  to doctors and parame dic staff,  their hospitals are 
now equipped for dealing with all situations arising from this pandemic , 
and doctors, nurses, paramedics and janitorial  staff , are all attending to 
their duties and performing their functions. We are informed that all 
staff, working in the hospitals and also in the field , is doing a 
tremendous job and  that  such may be acknowledged . We thus, 
acknowledge their efforts and express great appreciation for them. The 
respective governments are required to ensure that these doctors, 
nurses, paramedics as well as janitorial st aff are properly taken care of 
and their salaries and other benefits are paid on time and if there is a 
possibility of giving them special compensation , the same may be done.   
4.  We note that a quarantine centre has been established in the 
Haji Camp , Islamabad  and some complaints about inhuman conditions 
prevailing therein  have been reported in the newspapers so also in the 
Islamabad High Court . We have asked the Secretary Health, present in SMC.01/20  
   4 
Court, to inform us about such quarantine centre. He states that he has 
not visited the said centre  but will now visit the same and will furnish a 
detailed report  in this regard .  
5.  We have examined the report s regarding the Zakat Fund and 
are not at all  satisfied  by the respo nse from the Provincial Governments 
regarding its distribution . The s ame appears to be the case with regards 
to funds of  the Bait-ul-Mal. As such, we require more detailed information 
about their distribution and specific report s are required from each of the 
Provincial Governments , ICT and G.B. , showing transparency in the 
distri bution of Zakat and Bait-ul-Mal funds . We also want to know as to 
what criteria has been adopted by the Provincial Governments , ICT and 
G.B., for making payments to the beneficiari es of Zakat and Bait-ul-Mal 
funds, and what is the b reakdown  of the amount vis -à-vis the payment of 
money to needy people and the expenses incurred on the administrative 
side of these two departments.  An opinion from the Ulema, as to how 
Zakat and Bait-ul-Mal funds  can be utilized, is required to be obtained 
and hence , opinions of the Chairman, Council of Islamic Ideology , so also 
of Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usmani , an Islamic Scholar and a former 
Judge of Shariat Appellate Bench of this Court,  be obtained in th is 
regard;  particularly , on the question as to whether Zakat and Bait-ul-Mal 
funds  can at all be utilized for payment of salaries to the employees and 
officers of these two departments  so also to incur  administrative 
expenses  of these departments.  We expec t that the learned Ulema will 
give their opinions before the next date.   
6.  The Government of Sindh has informed  us that it has 
allowed certain industrial units to operate in Karachi. The learned 
Advocate Ge neral , Sindh has stated that an SOP has been dr awn up for 
operation of these industries , keeping in view the Coronavirus (COVID -
19) pandemic . Furthermore,  the Sindh Government is going to ensure SMC.01/20  
   5 
that the said SOP is strictly adhered to and that the industrial units are 
asked to give necessary certifica tes to the Sindh Government. We  have  
pointed out to the learned Advocate General , Sindh that the Factories 
Act, 1934 provides for proper facilities to be given to factory  workers , and 
that if compliance of such Act is made,  there will be a revolutionary 
change in the factories and besides the steps taken by the Sindh 
Government, factories shall become safer place s for their workers. We 
may observe that f actories ought to ensure proper residential 
accommodation , clean toilets , drink ing water , proper canteens , where 
food made by the employers is given to the workers at a nominal price, 
and proper medical facilities  are provided . Recreation facilities be also 
made available to the workers.  The Government of Sindh should ensure 
that all labour laws are followed  by the factories in letter and spirit , and 
the relevant department s, dealing with the factori es, are  required to 
submit a detailed report in this regard . We may , however,  note that the 
above observations , though have been made in respect of factories 
opera ting in Karachi ; in fact , the same apply throughout  Pakistan , across 
the b oard, without any distinction and that the laws of the State in this 
regard have to be strictly observed.              
7.  The Government of G.B. has also sub mitted a report in 
which  it has  stated  that the condition in this area is satisfactory , in that 
not many  Coronavirus  (COVID -19) cases have been discovered and the 
figure of total cases is not rising . 
8.  Senator A. Rehman Malik , has filed a report showing the 
efforts made by the Senate of Pakistan to deal with th e pandemic. The 
same has been taken on record.  
9.  The President of PMA has also been heard and the report 
filed by the PMA has been taken on record.  SMC.01/20  
   6 
10.  We have also heard the President of the Islamabad High 
Court Bar A ssociation as well as the President of the District Bar. Their 
grievance is that lawyers are not being provided  testing facilities  and 
other medical assistance by the ICT. The learned Advocate General , ICT 
has been put on notice and he has made  a statement  that all practical 
steps shall be taken  to redress  the grievance of the lawyers for provision 
of necessary medical facilities.  
11.  The Cantonment Boards have also submitted reports 
highlighting  the status/condition of  their hospitals  and other 
dispensari es, so also facilities for treatment of Coronavirus (COVID -19).  
12.  We note that  while  this pandemic  has no t reached its peak , 
cases are  continuing in the country and are increasing day by day . 
However,  we do hope that  in this moment of crises,  functiona ries of all 
the governments shall cooperate with each oth er, make a  consolidate d 
effort , and take decision s by consensus  for the mutual benefit of the 
nation  and its citizens . There s hould be no lapse in this regard.  Further 
reports be filed by the respect ive governments and the departments, 
noted above. Such reports shall be made available to this Court before 
the next date of hearing.      
13.  Adjourned to a date after two weeks.  
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
Bench -I 
ISLAMABAD  
20.04.2020  
A Rehman */  
 