IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 Present:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.33 OF 2013  
(Under Article 184(3) of the Constitutio n challenging the 
appointment of DG, CAA and delay in completion of NBBIA P) 
 
 
   
Asaf Fasihuddin Khan Vardag.  Petitioner(s)  
 
VERSUS  
Government of Pakistan and others.  Respondent(s)  
 
 
Petitioner(s)  : Mr. Asaf Fasihuddin Khan Vardag, ASC  
(in person)  
 
On Court Notice:  : Mr. Muneer A. Malik,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
For Respondents No.1 & 2  
(Govt. of Pakistan through  
Secretaries Defence &  
Establishment Division)  : Mr. Shah Khawar, Additional A.G.P.  
Qari Abdul Rashid, AOR  
 
   
For Respondent No.3  
(Air Marshal (R) Khalid Ch) : Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gilani, Sr. ASC  
Syed Safdar Hussain, AOR  assisted by  
Barrister Saad Buttar, Adv  with 
Air Marshal ® Khalid Chaudhry,  DG, CAA  
   
For Respondent No.4  
(Ch. Muhammad Munir)  : Mr. Shahid Hamid, Sr. ASC  
assiste d by 
Ms. Asma Hamid, Adv.  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
   
For Respondent No.5  
(M/s. Louis Berger)  : Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari, ASC  
assisted by  
Mr. Saad Aamir, Adv.  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
 
For CAA  : Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC  
Assisted by  
Barrister Momin Ali Kha n, Adv.  Const.P.33/13  2 
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
Mr. Obaid ur Rehman Abbasi,Sr. Law Officer  
Eng. Muhammad Musharaf Khan,  
Project Director (NBBIAP)  
Mr. Aamir Habib Sikandar, Dy. PD  
   
For Aviation Division  : Mr. Muhammad Ali Gardezi, Secretary  
   
For Technical Assoc iates : Miang ul Hassan Aurangzeb, ASC  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
   
For LTH (JV)  : Kh. Haris Ahmad, Sr. ASC  
assisted by  
Barrister Ali Shah Gillani, Adv.  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
   
For M/s. China State  
Construction Engineering  : Syed Ali Raza, ASC  
Mr. Tariq A ziz, AOR  
   
For FWO  : Mr. Asad Rajpu t, ASC  
   
For M/s. Sambu 
Construction & Sachal  
Engineering  : Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR.  
   
For Hussain Construction  : Dr. Tariq Hassan, ASC  
Mr. Jawwad Hassan, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
   
For Habib Construction  : Syed Ali Zafar, ASC  
Raja Zafar Khaliq, ASC  
   
For M/s. Al -Tariq 
Construction  : Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
   
For M/s. Ciemens  : Mr. Imtiaz Rasheed Siddiqui, ASC  
Mr. Hasnain Ibrahim Kazmi, ASC  
   
For M/s. Xinjiang Beixin  : Mr. Shahid Kamal Khan, ASC  
Mr. Muhammad Siddique Baloch, AOR  
   
For M/s. Gammon Pakistan  : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha,Sr. ASC  
   
For M/s. Izhar (Pvt) Ltd  : Mr. Babar Ali, ASC  
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
   
For M/s. Jaffer Brothers  : Syed Ishtiaq Haid er, ASC  
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR  
   
Remaining Contractors  : Nemo  
   
Dates of Hearing  : 31/07, 19 & 22/08 and  3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 
24, 25/09/2013  
 Const.P.33/13  3 
 
    O R D E R   
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — The Petitioner, Mr. 
Asif Fasihuddin Khan Vardag , an Advocat e of Supreme Court of 
Pakistan , has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan  by means of the 
instant petition .  
2.   The Petitioner , inter alia , has alleged corruption in the  
higher ech elons of the government in the construction  and completion 
of New Benazir Bhutto International Airport  Project , Islamabad  
(NBBIAP) , which was required to be completed at the cost of Rs.35 
billions ; and as it has not been completed on the due date i.e. 
December, 2011 , the initial cost of Rs.35 billion no w has shot up to 
Rs.73 billion . He further averred that there is every likelihood that the 
cost may further be escalated to Rs.90 billion . The Petitioner further 
alleged that Air Marshal (R) Khalid Chaudhry , who is Respondent No. 3 
herein,  was appointed as Director General, Civil Aviation Authority 
(DG, CAA) through executive arrangements made  by the then Minister 
for Defence without observing legal formalities  and therefore, he has 
pivotal role in this organi zed loot. In addition to this, , he has also been 
given the charge of another mega project , namely, the Multan 
International Airport.  
3.   The above facts , particularly allegations of corruption , 
necessitated this Court  exercise its jurisdiction under Arti cle 184(3) to 
examine,  inter alia , whether the appointment of incumbent DG, C AA 
had been made in accordance with law  and in  adher ence to the 
principle of transparency ; and also to ascertain the status of the 
construction of both the above said airports.  The DG, CAA  submitted a Const.P.33/13  4 
concise statement  (CMA 4379/2013) in which he has annexed an 
Inquiry Report  prepared by Lt. General (R) Shahid Niaz, Chairman of 
the Inquiry Committee constituted by Ministry of Defence fixing the 
responsibility upon all concerned for causing delay in construction of 
the airport. He was also directed to place on record , for our perusal , a 
study report. Relevant facts from the report of General  (R) Shahid Niaz 
are as under: - 
“The first development strategy (Feasibility) of the New Benaz ir 
Bhutto International Airport Islamabad was pr epared by the 
French firm M/s Ai roport De Paris (ADPi) in association with 
NESPAK in October, 1984. It was concluded in the study that 
construction of the airport at a new site will be more feasible/ 
economic al than the expansion/upgradation of the existing 
International Airport at Chaklala. The new site selected/studied 
was located at Pindh Ranjha in Attock and Rawalpindi districts. 
The CAA started the purchase of land in 1986 through 2008 at 
Pindh Ranjha.  
After a lapse of 22 years, the need for another feasibility study 
was felt necessary and therefore in 2006 the preparation of 
Master Plan was assigned to M/s Louis Berger Group (LBG) USA 
and M/s ECIL as joint venture partners. Later the same group 
was also s elected as the Project Management Consultant (PMC) 
for NBBIAP by following due process of selection.  
In March 2007, the CAA Board on recommendations of the PMC, 
approved M/s CPG Airports, Singapore as design consultant for 
Passenger Terminal Building (PTB)  and the design work of 
remaining components of the project were assigned to M/s ADPi 
France & NESPAK (JV).  
In March 2008, CAA Board approved the PC -I of the project at a 
cost of Rs. 37 billion, based on the Master Plan prepared by the 
M/s LBG. However, th e ground breaking ceremony of the project 
was conducted earlier on 7th April, 2007 jointly by the then 
President and Prime Minister of Pakistan and it was directed by 
the Prime Minster of Pakistan to get the project completed in 30 
months period. Although the detailed engineering designs of the 
project were not ready by that time except for design of the Const.P.33/13  5 
Airside Infrastructure, CAA has reported that in  compliance to 
the directives of the Prime Minister, site preparatory works of 
the runway was immediately s tarted through package 00 in Feb 
2007.  
Against the approved PC -I cost of the project Rs. 37,000 Million, 
10 contracts out of 17 packages (excluding cost of land, 
management and design) have been awarded at a total cost of 
Rs. 46,669.19 Million till Septemb er 2012. The contracted cost 
of these 10 packages is 26% higher than the overall approved 
cost of the PC -I. The expenditure incurred till September 2012 is 
Rs. 16,501 Million being 44.6% of the approved PC -I cost.  
CAA prepared a revised PC -I at a cost of R s. 66 billion in March, 
2012 while keeping in view the cost incurred and expected 
increase in the overall cost of the project. The revised PC -I was 
considered in 140th meeting of CAA Board held on 16th April 
2012 where in the Secretary Defence / Chairman C AA Board 
observed incoherence between the overall expenditure incurred 
and the physical progress of the project. The Secretary Defence 
constituted a Committee under the chairmanship of Lt. Gen. 
(Retd) Shahid Niaz, Member (I&M) Planning Commission with 
Additional Secretary (Military Finance), Finance Division, 
Director General, CAA and Director, Planning and Development, 
CAA as members to conduct an inquiry under the following 
parameters:  
a) To conduct a comprehensive study / audit of the project.  
 
b) To inquire i nto the reasons for increase in the cost of 
project  
 
c) To identify the persons responsible for this state of affairs 
and to fix the responsibility.  
 
d) To suggest ways and means to bring this project on track 
for its expeditious completion.  
 
Since detailed audi t of the project upto February, 2011 has been 
conducted by the Auditor General's Office and report to that 
effect has already been published / submitted, so to avoid 
duplication of effort it was decided by the Committee to conduct 
performance audit of the project. Accordingly Ministry of 
Defence was informed vide letter No. 4(16 -133)/PC/T&C/  
2012/Vol -IX dated 9th August, 2012 placed at Annex -II. Const.P.33/13  6 
In order to expedite and facilitate the Inquiry Committee, the 
Chairman of the Committee Lt. Gen. (Retd) Shahid N iaz 
constituted a subcommittee comprising Engr. M. Mustansar 
Khan, D.G. Projects Wing, Mr. Munir Ahmed Anjum Chief (T&C), 
Planning Commission, Mr. Muhammad Musharraf Khan, PD 
(NBBIAP), Mr. Rouhullah, Acting Director, P&D, CAA, Mr. Amir 
H. Sikandar, Deputy PD Finance (NBBIAP) and Mr. Noor Alam, 
Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Defence.  
Following course of action has been adopted to complete the 
assignment:  
i. Obtaining relevant record and data from CAA, for which a 
set comprehensive formatted document was provide d by 
the committee.  
ii. Meetings/Discussions with the concerned officials and 
other stakeholders.  
iii. Frequent site visits to the projects site/project office by 
members of the sub committee.  
iv. Scrutiny of the records and reconfirmation through 
acquisition of relat ed documents.  
4.    Khawaja Haris Ahmed, learned Sr. ASC appearing on 
behalf of M/s Laga n – Technical  - Habib Joint Venture (LTH -JV), on our 
query , pointed out that the CAA Board , in its 140th Meeting  held on 
16.04.2012, expressed its extreme displeasure o n the progress of 
NBBIAP . Thus  the Inquiry Committee was constituted by the CAA 
Board to fix the responsibility by identifying the persons responsible 
for the state of affairs of the project and provide suggestions to put 
the project on the right trac k for its earliest possible completion.  
5.     
The Committee was required to conduct performance audit in such a 
manner that it shall not hamper the overall progress of developmental 
works at the site and was requir ed to submit its report to the 
Secretary Def ence/Chairperson CAA Board within a period of 30 days Const.P.33/13  7 
from receipt thereof. The Committee , however,  submitted it s report on 
23.01.2013.  
6.   It is to be noted that the Inquiry Committee could not 
complete its task within the stipulated period of 30 days a s was 
required in the notification of appointment of Inquiry Committee , but it 
was noted in the report itself that flow of information and provision of 
relevant documents/record from the concerned authoriti es of CAA had 
been a sore issue and it was  a major  reason for the slow progress of 
the Committee proceedings. It was only through intervention of 
Ministry of Defence at the request of the Sub-committee through 
various letters/communications that the requisite information was 
provided. H owever, till the wr iting of that  report, CAA was unable to 
provide the complete set of information required  by the Inquiry 
Committee . In this very context , it is interesti ng to note that attitude 
of CAA was non-cooperative towards the Inquiry Committee . Although  
Air Marshal (R) Khalid Chaudhry, incumbent DG, CAA was one of the 
members of the Inquiry Committee he provided  no information about 
cost of the project  or the feasibility study  to the Inquiry Committee . It 
is true that at the time when feasibility study was carried o ut, 
someone else was DG, CAA . However, at the time that the Inquiry 
Committee was conducting its investigations, Air Marshal (R) Khalid 
Chaudhry  was the head of CAA and overall in charge of the executive 
functionaries . Therefore, he was in a position  ensure their cooperation 
and to place all the important documents before the Inquiry 
Committee, but for the reasons best known to him the needful was not 
done. The Inquiry Committee , on the basis of whatever material 
brought before it, prepared a report which suggests that final Master Const.P.33/13  8 
Plan/report was prepared by the Joint Venture of M/s Louis Berger 
Group, USA (LBG) and Engineering Consultants International (Pvt) Ltd. 
(ECIL) , in the month of September, 2006 and an amount of Rs.27.767 
million was paid to the Co nsultants for the preparation of the feasibility 
study/ Master Plan . According to the Master Plan prepared by the 
Consultants , an amount of Rs.27,102.1 million (which included the 
total overall cost of engineering, supervision, PM & Admin and Fees for 
the p roject) was required in the year 2006 for the completion of 
Runway, Taxiway, Apron, Passenger Terminal, Cargo Terminal, 
Car/Taxi Parking, Roads/Bridges/Culverts, Rescue & Fire Stati on, etc.   
However, the financial impact of the land was not included in the  
Master Plan. The reservations/findings of the Inquiry Committee , 
recorded on the preparation of the Master Plan, read as under: - 
i. “The Master Plan (2006) was prepared after lapse of 22 years 
which resulted in cost appreciation from tentative cost of Rs. 
1.267 billion (1984) to Rs. 37 billion. Main justification for delay 
as reported by CAA was the change in priority of constructing 
Allama lqbal Airport Lahore over NBBIAP at Islamabad.  
 
ii. The Master Plan developed by M/s LBG and M/s ECIL (JV) in 
2026 lacked so me essential components i.e. link taxiway, state 
lounge, mosque, medical centre, bachelor accommodation, APM 
residence, M.T. Section, boundary wall and land for future 
requirement. The cost of these components at present is 
estimated at Rs. 1.3 billion. Th is lapse on part of the Consultant 
indicates negligence. ” 
7.   Similarly, in respect of the Land Procurement, after having 
gone through the facts of the matter, following findings were recorded 
by the Inquiry Committee: - 
i. “Acquisition of land was started in  1986 under Land Acquisition 
Act, much before the approval of the PC -I which was accorded Const.P.33/13  9 
in 2008. Initially, the land was purchased at the average price of 
Rs. 44,896 per acre whereas the rate calculated in the original 
feasibility of 1984 was Rs. 12,140 per acre.  
ii. After the purchase of land in 1986, the purchasing activity 
continued till 2008. The land purchased during the period 1986 -
2008 was 3287 acres. The average cost comes to Rs. 277,037 
per acre which is 22 times higher than the cost estimated in the  
feasibility of 1984. The responsibility for substantial increase in 
cost of land can be attributed to inaction on part of the CAA, for 
failing to procure the required land in the minimum possible 
time. The process for purchase of land was continued for 22  
years and even then the total procured land may not be 
sufficient for the future operational requirement of the Air Port 
as reported by Project Authorities.  
iii. In the feasibility study / master plan of 2006, the requirement 
of 3155 acres of land was worked o ut on the basis of catering 
the needs upto 2035. These projections were made by using 
historical, demographic and socio economic data for the region 
and the country, presented in terms of annual number of 
passengers, aircraft operations and cargo for each year upto 
2035. The breakup of the land use is attached at Annex -IV. In 
the given circumstances purchase of additional 137 acres of land 
is not justified.  
iv. An amount of Rs. 910.622 million has been paid on account of 
purchase of 3,287 acres of land. The sai d amount is not the part 
of the approved PC -I. 
v. It has been observed that further Rs. 2000 million has been 
kept in the approved PC -I for purchase of additional land. The 
said amount has been decreased to Rs. 900 million in the 
revised PC -I. In the given sc enario, once 137 acres of excess 
land is already acquired, the original PC -I had Rs. 2000 million 
whereas the revised PC -I has Rs. 900 million for additional land, 
the consultant and CAA both are not sure about the actual 
requirement of land even at such a n advanced stage of the 
project.  
vi. CAA has purchased 132 acres of land more than the estimates 
of Feasibility Report/Master Plan estimate 2006.  
vii. According to sponsors there are many left over areas embedded 
in the acquired piece of land. Reportedly, the spons ors have a Const.P.33/13  10
plan to acquire these areas to address the flight safety and 
security issues. Purchasing / clearing the land at this stage of 
development of the Airport will have a huge financial impact. It 
is reported that some embedded areas still exist in th e acquired 
land and where over 80 persons are still residing within the 
project area. This is a serious issue and needs immediate 
addressal. Detail of the embedded land is at Annex -V. 
viii. It appears that the PMC while submitting the final Master Plan of 
the ai rport had not comprehensively worked out the proper use 
of land hence the total requirement of land is not yet finalized.  
ix. The Planning and Development Directorate, Civil Aviation 
Authority also bears the responsibility for not correctly working 
out the det ailed requirement of land in consultation with the 
Consultants. ” 
 
It is equally important to note that Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, learned 
counsel for CAA has provided following project -wise details of each 
project: - 
(E) CONSULTANT FOR THE PROJECT  
(F) PROJECT M ANAGEMENT UNIT (PMU)  
(G) PLANNING  
(H) EXECUTION  
(I) PERIPHERAL FACILITIES  
(J) CONCLUSION  
 
The Inquiry Committee under the heading “CONSULTANT FOR THE 
PROJECT”, thoroughly examined the status of the Project under 
following sub -headings: - 
(1) Project Management  Consultant (PMC)  
(2) M/s CPG Airport (Design Consultant for Passenger Terminal 
Building)  
(3) M/s ADPI -NESPAK JV (Design Consultant for the project 
except PTB)  
The Inquiry C ommittee also recorded its finding s including one wherein 
division of  the project of constr uction of Airport into 17 different Const.P.33/13  11
packages was termed as indicative of poor planning. The same finding 
is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“vii. As per standard engineering practice adopted for development 
of major airports, the whole construction activity is no rmally 
divided into two major parts, one Airfield infrastructure and 
second Lan dside Infrastructure, the work is then awarded for 
execution to one or two internationally  renowned and 
experienced firms. The division of this project into 17 different 
package s is indicative of power  planning. It may be highlighted 
that the PMC in the Minutes of Contract Negotiations” at Annex -
XII has clearly and in unambiguous terms recommended to 
adopt an approach with two main contracts, one for the airfield, 
taxiways, utili ties, water, drainage, fuel farm and lighting etc 
and a second contract for the terminal and all ancillary facilities. 
The view point given by CAA, that subsequently in May 2008 the 
PMC advised to split the work in various pa ckages is not cogent 
as ultimat e decision rested with the client. The only plausible 
reason for splitting the work into so many packages is due to 
non availability of timely designs. If at all the work was to be 
split, it could have been managed by having more compact 
packages, which co uld have helped in cutting down the costs 
and time over runs, besides eliminating the inter face 
problems.”  
8.   With regard to Project Management Unit (PMU) following 
findings were recorded: - 
i. PMU for the project was never notified by the authorities hence  
the distribution of work and specific duties to be performed by 
the members could not be determined in the absence of an 
approved TOR, which is a serious lapse on part of CAA.  
ii. There have been frequent changes of the Project Director i.e. 
five Project Dire ctors have worked during the period 2006 -till Const.P.33/13  12
date 2012, which has adversely affected the progress and 
management of the project as a whole. It may be mentioned 
that for any public funded project the project director of the 
project has tobe appointed and s hold remain with the project till 
its completion.  
iii. Some of the officers indicated in the PMU incumbency position 
were employed part time performing duties other than the 
project.  
iv. The PMU has not been able to perform its basic and effective 
role of the clien ts (CAA) check through the PMC on various 
activities of the project.”  
 
9.  Under the title “PLANNING ” the Committee has discussed 
original PC -1, considered in the Development Working Period (DWP) 
meeting of Ministry of Defence held on 19.03.2008 and revise d PC-1, 
prepared jointly by M/s LBG & NESPAK in March, 2012 at the cost of 
Rs.66 billion including Foreign Exchange Commission (FEC) of Rs.16 
billion (equivalent to US $ 180 million valued at Rs.80.62 for 
expenditure already incurred and Rs.90/US$ for expe nditure on 
balance work) , which  was considered in the 140th meeting of CAA 
Board held on 16.04.2012 and was deferred  subject to submission of 
Inquiry Committee Report. In the Revised PC -1 an amount of Rs.46.2 
billion has been reflected to be financed from CAA’s own resources and 
remaining Rs.19.80 billion through borrowing. The following 
reasons /justifications   were given for revision of the PC -I on account of 
non-inclusion of certain essential facilities overlooked by consultants 
while preparing the origin al PC-I:- 
 
1.  Site preparatory works  Rs. 
Million  
2.  Airside Infrastructure:  179 
 Airfield lighting System  1,004  
 Hydrant Refueling system  1,236  
 ATC equipment & NAVAIDS  1,530  Const.P.33/13  13
 ATC, FCR, RADAR & Radio Building.  1,470  
 Additional Aprons, Taxiways a nd Remote Parking for 
 state Lounge  1,000  
 Other Miscellaneous additions.  1,553  
     Total:  7,793  
  
3.  Passenger Terminal Building:   
 (addition of passenger boarding bridges, PCA, 400 Hz 
 power supply)   
 Increase of rate per sq. m of terminal build ing  
 Original PC -I:  Rs. 82,000 per sq. m   
 Revised PC -I:  Rs. 126,900 per sq. m  11,966  
  
4.  Landside Infrastructure:   
 Sewerage treatment plant:  150 
 Landscaping:  400 
 Landscaping Building:  600 
 Cargo complex:  500 
 Additional area and faciliti es in landside infrastructure:   
 Additional pedestrian link bridges and increase in width 
 & height of  departure level bridge (2 to 4 lanes):  2,000  
 Other miscellaneous additions   
 (power distribution & Telecommunication network):   
    Total:  5,378  
  
5.  Other components of project cost    
 Increase in Project Management cost  278 
 Increase in Airside Design Cost  104 
 Increase in Terminal Building Design Cost  133 
 Increase in contingencies  538 
 Vehicles (Details not given)  15 
 Increase in Cus tom duties & Taxes  1,000  
 Decrease in Land Acquisition cost  (1,000)  
 Inflation / Escalation  3,200  
    Total:  4,168  
    Grand Total:  29,000  
 
The Inquiry report finds mention ed that once the work started as per 
the scope of original PC -I, the project au thorities divided the work of 
each component into different packages. During the course of 
implementation it was realized that there was likely to be a substantial 
increase in the overall cost of all the components from their 
indicated/estimated cost as re flected in the original PC -I. The 
component -wise increase in the cost of various packages has also been  
indicated in the report as follows: - 
 PC-I Sub -Heads  Original Cost 
Rs. Million  Revised 
Cost Rs. 
Million  Increase 
in cost  Const.P.33/13  14
A Site Preparatory Works (Phas e-
I) 1,080.531  902 (178.531)  
B Package 01: Airside 
Infrastructure (Civil Works)  
10,375  12,928   
Package 7A: Airfield Lighting 
System  1,004   
Package 06: Hydrant Refueling 
System  1,236   
Package 7B: 
NAVAIDS/MET/ATC Equipment  1,530   
Package 8C -1: ATC Complex 
and FCR Building  1,470   
Airside Infrastructure  10,375  18,168  7,793  
C Package 2: Piling Foundation 
Works for Passenger Terminal 
Building  
14,760  370  
Package 3A: Constructing of 
Pile Caps for Passenger 
Terminal Building  471  
Package 03: P assenger 
Terminal Building  20,640   
Package 04: Special Items of 
Equipment  3,599   
Package 05: Furniture & 
Signage  617  
Package 09: Aircraft Stand 
Equipment (PB Bridges, Power 
Supply)  1,029   
Terminal Building  14,760  26,726  11,966  
D Package 8A:  Landside Roads, 
Bridges, Drainage and Utilities  
5,000  6,853   
Package 8B: Electrical Power & 
Telecommunication Network  2,025   
Package 8C2: Landside 
Buildings & Landscaping  1,000   
Package 10: Cargo Complex & 
Allied Works  500  
Landside Infrastru cture  5,000  10,378  5,378  Const.P.33/13  15
E Project Management 
Consultancy  374 652 278 
F Design Consultancy (Airside 
Infrastructure)  410 514 104 
G Design Consultancy (Terminal 
Building)  390 523 133 
H Contingencies @ 3% (including 
CAA Establishment Charges & 
Overhead s) 971.686  1,510  538 
I Vehicles  - 15 15 
J Custom Duties / Taxes  500 1,500  1,000  
K Environmental Study  2.7 3  
L Additional Land Acquisition Cost  2,000  900 1,100  
M Escalation (Lump Sum) **  1,000  4,200  3,200  
  Grand Total  36,864  65,991  29,000  
 
 
10.    The Inquiry Committee has noticed that process of the 
preparation of original PC -I was faulty . Therefore, it is appropriate to 
note  the findings of the Committee  as reproduced hereinbelow :- 
i. The process of preparation of the original PC -1 was faulty and 
many important aspects were over looked. For example, 
detailed breakup of cost was not given, even quantities & Unit 
price of major items was missing and it was not prepared 
strictly in line with the parameters of the feasibility report.  
ii. In most of the comp onents, lump sum provisions were made 
much against the formal engineering practice.  
iii. It is evident that the project despite its importance and strategic 
nature was neither properly scrutinized, nor 
appraised/evaluated at the planning and the approval stages . 
iv. The DWP meetings are very important, in development process 
as they play crucial role in thescrutiny /appraisal of proposals at 
technical & working level which results into improvement in the 
investment proposals. The CAA Board in its 125th meeting held 
on 19th September 2008 gave the ruling that CAA Board is fully 
empowered to approve self financed development schemes / Const.P.33/13  16
projects of CAA. As a sequel to this decision, no meeting of CAA 
DWP took place till end of 2011. The decisions of DWP of CAA 
meeting hel d in March, 2008 placed at Annex -XIX were 
therefore violated as per procedure for approval of self financing 
development schemes of autonomous organizations instructions 
issued by P&D Division vide OM No. 21(2 -GEN)PIA/PC/2004 
dated 18th December, 2004 plac ed at Annex -XX. Later, the 
matter was reviewed by CAA Board in 2012 and it was decided 
to reactivate CAA DWP. Revised PC -I was therefore processed 
accordingly and recommended by CAA DWP in its 11th meeting 
held in Feb 2012 for further consideration by the CAA Board.  
v. As mentioned above in the period when the holding of DWP was 
dispensed with, all contracts awarded were without legitimate 
approval / authority.  
vi. The original PC -1 catered for medium term development phase 
upto 2020 requirements while the revised  PC-1 meets the 
projected requirements of 2035. The CAA has deviated from the 
recommendations of the feasibility report of 2006 in that instead 
of developing the airport in phases/stages; they have started 
construction for the ultimate phase which might re sult into 
excess capacity in an earlier timeframe.  
vii. The PC -1 was not based on the parameters of feasibility study 
conducted by M/S LBG in 2006 thus making the Master Plan / 
feasibility study redundant. This reflects poorly on management 
of the project at th e preparation stage which is considered to be 
the most critical phase of a project in standard engineering 
practice.  
viii. CAA has separately approved two projects namely; (i) PC -1 for 
Site Preparatory Works at an estimated cost of Rs. 1081.531 
million and (ii) PC-II for Consultancy Services at a cost of Rs. 
1209 million. Inclusion of these two costs in the original & 
revised PC -1 is not understood, an appropriate course should 
have been to close these two PC -Is or include the left over 
components of these PC -Is in the original PC -I. 
ix. The PC -1 for such an important mega project, which was a 
Green Field Airport, should have been properly deliberated by 
concerned department of CAA, which apparently was not done, 
despite the available technical support from very expen sive Const.P.33/13  17
panel of consultants. To sum it up the original PC -1 in its 
existing shape should not have been approved.  
x. Provision of lump sum escalation of Rs. 4,200 million in the 
revised PC -I is not justified as most of the contracts have been 
awarded or detailed  costs are estimated. In view of this the 
escalation can only be given on the balance works and for 
contracts which have not been finalized. ” 
While discussing the subject “ EXECUTION” , it was mentioned by the 
Inquiry Committee that in the month of February,  2007 first contract 
for Site Preparatory Work was awarded after getting approval of PC -I 
amounting to Rs.1,400 million. PC-II costing Rs.1,209 million was 
approved in November, 2007 covering all consultancy charges, 
whereas the Project Management Consulta nt was hired in January, 
2006. The Original PC -I of the project costing Rs.37 billion was 
approved in April, 2008, against which 10 contracts (excluding the 
costs of land, management and design)  were awarded at the cost of 
Rs.46.669.19 million, which is 26 % higher than the approved cost of 
the PC -I. The expenditures incurred till September 2012 has been 
reported as Rs.16,501 million which is 44.6% of the approved cost. 
Therefore, in this background, in respect of Execution following 
findings have been recor ded:- 
i. The award of contracts over and above the 15% limit of the 
approved cost is not permitted under the prevalent rules without 
approval of the revised PC -I, which in this case was grossly 
violated.  
 
ii. Implementation of certain components of the project wa s 
initiated without getting approval of the competent authority i.e. 
DWP/CAA Board in violation of the rules. The contract for site 
preparation was awarded in February, 2007 while the project 
was approved by the CAA Board in its meeting held on 28th Const.P.33/13  18
March,  2008. Reportedly this was done to facilitate holding of 
Earth Breaking Ceremony in an earlier time frame.  
 
iii. Out of 17 packages, the Executing Agency has awarded ten 
contracts so far (excluding cost of land, management and 
design etc). Out of the ten awarde d contracts, three have been 
reported as 100% complete. However, the accounts of these 
contracts have yet to be finalized / closed. The remaining seven 
contracts are in progress and all are behind the schedule. In 
general, 33.8% overall physical progress h as been reported in 
all 17 packages pertaining to the construction work in a time 
frame of total 67 months. If the planned date of completion of 
the Project i.e. June 2013 is kept in view, the cumulated lag at 
present in the overall progress of the under e xecution packages 
is 64%., Hence it is very difficult to meet the dead lines, unless 
extraordinary measures are put in place in right earnest. ” 
11.   The Committee has also stated that the said Project has 
been divided into following four major compone nts having 17 contract 
packages: - 
1. Site Preparatory Works  
2. Airside Infrastructure Passenger Terminal Building  
3. Passenger Terminal Building  
4. Landside Infrastructure  
In respect of Site Preparatory Works , the Committee has recorded 
its findings besides discussing the  Airside Infrastructure progress  
which is also known under sub -heading as Package -01 Airside 
Infrastructure (Civil Works). The contract was awarded in August, 
2008 to M/s Lagan -Husnain JV at a cost of Rs.11,825 million. The 
actual completion date of the pr oject was August, 2010 but it was 
delayed. The progress of the Package was very slow till January, 2010 
and stood at only 7 -9% again st the planned progress of 60%. P rimary Const.P.33/13  19
reason for the delay was cited as internal rift between the JV partners.  
The physic al progress by t he end of September, 2012 was 82.45% 
whereas the anticipated completion cost based on the revised PC -I was 
Rs.12,928  million. The Committee  on this issue  recorded following 
findings: - 
i. According to the Project Authorities this contract is ex pected to 
be completed by February 2013 with a delay of 30 months. The 
award of contract at higher prices and increased completion cost 
over contract price can be attributed to the following factors: - 
 
a) The project has sustained an additional cost of Rs. 1. 500 
billion due to conversion/intended use of a parallel 
taxiway into secondary runway.  
b) The completion cost of the contract is expected to 
increase further due to change in scope and claims of the 
contractors on account of idling charges.  
 
ii. In sharp contras t to the contractual obligations which required 
termination of the contract due to default and imposition of 
penalties and re -award of a new contract, a  new JV was formed 
(Lagan 60% TAPL 35% and Habib 5%) with exclusion/addition 
of partners to implement th e contract on the same terms & 
conditions. Though provided in the contract of the JV to change 
its composition but only in the event of normal performance by 
the JV. However, in this particular case the JV at that point in 
time was in a default stage havin g achieved negligible progress 
(of around 9% against 65%) and the only course available was 
to terminate the contract. This undue favor to the new JV by 
taking all the responsibilities of delays by the Project 
Management has accrued the right of claiming i dle charges by 
the new JV. This has already resulted into payment of idle 
charges/claims of Rs. 2.0 billion till to date to the new JV. It is 
apprehended that further claims in the shape of idle losses may 
be claimed by the contractor, which could result i nto enormous 
increase in the contract value. Detailed inquiry to probe into the 
matter needs to be conducted.  
 Const.P.33/13  20
iii. The PMC should have imposed penalty on the JV contractor for 
the expected 30 months delay in completion period of the 
contract, but such an actio n was not initiated for the delay in 
the contract implementation for which the PMC bears the 
responsibility.  
 
iv. There appeared no reason for converting parallel Taxiway (as 
proposed in original master plan) into Emergency Runway and 
subsequently as a Seconda ry Runway which has generated the 
requirement of a 3rd Runway with huge financial outlay. The 
changes effected have many implications for safe operation of 
Secondary runway, a detailed technical appraisal by the Ministry 
of Defence is therefore necessary.  
 
v. Against the contractual completion date August, 2010, the 
physical progress upto September, 2012 was 82.45%. The 
contract is expected to be completed by February, 2013 with a 
delay of 30 months. The contractual execution period has 
expired in August, 2010  and since then it is being implemented 
without issuing any extension letter to the contractor. ” 
Under the sub -heading “Pac kage-6 Hydrant Refueling System” it was 
observed that the contract was awarded in February, 2010 to M/s Al -
Tariq (Pvt) Ltd. at a cont ract price of Rs.1,187.238 million and planned 
to be completed by April, 2011 but then re-scheduled to be completed 
by December, 2012 with a delay of 20 months for increased estimated 
cost of Rs.1,236 million. Findings on this issue are as under: - 
i. This con tract is part of the Airside Infrastructure component. 
According to the justification given in revised PC -1 this item was 
not included in the original PC -1 and has been added to the 
scope of work. The increase in contract price by Rs. 48.762 was 
found to b e on account of payment of claims to the contractor. 
In addition idling claims amounting to Rs. 140 million have also 
been reportedly received by the Project Management and are 
under process.  
 Const.P.33/13  21
ii. Delay of 20 months in the completion period of this contract is  
mainly due to coordination and interface issues between the 
Fuel Hydrant Lines and Apron works (Airfield Lighting System). 
Ideally both the works should have been awarded to one 
contractor to avoid such clashes.  
 
iii. As the feasibility study as well as PC -1 was prepared by the LBG 
therefore, non inclusion of these important components while 
preparing PC -I can be attributed to negligence on part of LBG.  
 
iv. A grave contractual anomaly was also noticed in the conditions 
of the contract formulated by PMC and subseq uently executed 
by CAA. The predominant item of work in the contract pertains 
to laying of pipes involving almost 60% of the entire cost of the 
works. However, the import and supply of the pipes was taken 
up by CAA, because of which a delay of six months o ccurred in 
the import of pipes which has in turn paved the grounds for the 
contractor to raise idle claims for the delay. It is not understood 
why CAA decided to procure the pipes themselves and supply to 
the contractor. Information regarding the total cla ims paid to 
the contractor has not been provided.  
 
v. M/s NESPAK shifted the layout of the pipe line from the fair 
weather strips of the apron to the area specified for the 
construction of Apron. This has resulted into the adversity of 
interface between the c ontractors resulting in delay in execution 
of both package -1 and package -6 leading to time / cost 
overruns besides claims by both the contractors. This speaks of 
a highly non professional approach of the Consultants. ” 
 
Under the sub -heading “Package -7A Air field Lightning System” it was 
observed that contract was in September, 2009 to M/s Siemens 
Pakistan at a cost of Rs.946.771 million but was expected to be 
completed in Rs.1,104 million. The Inquiry Committee recorded 
following findings: - Const.P.33/13  22
i. Against the contr act value of Rs. 946.771 million the completion 
cost is expected to be Rs. 1004 million showing an increase of 
6%. The contract is expected to be completed by December, 
2012 with a delay of 20 months. The main reason for delay as 
reported was interfacing p roblems. The reason for increase of 
Rs. 57.229 million in the cost can be determined after having 
the relevant records which have not been provided by the 
Project Authorities. Further to this increase in cost, there are 
likely to be claims of the contracto rs, details of which have not 
been provided. ” 
 
Under the sub -heading “Package -8C-1 ATC FCR Radar & Radio 
Building” it was mentioned that the contract was awarded in January, 
2011 to M/s Beixen -Gammon JV at a cost of Rs.1,470.169 million and 
was to be compl eted by December, 2012. However, by the end of 
September, 2012 physical progress achieved was 46%. Findings on 
this issue are as under: - 
i. According to the revised PC -1 this item was not included in the 
original PC -1 and was added to scope of work. The co ntract is 
expected to be completed within contract value.  
ii. The work will not be completed by schedule time of December 
2012 and likely to take 4 to 6 months more only if special 
efforts are made. ” 
12.   In the end the Committee gave general findings on the 
heading of Airside Infrastructure, which are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
 “General Findings on cost of Airside Infrastructure  
As per approved PC -1, the amount reflected under Airside 
Infrastructure (Civil Work) was Rs. 10,375 million. However, 
besides Civ il Works, the Airside Infrastructure also included 
HRS, ALS, ATC/FCR Radar & Radio and ATC equipments and 
Navaids. Once the process of awarding contracts was 
undertaken, the cost for HRS, ALS, ATC/FCR Radar & Radio and 
ATC equipments and Navaids amount cam e to Rs. 5,240 million. 
Thus the total tendered cost of all the five packages works out Const.P.33/13  23
to Rs. 17,065 million. However, in the revised PC -I total cost 
calculated for all five packages of Airside Infrastructure 
development  is Rs. 18,168 million, showing an increase of Rs. 
7,793 million or 75% over the approved cost. Out of this Rs. 
2,553 million (25%) is attributable to escalation and Rs. 5,240 
million (50%) is due to missing items which were otherwise 
integral part of Airside Infrastructure. Approval of PC -I with 
missing details of such important components is not 
understandable. ” 
  The “Passenger Terminal Building (PTB) was split into 
following packages: - 
(a) Package-2  Pilling/Foundation Work  
(b) Package -3A  Construction of Pile Caps  
(c) Package -3  Main Pa ssenger Terminal Building (Super 
   Structure only)  
(d) Packages 4,5&9  PTB Special System, Furniture, Signage& 
   Counters and Air Stand Equipments   
   (These works are yet to be awarded)  
 
The contract of Main Passenger Terminal (Super  structure) was 
award ed to M/s CSCEC -FWO JV in January, 2011 at a cost of 
Rs.20,286.041 million against the appr oved cost of Rs.14,760 million 
and the findings of the Inquiry Committee  are as under: - 
i. Against PC -1 approved cost of Rs. 14,760 million for Civil 
Works, the contrac t for the super structure component only was 
awarded  at 37.4% higher cost of Rs. 20,286.04 million. The 
expected completion cost of the contract is Rs. 20,640 million 
showing an increase of 1.7% over tendered cost and 39.8% 
increase over approved cost. The  reason for this increase is 
attributed to the increase in unit cost, which has increased from 
82,000 per sq.m to Rs. 126,000 per sq.m showing an increase 
of 53.6%. It may also be mentioned that this cost does not 
include cost on account of piling and pile  caps for which two Const.P.33/13  24
separate contracts have been awarded to justify abnormal 
increase in cost of Main Terminal Building.  
ii. As per the information gathered during discussion/deliberations 
with consultants/CAA, it has been concluded that M/s CSCEC 
has not been  able to perform as expected, which is also 
hampering the progress of work by other JV partner M/s FWO 
(30% share) as the complete work of building structure has 
been split between two contractors much against the desirable 
engineering practices.  
iii. The contr act was awarded in June, 2011 ending in Aug, 2013. 
The total progress up to end  Sep, 2012 (15 months after the 
award of work) is barely 5% as against the contractually 
required progress of 67%. Keeping in view the scanty resource 
availability of shuttering , equipment and labor at site it can be 
very safely predicted that this JV will not be able to accomplish 
its contracted scope of work before the target date. The PMC 
and the client need to resolve this issue on priority.  
iv. Against the approved cost of Passe nger Terminal Building of Rs. 
14,760 million, the building is likely to be completed at a cost of 
Rs. 21,481 million inclusive of all the three activities; i.e. Super 
Structure, Piling foundation and pile caps. This shows an 
increase of Rs. 6,721 million o r 45.5% over the approved cost 
and Rs. 168.226 million or 0.8% over the tendered cost. The 
reasons for such an enormous increase in cost has been 
reported as non availability of timely detailed design at the time 
of preparation of approved PC -1. The total increase in cost is 
attributable to escalation. ” 
  Regarding Landside Infrastructure it was mentioned 
that the project was divided into following four Packages: - 
 a)  Package -8A Landside Infrastructure Work  6853 M  
b) Package -8B Electrical power and 
telecommunica tion 2025 M  
c) Package -8C2 Landside buildings and 
Landscaping  1000 M  
d) Package -10 Cargo Complex and allied works  500 M  Const.P.33/13  25
13.  The contract of Package -8A was awarded to M/s LTH JV for 
a cost of Rs.6,852.506 million against Rs.5 ,000 million. The findings of 
the Committee on this issue are as under: - 
i. This works package was awarded to M/s LTH JV at a contract 
cost of Rs. 6,852.506 million. Incidentally, this is again the 
same contractor as of Package 1 who emerged as the lowest 
contractor for this works package wh ich involves construction of 
internal road works of the NBBIA Project, Departure level 
bridge, Water works, Sewerage treatment plant and water 
treatment plant. The main reasons for delay in execution are 
interfacing issues between the contractors, lack of available 
design information and affect of flooding due to unprecedented 
rains.  
ii. The physical progress upto September, 2012, has been reported 
as 28.3% against the contractual completion date of March, 
2013. The contract is expected (as reported) to be comp leted by 
the planned date provided special efforts are made. ” 
The contract of Package -8B was awarded to M/s Siemens Pakistan Ltd. 
at a cost of Rs.2,005.789 million . As per revised PC -I the expected 
cost increased to Rs.2,025 million and was supposed to be completed 
by September, 2012. The findings of the Committee on this Package 
are as under: - 
i. This is also a component of Landside Infrastructure for which 
separate contract has been awarded to justify increase in 
cost of component. According to sponsors, the se items were 
not part of the approved PC -I therefore, have been added to 
the scope. However, perusal of PC -I indicates that necessary 
provisions were made in the approved PC -I on lump sum 
basis for these jobs.  
ii. Physical progress achieved, after lapse of th e contractual 
completion period in September, 2012 is as low as 2.5 %. In 
such circumstances, action should have been initiated 
against the defaulting contractor according to contractual 
obligations. However, no such action has been taken. The 
contract is expected to be completed by December, 2013 Const.P.33/13  26
with a delay of 15 months as reported by Project Authorities. 
The planned execution period has expired in September, 
2012. However, the contract is being implemented without 
giving any extension .” 
The Package -10 was not included in PC -I but was part of the revised 
PC-I with allocation of Rs.500 million. However, no progress on the 
contract was reported by the Project Authorities.  
14.     With regard to heading “PERIPHERAL 
FACILITIES” it was mentioned in the report  of the Committee that as 
per arrangement CAA was to provide funds for the development of its 
own resources within the boundary of the new airport while the Prime 
Minister had directed to provide funds from the PSDP for infrastructure 
development works to make the Project fully functional.  
In the end the Inquiry Committee under the heading 
“CONCLUSIONS” gave its findings, relevant therefrom are 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
1. While undertaking the comprehensive study of the project 
NBBIA, a clear picture has emer ged which is indicative of 
the fact that the project has been beset from inception to 
its present stage by numerous issues and problems 
basically generated due to inappropriate planning of this 
mega airport project, which was followed by an inefficient 
implementation strategy.  
 
2. It is worth mentioning that in the development of this 
scheme from its commencement to the execution stage, 
the Planning and Development Department of the CAA 
had a pivotal role to play. However, this setup has not 
been able to perfo rm and deliver according to the dictates 
of the demand, which can be mainly attributed to its lack Const.P.33/13  27
of capacity and expertise, essentially required for a 
project of this magnitude.  
 
3. A clear cut vision was neither developed nor available, 
through preparation  of a road map based on critical path 
analysis of all major activities connected with the project. 
The CAA Board therefore was forced to take decisions at 
various stages of the project implementation on the basis 
of inaccurate assessment /analysis presente d. This led to 
addressing the emerging eventualities only and that too 
on a short term basis with its obvious implications.  
 
4. Ideally the overall project planning should have set out in 
detail as to how the Employers requirements are to be 
implemented. Howe ver, this deficiency in planning 
resulted in major implications in financial terms as well as 
in attaining the desired level of physical progress of 
various components. These are now summarized / 
concluded as follows;  
4.1 Feasibility Studies  
I. The first feas ibility study conducted in 1984 was meant to 
compare the merits of either to upgrade the existing airport at 
Chaklala or construct a new airport at Pind Ranjha. The report 
finally recommended the latter option and a master plan was 
prepared based on certai n projected figures for year 2000 just 
catering for basic components, with an indicated cost of Rs. 
1.267 billion. The final Master plan prepared in 2006 by M/S 
LBG, updated the data of the initial plan, however it missed 
out on certain essential details /  components. This aspect was 
also over looked by P&D Dept. of CAA during its scrutiny / 
process of approval.  
II. Thus the original PC -I prepared on the basis of the final Master 
plan lacked clarity, realistic costing and missing out of certain 
essential compon ents. It can be concluded that PMC failed in 
its responsibility to prepare a comprehensive PC -I for the 
project. R&D Dept. of CAA is equally responsible for this Const.P.33/13  28
negligence as it too failed in addressing the above mentioned 
weaknesses during the process of  scrutiny/vetting of the PC -I. 
4.2 Land Procurement  
i. Acquisition of land was started in 1986 through 2008 and 
3,287 acres of land was purchased against requirement of 
3,155 acres recommended in the Master plan, with an average 
cost of Rs. 277,037 per acre, which is 22 times higher than the 
cost estimated in feasibility study of 1984. The prolongation of 
the process of procurement has not only led to substantial cost 
escalation but has also effected the process of planning / 
execution, where in certain essent ial portions of land like the 
access to the airport for construction activities were not 
procured.  
 
ii. No serious effort appears to have been made to clear / take 
possession of left over embedded areas in the acquired land; 
where reportedly over 80 persons ar e still residing, with 
obvious security implications.  
 
iii. Due to lack of comprehensive assessment undertaken initially 
and because of certain arbitrary decisions taken for altering 
the scope of work during the currency of the project, the 
available land is co nsidered now insufficient by the project 
authorities for housing the projected commercial facilities and 
construction of the second runway to cater for future 
operational requirements. The additional requirement of land 
as indicated is about 1500 Acres.  
 
iv. This is a reflection of poor planning by the PMC, superimposed 
by lack of correct assessment and scrutiny by the P&D dept. of 
CAA. 
 
4.3 Role of PMC, Design Consultants, PMU and CAA  Const.P.33/13  29
i. The Project Management Consultants comprising M/s Louis 
Berger Group of USA and ECIL were engaged in Dec 2005 by 
CAA, through a proper process of prequalification. The quoted 
cost of Rs. 351.8 million the PMC was later enhanced to Rs. 
374 million at the signing of the contract, on the plea that PMC 
will have a panel of 3 internati onal experts in their group. The 
period of PMC's contract ended in Feb 2011, which was 
renewed in Nov 2011 with retrospect effect having extended 
date of June 2014. The decisions given by the PMC during the 
intervening period have no legal cover, though it  has been 
covered by the retrospect effect approval.  
 
ii. The services of ECIL were not dispensed with in the renewed 
contract based on their substandard performance instead their 
role was relegated to that of a sleeping partner by LBG (PMC). 
However, no legal  action was initiated against the PMC, which 
reportedly was responsible for causing enormous delays 
besides not providing the desired services since 2010. M/s LBG 
was facilitated / allowed to associate with NESPAK, with no 
punitive action taken against the  PMC for non performance. 
The responsibility solely lies on the PD and P&D Dept. of CAA.  
 
 
iii. Placing NESPAK in the Project Management Group, when the 
same firm was also involved as a design consultant is a 
fundamental violation of the internationally approve d 
principles of project execution. Though in certain works the 
design and supervision can be entrusted to one firm, but it is 
only done at the initiation of the works. In the instant case 
induction of NESPAK during the currency of the project in the 
manage ment position has led to numerous problems including 
prolongation in the contracts period.  
 
iv. There have been repeated complaints about the delays in 
submission of designs by M/s CPG (Singapore) and M/s ADPi 
which has been a major source of delays in executi on of all Const.P.33/13  30
packages. However, CAA has been unable to provide the 
record pertaining to the actual dates of submission of designs 
so that the delays can be translated into authentic information 
causing loss to the public exchequer. However, the aspect 
about f requent changes ordered by the CAA at various stages 
of the project implementation has also contributed towards 
delay in timely submission of designs/drawings. As per the 
latest state obtained almost 95% design work has been 
completed.  
 
v. M/S Louis Berger Gr oup of USA as the lead partner in the 
PMC/JV was required to place 16 experts (all expatriates) — 
Refer. Annex VII in various fields, beside the locally hired 
engineers / staff, for the purpose of management. However, 
as per the actual deployment, the pres ence of the expatriates 
has been minimum, for instance in Dec 2010 , the number 
was Expatriates 2 , local 27, NESPAK 23, May 2011, 
Expatriate 1, local 50, NESPAK 22, Current, Expatriates 
4, local 70 . Thus the sole purpose of engaging M/s Louis 
Berger Group a s lead partner appears to have been defeated. 
No concrete action was initiated against the PMC/JV. 
Responsibility lies with the PD.  
 
vi. The splitting of this project into 17 different packages has 
been the main cause of delay in execution, cost over runs and 
interface problems between contractors. The PMC as per the 
“Minutes of Contract Negotiations” had clearly recommended 
the division of work into two/three main contracts, however 
subsequently CAA accorded approvals for awarding different 
packages separately . The stance taken by CAA, that this too 
was done on advice of PMC, does not hold ground as they 
(PMC) only endorsed the decisions taken by the client. The 
main reason for splitting the works is due to delay in timely 
provision of designs and the urge to s how progress on ground. 
This has led to mismanagement of the project, for which the 
P&D dept of CAA and PD are to be blamed.  
 Const.P.33/13  31
vii. The provision of Flexible Pavement for the runways instead of 
a Rigid Pavement is an issue that was discussed in the 7th 
meeting o f the CAA DWP held on 19 March 2008, where in it 
was directed that the provision of “Rigid pavement instead of 
Flexible pavement should be examined and cost estimated 
accordingly”. However, no response has been furnished by the 
project authorities as to wh y the Designer went ahead with 
designing of flexible pavements, despite the merits of a rigid 
pavement over a flexible pavement in terms of the very high 
cost of maintenance for provision of overlays after every 10 
years for a flexible pavement.  
viii. As per the  prevailing practice of FIDIC or PEC based contracts 
the bills of the contractors for actual work done are verified by 
the Consultants before payment. However, in case of claims, 
these are first referred to project authorities for their views 
and clearance  and are then verified by the Consultant / 
Engineer (PMC in this case) for allowing payments. The 
insertion of sub clause (e) under the heading certificates and 
payments clause 60.1, in all ongoing contracts, has accrued 
the benefit to the contractors to l odge claims directly to the 
PMC. The consultant/Engineer PMC has been vetting/ 
recommending these payments ON ACCOUNT which made it 
mandatory for the client to allow payments for claims.  
 
ix. The major beneficiary on this account has been the JV (Logan 
-Tech-Habib), who has already received payment worth over 
Rs. 4.0 billion, with verified claims of Rs. 0.5 billion lying 
pending for payment. Over and above these, claims worth 
over Rs. 5.0 billion are pending with the PMC. This is a major 
drain on the project, a nd existence of this provision in the 
contract is an indirect enticement to the contractors to prolong 
the execution period to generate claims. This practice has 
been discontinued in the recently awarded work (one contract 
only) through appropriate structu ring of contract document. 
However, all ongoing contracts have this provision with huge 
financial implications. This needs to be addressed through 
mutual consultations / negotiations with the contractors, as 
there is no clear cut legal remedy available. Th is is a very Const.P.33/13  32
serious lapse on part of the P&D dept of CAA which without 
due deliberations concluded these contracts.  
 
x. Arbitrary decisions taken by the client at various stages of the 
project has led to not only major cost escalations, but has also 
indirect ly affected the scheduled working of the overall design 
process. This has further delayed the process of award of 
contracts and execution of work. Various committees / over 
sight bodies constituted at different stages gave 
recommendations for major changes  in the scope of the 
project, which were then approved by the CAA Board. The 
Board obviously cannot be blamed as it was not a technical 
forum to deliberate / discuss such matters in the absence of 
detailed technical studies. Some of these issues are indica ted 
as under:  
a) The change in the scope of the terminal building (PTB) in utter 
disregard to the planning parameters of the Master Plan / 
feasibility study (2006) initially designed to cater for 6.5 mppa, 
for midterm period up to 2020 was enhanced to 9 mppa,  which 
was the ultimate figure for third phase of development up to 
year 2035. This excess space created on the completion of PTB, 
will most likely remain under utilized, though it has caused 
major design changes, delay in execution and enormous cost 
increase. 
 
b) Under the package 01 the contract was awarded for construction 
of one Main Runway, Parallel taxiway and link taxiways to cater 
for the needs of air traffic load of 2020, as per the approved 
Master Plan of NBBIAP. It was also decided that the parallel  
taxiway could also be used for an emergency landing if the 
situation so arose. Subsequently the parallel taxiway was 
converted into a full fledged secondary runway by the CAA on 
the recommendations of the Steering Committee which held its 
meeting in Dec 2 010 and accordingly its Specifications were 
modified. The accumulated financial effect for this major change 
is around Rs. 3.4 Billion. It is pertinent to mention that due to Const.P.33/13  33
distance of 230 meters instead of 1030 meters between the two 
runways, simultaneo us flight operations cannot be undertaken.  
 
c) These changes made during construction of Airside pavements 
have further generated the requirement of a 3rd runway for 
future operations, with cost effect of Rs 8 -10 Billion including 
parallel Taxiway but exclusi ve of cost of land. Another serious 
issue is regarding provision of lighting system for the, 
Secondary runway. As at night only one runway can be used for 
operations because of the absence of appropriate lightening 
system for taxi operations. Other propose d option given by CAA 
is to add link Taxiway for the landing aircrafts to go all the way 
to the end of the runway.  
 
d) The Airside Infrastructure contract was awarded in August 2008 
to M/s Lagan -Husnain JV at a cost of Rs. 11,825 million. The 
progress of this  package till January, 2010 stood at only 7 -9% 
against the planned progress of 65%, primary reason being 
internal rift between the JV partners. Termination Notice was 
issued to the JV by the project authorities on instructions of M/o 
Defence. In sharp cont rast to the contractual obligations 
requiring termination due to default/imposition of penalties and 
re-award of a new contract, the CAA on the recommendations of 
a Committee under the chairmanship of Joint Secretary Admn. 
M/o Defence allowed formation of a new JV (Lagan 60% TAPL 
35% and Habib 5%) with exclusion/addition of partners to 
implement the contract on the same terms & conditions.  
Though provided in the above mentioned contract of JV to 
change its composition but only in  the event of normal 
perform ance by the JV. However, in this case the JV was at a 
default stage,  and the only course available was to 
terminate the contract. Despite recommendations of the  PMC 
for termination of the contract, undue favor was given to the 
new JV by taking all the  responsibilities of delays by the 
Project Management, which has  accrued the right of claiming 
idle charges by the new JV. This has already resulted into 
payment of charges/claims of Rs. 3.5  billion till to date to the Const.P.33/13  34
new JV, with Rs 0.5 Billion claims vet ted and pending and 
another Rs 5.0  Billion claims already lodged. This has 
resulted in to not only enormous increase in the contract  value 
but also has caused expected 30 months delay in the contract 
implementation.  
xi. There have been frequent changes of th e Project Director i.e. 
Five Project Directors have worked during the period 2006 - till 
date 2012, which has adversely affected the progress and 
management of the project as a whole. The bifurcation of the 
project in to numerous packages entailed proper s taffing of the 
PMU, with experienced and technically sound engineers who 
could oversee and coordinate the various activities with 
contractors and the PMC. This however has remained a weak 
link. There has been some improvement in the physical 
progress of th e project during last six to seven months, 
however, there is an urgent need to further restructure and 
strengthen the PMU, besides delegation of appropriate 
authority to the PD for facilitating site decisions.  
 
The Committee also gave its recommendations,  relevant therefrom are 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“2. Way Forward  
viii. The CAA may take immediate action against the defaulting 
consultants / contractors while remaining within the 
contractual provisions, after due consultation with the legal 
and financial exper ts. Where required EOT (extension of time) 
be granted in the contracts for regularization of payments 
being made, while keeping the Client's interest in view.  
 
ix. The issue of contractor’s claims is a sensitive issue, which 
needs careful handling. The amount of over Rs. 3.5 Billion paid 
“On Account” to the JV (Logan - Tech - Habib), against claims 
has been made on recommendations of PMC (Engineer), based 
on provisional supporting record. PMC must be instructed to 
provide complete authenticated/verified record of these claims Const.P.33/13  35
as per contractual obligations, before recommending fresh 
claims of the JV. Future claims of other contractors must also 
be dealt with, in a similar manner.  
 
x. The development and functioning of the Fuel Farm may be 
accorded priority, CAA nee ds to pursue this aspect on a 
priority basis.  
 
xi. CAA should follow up with M/O Communication, NHA, CDA, 
IESCO and Planning Commission for expediting the progress of 
peripheral Road net work and Electric supply connection to 
NIBBAP.  
 
xii. In the context of const ruction of link road to NBBIAP, CAA has 
to provide assurance to NHA for timely operation of the airport 
failing which the Concessionaire (FWO) is to be compensated 
by NHA on the basis of projected revenue in case of delay in 
operation of the project.  
 
xiii. The feasibility studies for sub soil water exploration and 
construction of Dam to meet the long term needs be initiated 
immediately. CAA may finance these initiatives to save on 
time.  
 
xiv. An independence monitoring mechanism may be put in place 
under the DG CAA  with members from Planning Commission 
and MOD. The team should review the progress of the project 
against the revised execution plan prepared by the PMC on 
monthly basis. The team may also oversee the process of 
amicable settlement of contractor’s legitim ate claims and 
coordinate with various Government Agencies for expeditious 
development of peripheral facilities. The team leader should 
furnish progress reports to MOD and Planning Commission on 
regular basis.  Const.P.33/13  36
15.   It is important to note that until the institution of instant 
petition, report was not put forward for implementation, inasmuch as 
without prejudice to the case of either of the parties, it was also not 
made public. On 12.7.2013 National Accountability Bureau, Rawalpindi 
address ed a letter to t he Secretary CAA which instructed firstly that  
after filing the report on 06.07.2013 letter was addressed to the 
Cabinet Secretary by the NAB, in pursuance whereof the Secretary 
Aviation was required to immediately provide copy of the Report of the 
Inquiry  Committee to the NAB ; and secondly  that the competent 
authority has taken cognizance of t he offence committed by the 
officials/officers of CAA under the provision of NAO 1999 and was 
requested to direct the focal person to provide certified copies along 
with Inquiry Report .  
16.   The Auditor General of Pakistan also highlighted 
irregularities and illegalities in the payments made to the contractors. 
Relevant paras therefrom are  reproduced hereinbelow :- 
“3.4.5  Irregular payment due to unauthorized  
Change  of Joint Venture - Rs.7,811.23 million  
 Rule 19(iv) of General Financial Rules (Vol -I) provides 
that the terms of a contract once entered into shall not be 
materially varied without the previous consent of the Authority 
competent to enter into the contract  as so varied. No payment 
to contractor by way of compensation or otherwise, outside the 
strict terms of the contract or in excess of the contract rates 
may be authorized without the previous approval of the Ministry 
of Finance.  Const.P.33/13  37
During audit it was found t hat an Agreement for Package -
I airside Infrastructure (Civil Works), of the project Construction 
of New Benazir Bhutto International  Airport was signed between 
Civil Aviation Authority Limited and Joint Venture of M/s Lagan -
Husnain, comprising Lagan Constr uction Limited and Husnain 
Cote Ltd with Lagan Construction Ltd as lead partner on July 24, 
2008 with bid cost of Rs 11,825.30 million with completion 
period upt o August 27, 2010.  
Audit further found that the ibid Joint Venture with whom 
the agreement was executed, was changed from Lagan -Husnain 
to Lagan -Technical -Habib in January 2010 during the course of 
execution of works. Audit holds that sanctity of bidding was 
completely compromised and the work was awarded to the new 
Joint Venture without calling for  open tenders. Deed of 
Accession was signed by the Project Director whereas, original 
agreement was signed by the Director General for and on behalf 
of CAA. The Joint Venture change was signed by the Project 
Director (BBIAP) without authority and provision  of clause in the 
agreement. It was also noted by Audit that M/s Lagan (the lead 
partner) has not fully mobilized on the Project and the Project 
was being solely executed by M/s Technical Habib in violation of 
contractual parity of 60:40. thus payments of Rs 7,811.23 
million made to Lagan -Technical -Habib (JV) through 
unauthorized change, stand irregular.  
 Audit maintains that the irregularity occ urred due to 
inadequate oversigh t mechanism for enfor cing relevant rules, 
regulations and weak internal controls .  Const.P.33/13  38
 Audit communicated the observation to the Authority in 
September 2012. The Authority replied that the change in the 
constitution of the Joint Venture was duly approved by CAA 
Board. The change in the constitution of the JV wherein the lead 
partner join ed hand with M/S Technical Associates Pakistan 
(Pvt.) Ltd. and M/S Habib Construction Ser vices (Pvt .) Ltd, to 
assume all the contractual obligations under the existing 
contract without any amendments, was duly approved by the 
authorized representative of t he Employer i.e. the Project 
Director. The reply was not tenable because change of Joint 
Venture was without reference to any provision in the contract 
agreement. The registration of Lagan -Husnain Joint Venture was 
for the mega project which was ultimately  terminated when the 
composition of the Joint Venture was changed.  
 The matter was discussed in the DAC meeting held on 
December 17 -18, 2012. The Committee directed the CAA to 
conduct a Board of Inquiry. The Committee further directed the 
CAA to stop furt her payments and submit revised reply within 7 
days. The compliance of DAC’s directives was not reported till 
finalization of this Report.  
Audit requires implementation of DAC’s directives.  
3.4.6 Invalid Engineer’s decision involving 
Rs.3,552.30 million a nd overpayment 
Rs.1,556.46 million  
Feder ation International Des Ingenious  Conseils (FIDIC) Policy 
Statement describes that during the course of construction, the 
consulting engineering firm was charged with the responsibility 
of exercising discretion in ac cepting materials, expressing 
satisfaction or approval, determining quantities and givi ng 
opinion, consent or decision. The proper and impartial exercise Const.P.33/13  39
of that responsibility in the client’s best interests was at the core 
of the consulting firm’s role an d was the essence of the FIDIC 
System.  
 During audit it was found that CAA (Project Director New 
Benazir Bhutto International Airport, Islamabad) accepted 
adverse E ngineer’s Decisions involving a  sum of Rs.3, 552.30 
million in respect of Package -I; Airside Infrastructure in favour 
of the contractor M/s Lagan -Technical -Husnain, JV against which 
a sum of Rs.1,556.47 million was paid to the contractor in 
settlement of dispute under “The Engineer” decisions No.1 to 
10. It was also noted that payments were made p rior to 
approval of the Dispute Review Board. After making the 
payments the Authority applied to the Dispute Review Board. It 
was further noted that after award, the k ey officials i.e. 
Construction M anager and Construction Control Specialist were 
changed w ithout authorization/approval of the Client.  
 Audit also observed that Interim Payment 
Certificates/decisions were signed by the representative 
of the Engineer, without any delegations and/or authority 
by the Engineer  or the client. It was further noted th at 
the Project Manager also left the project after certifying 
the unjustified claims which were decided in an 
unauthorized manner. Mr. James McClung signed the 
decisions s “The Engineer’ without authorization from 
Louis Berger Group and without any authori ty from the 
Employer to act as “The Engineer’. The decisions 
regarding claims/extension of Time  were made by the 
consultants without consultation and approval of the 
client. IPCs were signed without any supporting data, Const.P.33/13  40
back-up details, certification, endo rsement and 
calculations of the amount of the claims. It was further 
observed that to cover up human resource gap, CAA 
entered into an extra -contractual arrangement with 
another firm. In March 2010, a firm was engaged by CAA 
in the Project Management team in place of the previous 
firm (a Joint venture firm with M/s Louis Berger) as per 
decision of the Monitoring Committee NBBIA on March 16, 
2010. As per invoice No.19, a monthly remuneration of 
Rs.173.29 million was paid to the firm from April, 2010 to 
Novem ber 2011. Simultaneously, M/s Louis Berger was 
also paid for the local component (ex -firm portion). The 
payment mad e to the firm was for Rs.33.00 million. Audit 
holds that due to complete management failure, invalid 
decisions and change in the positions of  key personnel 
without provision in the contract, resulted in irregular  
expenditure of Rs.1,556.47 million.  
Audit maintains that the irregularities occurred due to 
inadequate oversight  mechanism for enforcing  relevant rules, 
regulations and weak internal controls.  
 Audit communicated the observation to the Authority in 
September 2012. The Authority replied that the matter was 
already being contested in the Dispute Review Board.  
The matter was discussed in the DAC meeting held on 
December 17 -18, 2012, whe rein the Committee observed that 
invoices were signed by the person who was not “The Engineer” 
and made decisions against the interest of the project/Authority. 
The Committee directed to conduct a Board of Inquiry. The Const.P.33/13  41
Committee further directed to stop fu rther payments and submit 
revised reply within 7 days.  No compliance of DAC directives 
was reported till finalization of this Report.  
Audit requires implementation of DAC’s directives.  
17.   This Court vide order dated 9.7.2013 also issued notices to 
the counsel appearing for CAA as well as Contractors to file their 
reaction both on the report of Lt. General (R) Shahid Niaz as well as on 
the report of Auditor General of Pakistan.  
18.   Mr. Shahid Hamid, learned Sr. ASC appearing on behalf of 
Ch. Muhammad Muneer (Respondent No.4 ) has submitted reply (CMA 
4460/2013) stating therein that his client  is not the contractor of New 
Benazir Bhutto International Airport at Islamabad , therefore, notice 
issued to him ( respondent No.4 ) may be discharged/recalled.  
19.   Mr. Shah Khawar, learned Additional Attorney General for 
Pakistan submitted parawise reply to the petition through CMA 
No.4491/2013 wherein , inter alia  it was partially admitted that the 
cost on the construction of NBBIAP has escalated because of the 
corruption of higher echelons of the Administrative and political 
structures in -charge of the project. It has also been mentioned in his 
reply that the recommendations of the Inquiry Committee headed by 
Lt. General (R) Shahid Niaz has been partially implement ed and now 
the case has been referred to the NAB to investigate the matter for 
identification of the delinquent officers/officials.  
20.   M/s Sambu -Sachal -HRL (JV)  submitted its reaction (CMA 
4768/2013) to the Inquiry Report stating therein that there was  Const.P.33/13  42
nothing against it either by the Inquiry Report or by the Auditor 
General . M/s Sambu -Sachal submitted its bid for Package -3A for 
construction of Pile Caps for the Terminal Building, which was accepted 
by CAA being the lowest bid for Rs.470,815,404/ -. The project got 
delayed for five months due to some technical problems and 
extraordinary unprecedented rains in 2011, which was accepted and 
agreed by both the consultant and the employer i.e. CAA. The contract 
was completed within the contract cost and taking  over certificate was 
issued , thus,  the project stood contractually completed in all respects 
without any dispute.  
21.   Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of M/s Siemens Pakistan Engineering submitted CMA 4845/2013 
stating th erein as under: - 
i. This august Court, with reference to the proceedings in the 
titled petition has noted that (a) there has been delay in 
timely completion of NBBIA (b) as a consequence of the 
same, NBBIA’s cost has increased from PKR 35 Billion to over 
PKR 90 Billion; an overrun ostensibly due to corruption and 
(c) the DG (CAA) appointment is against the rules.  
ii. Pursuant to the aforesaid, the august Court has sought reply 
/comments’ in addition DG CAA was directed to serve notice 
on all contractors. The cont ractors present before the Court, 
on to submit their directors and shareholders passports with 
Court and also to submit undertaking that they will not travel 
outside Pakistan without the permission of the Court.  
iii. The aforesaid observations of the august Cou rt has been 
based on the conclusions drawn from (a) Report prepared by Const.P.33/13  43
General (R) Shahid Niaz and (b) the Auditor General of 
Pakistan. The Apex Court, has rep0roduced the “Conclusion” 
from the Report at serial “a” in its order dated 9.07.2013.  
iv. It is stat ed with respect that there does not exist any 
adverse comment/deliberation/observation with respect to 
Siemens Pakistan therein. The relevant portion of Report at 
serial number “a” is at pages 46, 47 and 55. The same relate 
to “Package -7A Airfield Lighting  System” [The major 
components: Laying of cabl es for airfield lighting, runway 
lighting, taxiway lighting, installation of runway lights, 
installation of taxiway lights, establishment of control desk, 
construction of vault station, installation of transfor mer 
housing etc.] and Package -8B- Electrical power and 
telecommunication [the major components: Road lighting, 
lying of MV and LV cables, substations, etc.]  
v. The narration of events and comments viz these Packages, 
are general in nature and do not impinge on the 
performance/status of Siemens Pakistan at NBBIA.  
vi. In fact a perusal of the Report and appreciation thereof 
shows that Siemens Pakistan, has been hampered from 
performing its job due to various factors; some of these, in 
brief, are mentioned herein un der: 
[“Package -7A Airfield Lighting System”]  
a) Conversion of Parallel taxiway was converted into full fledged 
secondary runway by CAA due to which our work stopped and 
on hold by CAA for approx 6 months hence adversely affected Const.P.33/13  44
our execution activities and o verall completion of the project. 
(Refer Report of Lt. Gen ® Shahid Niaz Page -66] 
b) Change in the Method of laying of UPVC pipes i.e. pipes will be 
fixed using the Conceret instead of Sand (Our Letter Ref. 
IS/INF/NBBIA/7A/HO/000010 dated December 10, 2009)  
c) Design Information Missing (Our Letter 
Ref.IS/INF/NBBIA/7A/HO/0030 dated March 17, 2010).  
d) Design Issues (Our Letter Ref.NBBIA -P7/Site -0088/Gen.001 
dated Sep, 02, 2010)  
e) Delay due to Inter -related activi ties with Package -1 Contractor 
(Our letter Ref.NBBA -P7/Site-0088/Gen.001 dated Sep, 02, 
2010) and Civil Aviation Authority – Caa Letter Ref. PD 
(BBIAP)/6280/52/Proj/ -327) 
f) Work Access Problem in different areas. [Refer Report of Lt. Gen  
(R) Shahid Niaz Page 69 (4.5, i)]  
g) Rework due to Damages done by civil contr actors to the laid 
UPVC Conduit & AFL cable.  
h) Variation Orders (200mm UPVC pipes, LED TWY and Guidance 
Signs, UPS 200KVA, collapsible apron lighting mast, CTBC, 
FM200, TWY K ext)  
i) Thef of AFL, LV and MV cable due to the airfield parameter not 
properly secure d by employer, hence resulting in causing losses 
to Siemens Pakistan despite the fact Siemens Pakistan at its 
own cost and expense increased the number of security 
personnel’s over and above which could have been reasonably 
forseen.  Const.P.33/13  45
[Package -8B – Electrica l power and telecommunication”]  
a) Design issues particularly utilization of energy efficient 
lights (CAA Letters Ref. PD (BBIAP)/6279/12/E&M -585 
dated Jan 17, 2011, PD(BBIAP)/6279/12/E&M -591 dated 
Jan 20, 2011, PD(BBIAP)/6279/12/E&M -739 dated Feb 
24, 2011, P D(BBIAP)/6279/12/E&M -99 dated Mar 10, 
2011 etc.)  
b) CAA initially asked to opt for LED Light fixture but after 
lapse of almost two years  they decided to go for 
conventional as per contract and then again changed its 
decision and decided to go for LED Light Fi xture.  
c) Delay due to the non availability of work schedule of Civil 
Contractor Package 1/8A.  
d) Work Access Problem in different acreas.  
vii. It is humbly submitted that a reference to Page 60 and para -3 of 
Gen (R) Shahid Niaz’s Report, shows that the delay has be en 
attributed to award of 132 KVA Grid Station and 132 KVA 
transmission lines; thus Siemens Pakistan cannot be held 
responsible for the delay in completion and commissioning of 
Project 7A and 8B as the same is dependent upon completion of 
132 KVA Grid Stat ion and 132 KVA transmission lines.  
viii. It is also submitted that despite all odds, referred to afore, 
Siemens Pakistan has already accomplished 85% of the works at 
Package -7A; the remaining is dependent on timely provision of 
“work access”. In case this is al so given as per schedule, the 
entire work can be accomplished on or before January 2014.  Const.P.33/13  46
ix. Similarly despite all odds, referred to afore, Siemens Pakistan 
has already accomplished 45% of the works at Package -8B: the 
remaining is dependent on timely provisio n of “work access” and 
“drawings”. In case these are also given as per schedule, the 
entire work can be accomplished on or before January 2014. 
Siemens Pakistan submitted an advance payment bank 
guarantee of PKR 300 Million to CAA against which CAA only 
disbursed advance of PKR 150 Million. It is noted here that 
Siemens Pakistan has performed 100% of the work against the 
advance payment of PKR 150 Million received from CAA.  
x. It is pertinent to mention that Package 7A values approximately 
PKR 1 Billion and Pa ckage 8B values approximately PKR 2 Billion; 
these are minor part of the entire Project and the nature of the 
work with Siemens Pakistan, by itself, could not delay other 
contractors at NBBIA.  
Indeed claims/payments of Siemens Pakistan have been delayed 
and pending; despite the same, notwithstanding difficulties, 
Siemens Pakistan has accomplished substantial performance.  
22.   Mr. Ali Raza, ASC has filed concise statement (CMA 
4846/2013) on behalf of M/s China State Construction Engineering 
Corporation (C SCEC) in reply to the notice. It has been stated that 
CSCE is the lead partner of the Joint Venture with Frontier Works 
Organization (FWO) who bid for and was awarded the contract for 
Package 3 of the construction project of NBBIAP. Package 3 consists of 
construction of the Passenger Terminal Building including all associated 
utilities and electromechanical works etc. Initially the project was 
divided in two packages which later on sub -divided into more than 14 Const.P.33/13  47
different packages. It has been admitted that completion of the Project 
is delayed and expected to be concluded by March 2014 as per 
estimates of CSCEC -FWO JV. However, in response to Inquiry 
Committee Report and Auditor General’s Report it has been stated that 
no specific observations have been made against the Company . 
However, general findings of the Inquiry Report are pertinent. In 
principle , the Inquiry Report has aptly highlighted the failure of the 
employer (CAA) and the project management consultants. In any 
large-scale project of this nature t he international practice is to ensure 
a central and singular project consultant/engineer and similarly a 
singular project design consultant with the con structi on of the project 
preferably divided into as few packages as possible to ensure 
coordination and avoid conflicts and roadblocks which would 
necessarily arise on account of delay of work by any one contractor. 
This is one of the principal practices lacking in the NBBIAP and the 
cause of majority of the problems. It has been further submitted that 
CSCE C was initially informed that only 10% of the Site would be 
handed over by the end of June 2011 but the first portion of the Site 
was handed over in July 2011 and the remaining portions of the Site 
was handed over in bits and pieces over the next year and portions of 
the Site still remain to be handed  over to Company.  
23.  Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari, learned counsel for M/s Louis 
Berger Group ( Respondent No.5 , hereinafter referred to as “LBG” ) in 
his reply (CMA 48 47/2013) stated that LBG’s consultancy serv ices 
were engaged for  project management after its proposals, both 
technical and financial, were considered by the Prequalification 
Committee (“PQC ”) constituted by the CAA, to be of the highest Const.P.33/13  48
standard of the six firms which submitted proposals.  Accordin g to him, 
it is acknowledged in the Inquiry  Report (at pages 20 and 21) that 
LBG’s appointment was made through a lengthy procedure which 
complied with the requirements of due process, and did not suffer 
from any lack of transparency. On 06.01.2006, LBG, i n association 
with Engineering Consultants International (Pvt.) Limited (“ECIL”), was 
formally engaged by the CAA as a Consultant for the Project 
Management, through a contract executed between the parties (the 
“Consultancy Contract”).   
24.  The learned co unsel also submitted t hat many of the 
observations made in the Inquiry  Report stem from misconceptions as 
to the actual scope of LBG’s duties under the Consultancy Contract in 
relation to the Project. Therefore, it is important to dispel any 
misinformation  on these matters at the offing, and also provide the 
context in which LBG's response to specific allegations (contained 
hereinbelow) may be read and understood.  LBG was not engaged to 
do the work of a Project Manager, in the fullest sense of the word, an 
erroneous presumption from which many of the allegations against 
LBG stem. LBG’s role was to provide certain consultancy services in 
relation to project management, and this envisaged the coordination of 
the overall Project, not de facto project management . It was submitted 
that though LBG provides such services across the globe in various 
projects, but its appointment for the Project did not include design 
consulting. Furthermore, LBG did not have the authority to control the 
Contractors, and was required to obtain the prior approval of CAA 
before exercising many of its powers and discharging many of its 
functions. LBG's role was that of a consultant/advisor to CAA , and the Const.P.33/13  49
final decision in most matters rested with CAA. Therefore, LBG cannot 
be blamed or h eld liable for the deficiencies of the Design Consultants 
and their designs, or for actions (or the lack thereof) taken by them or 
the Contractors under the directions of CAA.   
25.   According to the learned counsel, LBG as the consultant to 
CAA under the Consultancy Contract, and as the Engineer under the 
Construction Contracts with the Project Contractors, had a duality of 
role. As an advisor to CAA, LBG carried out certain acts on behalf of 
CAA, for example giving instructions to Contractors as to variat ions in 
works. At the same time, however, LBG owes a duty of care to the 
Contractors to administer their contracts in accordance with their true 
intent and purpose.  This duality of role is underappreciated by both 
the Contractors and CAA, as well as in the  Inquiry  Report and the 
Audit Report, which is the cause of many misconceptions.  
26.  It was further submitted that LBG was dependant on CAA 
to provide it with the requisite funds, without which services could not 
be rendered. It was also in need of facil ities by way of offices, 
equipment, accommodation, and transportation to meet the demands 
of the job. CAA has failed to provide LBG with the funds and facilities 
which it was contractually bound to provide. It has been guilty of non -
payments, reduced payme nts, or delayed payments on some pretext 
or the other. It was further submitted that the significance of the role 
of the Design Consultants in all that has gone wrong with the Project 
cannot be overstressed, and it finds specific mention in a number of 
paragraphs of the Inquiry  Report.  The submission of designs took 
place over a protracted period and in a piecemeal fashion. The 
consequence of incomplete designs trickling in over an extended Const.P.33/13  50
period was for construction works to be split up into numerous smal ler 
packages (seventeen in all) and awarded to multiple contractors. This 
in turn has created a logistical and management nightmare for the 
Project. As admitted in the Inquiry  Report, LBG had advised CAA 
during the Consultancy Contract negotiations, to opt  for two (2) 
contract packages in order for work to commence earlier and to ensure 
a better end -product; one contract to cover the airfield, taxiways, 
utilities, water, drainage, fuel farm and lighting etc., and the second 
contract for the terminal and anc illary facilities. These design defects 
have often caused the Contractors' works to be unbuildable as 
tendered. CAA ought to have ensured the completion of all designs 
prior to the awarding of contracts for construction, political pressure to 
commence work  meant that such a course of action was not pursued.  
27.  It was further submitted that the Inquiry  Report 
acknowledges that it has been drafted in the light of incomplete 
information provided by only one of the stakeholders . Therefore, the 
reliance on in complete, one -sided information by the Inquiry 
Committee can hardly be considered to afford due process to the 
parties concerned. Further,  LBG was not associated with the inquiry in 
any capacity. Hence the principles of natural justice were not followed 
by the Inquiry Committee, and to the extent the Inquiry  Report makes 
any adverse findings or remarks, they cannot prejudice LBG's rights. 
The Inquiry  Report has given findings and reached conclusions which 
are based on misconceptions and incomplete facts. Therefore, the 
Inquiry  Report rightly shies away from assigning responsibility for the 
Project's failings. In a nutshell, the Inquiry  Report identifies the 
possible issues and problems which have afflicted the Project, but Const.P.33/13  51
essentially calls for a further pro be and inquiry on those matters. The 
Inquiry  Report acknowledges that the breaking up of the Project into 
seventeen packages flew in the face of established practices, and was 
contrary to the specific advice from LBG that the Project be executed 
through tw o contracts.   
28.  Mr. Mohammad Asad Rajput, ASC has filed reply on behalf 
of Frontier Works Organization (FWO) through CMA 4848/2013, 
wherein it has been stated that a Joint Venture Agreement was made 
between CSCEC with 70% share and FWO with 30% share. T hey were 
awarded the contract for package -3 i.e. Passenger Terminal Building 
(ETB) Superstructure including Associated Utilities and E & M Works. 
After acceptance of Bid, the Civil Aviation Authority issued letter of 
acceptance on 20.04.2011 and agreement for the work was signed on 
06.06.2011 whereas letter of commencement was issued by the 
Project Manager M/s LBG on 08.06.2011, as such S ite for construction 
of Package -3 was handed over to FWO (JV) on 10.01. It has been 
stated in the reply/comments that the  Inquiry Report is an in depth 
analysis of the affairs of the BBIA Project as a whole.  
29.   Khawaja Haris Ahmed, learned  Senior  ASC has filed 
concise statements (CMA 4859/2013 and CMA 4860/2013) on behalf 
of M/s Lagan T echnical Habib JV  (LTH) in response  to the Audit Report 
and Inquiry Report respectively. According to him, i n Para 3.4.5 of the 
Audit Report it was found that the agreement was signed between CAA 
and Joint Venture of M/s Lagan -Husnain with bid cost of Rs.11,825.30 
million but during course of execution of works Joint Venture was 
changed from Lagan -Husnain to Lagan -Technical -Habib ., Thus, Const.P.33/13  52
sanctity of bidding was completely compromised. In this context, it has 
been averred that consent of the Employer (CAA) was duly obtained to 
the proposed ch ange in the structure of the joint venture, in line with 
the provision contained in sub -clause 77.1 of the Particular Conditions 
of Contract. As such neither sanctity of the bidding was in any manner 
compromised nor was there any occasion for calling for o pen tenders 
simply because of composition of the JV was being allowed to be 
changed. With regard to the Audit Report that “Deed of Accession was 
signed by the Project Director whereas, original agreement was signed 
by the Director General for and on behalf  of CAA”, it has been 
submitted that same individual who has signed the Deed of Accession 
in terms of the instant contract had also signed (i) Letter of 
Accepta nce for Package I and (ii) Letter of Acceptance and Contract for 
Package 8A. In any case, at no stage did the CAA intimate to the 
Contractor that the Project Director was not authorized to sign the 
Deed of Accession. As far as the mobilization is concerned, M/s Lagan 
is providing inter alia construction management advice, construction 
planning, its e xpertise in the implementation  of the contract, key 
personnel for carrying out the monitoring of the construction at site, 
such as Project manager, Planni ng Engineer, Technical Manager and 
other staff besides exclusively contributing towards Performance 
Guarantee in the sum of Rs.1.182 Billion.  
30.   Regarding paragraph 3.4.6. (Invalid engineers’ decisions 
involving Rs.3,5552.30 million and overpayment Rs.1,556.46 million) 
it has been submitted by the learned counsel that Contractor 
submitted his monthly b ills for interim payment which comprised of 
two sections, i.e. (i) work done (ii) additional sums due regarding Const.P.33/13  53
which Engineer’s decision/Dispute Review Board determination had 
already been rendered in favour of the contractor but payment had not 
been made  pursuant thereto. So far as the allegation of making 
payment p rior to the approval of the DRB is concerned, reference of 
sub-clause 67.1 of the Particular Conditions of the Contract has been 
given. Relevant part whereof reads as under: - 
….the Contractor a nd the Employer shall give effect 
forthwith to every such decision of the engineer unless and 
until the same shall be revised, as hereinafter provided in 
the Dispute Review Board or in an amicable settl ement or 
in an arbitral award.”  
31.   As regards the change of key staff of the Consultant it has 
been submitted that this matter pertains to CAA and the Constultant 
has no concern with the Contractor. Besides, the representative of the 
Engineer had sent to the Contractor a copy of his letter dated 27th 
August, 2008 containing confirmation of the delegation of authority by 
the Engineer to the Engineer’ s concerned representative. It has been 
submitted in respect of overpayment that no overpayment to the 
Contractor has been made and the contract requirements fo r the 
release of all payments were duly followed by the Engineer, while 
payment i tself was ultimately made on the recommendation made by 
the Committee set up by the CAA itself.  
32.   In response to Inquiry Report by Lt. Gen. (R) Shahid Niaz, 
it has been s ubmitted that as per the applicable provisions pertaining 
to both FIDIC and PEC based contract the procedure for processing the 
claims of the Contractor before payment is the same as the procedure 
for processing the claims of the Contractor before the paym ent is the Const.P.33/13  54
same as the procedure for processing the bills of the contractors for 
actual works done.  As regards the observation given in the Report 
that a “Termination Notice” was issued to the Contractor on directions 
of the Ministry of Defence, it has be en submitted that no such 
Termination Notice was ever communicated to the Contractor, and 
even as per the contents of the Report, no copy of any such notice was 
provided to the Inquiry Committee. It has been admitted that the 
progress of this package was v ery slow until January  2010. However it 
was due to the failure of the Engineer/Employer to perform their 
reciprocal promises under the contract. It was further admitted that 
the change in the designation of the emergency runway to secondary 
runway caused m ajor design changes in the Air Field Lighting Design, 
which caused major delays to the Works under Package -I. In his reply, 
Khawaja Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC has referred to following findings: - 
1. As far as delay in the completion of the Works under the 
contract is concerned, it is submitted that the new JV is in 
no way responsible for the said delay.  
2. So far as the factors contributing to increased completion 
cost over contract price are concer, the same are replied 
seriatim hereunder:  
i. The Contractor is in no way responsible for the 
additional cost of Rs.1.5 Billion due to 
conversion/intended use of a parallel taxiway into 
secondary runway.  
ii. The change in scope of Works is not attributable 
to the Contractor. As regards the claims of the 
Contractor, the same can be l egitimately raised 
under the terms of the contract which are in 
accord with international standards as as per 
FIDIC and PEC requirements. It may be reiterated 
here that such claims are not paid automatically, Const.P.33/13  55
rather they are paid only after 
determination/d ecision and certification by the 
Engineer and in case of dispute, the matter is 
referred to the DRB (Dispute Review Board) and, 
thereafter, to arbitration in case amicable 
settlement cannot be affected. It is also 
absolutely incorrect to allege that the contractual  
obligations required the employer to go for 
termination due to default (of the Contractor) or 
for imposition of penalties and re -award of a new 
contract The fact of the matter is that there is no 
provision in the contract that mandates the 
termin ation of the contract, imposition of 
penalties or re -ward of new contract in case of 
concurrent delays i.e. delays attributable to both 
the Contractor and the Engineer/employer. Nor 
has nay such provision of the contract been cited 
in the Report in referen ce. In any case, even 
where the default is attributable to the 
Contractor, it is the prerogative of the Employer 
to decide whether the contract should be 
terminated or not. In this respect it is noteworthy 
that termination of a contract of this size and 
magnitude is not a straight forward affairs, 
particularly when the Employer is itself guilty of 
serious defaults in the  performance of its various 
reciprocal  obligations  which had materially 
contributed to the lack of progress in the 
implementation of the Wo rks. Indeed, termination 
of the contract by the Employer in the prevailing 
circumstances would have had serious 
repercussions in terms of increase in the cost of 
the project itself as monumental time an d cost 
overruns would have ensued……  
iii. The finding that P MC should have imposed 
penalty on the LTH -JV for the expected 30 
months delay in completion period of the project 
is utterly misconceived, as there is no justification 
for the imposition of such a penalty ascertainable Const.P.33/13  56
from the record. Rather to impose thi s penalty 
would be unfair, iniquitous and breach of contract 
by the Employer.  
iv. This finding does not attribute any adverse 
comment on the working of the Contractor.  
v. It is correct that initially the contractual 
completion date was Au gust 2010 but the 
physic al progress up to September 2012 was 
82.45%. However, it is reiterated that the 
primary cause for this delay was not due to the 
Contractor rather it was on account fo the failure 
of the Engineer/Employer to perform their part of 
the contrct. Rather it was due to non -fulfilment of 
obligations on their part Engineer/Employer. Be 
that as it may, it is not correct that the 
contractual execution period is being 
implemented without issuance of any extension 
letter to the Contractor. In this respect it is 
submitte d that although the project authorities 
has that the contract project was tobe completed 
in February 2013, this was an advice based on 
unrealistic premises and was clearly incorrect. In 
fact, the Engineer/Employer could not perform 
their obligations under the contract which was a 
precondition for the Contractor to complete his 
Works accordingly the Contractor had submitted 
extension of time entitlement details under letter 
ref No.1737, dated 17th December 2012 
demonstrating entitlement up to 8th June, while  a 
further submission was made on 9th May 2013 in 
letter Ref No. 1969 demonstrating extension of 
time entitlement up to 14th November 2014. 
Accordingly, extension of time was awarded in 
Engineer’s decision 16 by letter dated 10th 
January 2013 up to 23 Apri l 2013 and, 
subsequently, by letter dated 5 April 2013 up to 
30th June 2013.)”  Const.P.33/13  57
33.   Barrister Syed Ali Zafar, ASC has submitted reply (CMA 
4866/2013) on behalf of Habib Construction  Service Ltd. (HCS)  stating 
therein that HCS was invited to substitute Hus nain, thus new Joint 
Venture was made as Lagan -Technical -Habib, with the consent of CAA.  
This consent was duly obtained from CAA who approved the deed  of 
accession dated 28.01.2010. About 95% of the contracted works on 
NBBIA  Package -I have been completed. All billing/accounting details 
are with LTH JV. However, HCS is awar e that 10% retention money 
from each Interim Payment Certificate (IPC ) remains with CAA. 
Balance 5% work is held up because of failure of other contractors to 
complete their work.  
34.   Concise statement (CMA 4867/2013) has been filed on 
behalf of Technical Associates by Miangul Hassan Aurangzeb, ASC 
stating therein that during the last quarter of 2009, when the works on 
the said contract  were underway, TAPL was approached by M/S Lagan 
Construction Limited to form a joint venture for the execution  of the 
remaining works on the said Contract . Lagan had also approached M/S 
Habib Construction Services (Pvt). to become a part of the joi nt 
venture with Lagan and TAPL, as earlier Joint Venture Ag reement 
dated 02.04.2008 executed between Lagan and M/s Husnain Cont ex 
Limited was terminated. However, M/s Lagan was appointed as leader 
of the LTH -JV with the responsibility to act as coordinator of the 
members of the LTH -JV’s combined activities for the  successful 
implementation of the Contract. Lagan was required to represent the 
LTH-JV in interaction and communications with CAA in all matters 
connected with the performance of the Contract.  Const.P.33/13  58
35.   Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC has filed reaction of M/s Al -
Tariq Construction stating  therein,  inter alia , that the “Hy drant 
Refueling System Contract ” was awarded in February, 2010 at a 
contract price of Rs.187.238 million. Mobilization advance was 15% of 
the contract price, which has already been adjusted from t he running 
bills. ATL has achieved 95% of the assigned work. Opening of LC for 
import of various items material was an obligation of the client. After 
conducting several meetings with Engineering Development Board 
(EDB), Board of Investment (BOI) and the C entral Boar d of Revenue 
(CBR) , relief was allowed by the concerned departments, which 
process took 3 months. Besides, some other reasons have been 
assigned for delay in completion of the work i.e. delay in approval of 
fuel pipeline materials and opening of  L.C., delayed decision in revision 
of design , delay in establishment of L.C. for other items, 
hindrance /delay in handing over of Site by other contractions , 
unforeseen site conditions , harsh weather condition and unusual 
torrential  rains, etc.  
36.   Mr. Shahid Kamal Khan, ASC has filed concise statement 
(CMA 4905/2013) on behalf of M/S Xinjiang Beixin Road and Bridge 
Constr uction Company Ltd stating therein that 55% of the construction 
work has been received by the Company up to 18.55% only o f the 
contrac t value. According to them work has been  delayed due to 
following reasons: - 
(i) Delay in approvals of shop drawings, material 
submittals & decision by consultant 
(Engineer)/Employer.  Const.P.33/13  59
(ii) Delay in approval of variations to the contract 
by Engineer/Employer.  
(iii) Miscell aneous delay and obstruction to works 
by Engineer.  
(iv) Delay in approval of extension in completion 
time.  
(v) Obstruction in work due to other cont ractors.  
37.  Mr. Babar Ali, ASC has filed CMA No .4940/2013 in 
compliance of the order dated 12.07.2013 stating that  Izhar Steel 
(Pvt) Ltd. has already completed the work a s against the agreement 
dated 13 .11.2012 for the construction of Cargo Complex and allied 
areas worth of Rs.650 million on March 2013 and has submitted an 
application to the CAA for the issuance of co mpletion certificate vide 
letter dated 25.03.2013. Thus, neither the CAA n or any other person 
from the public  at large ha s any grievance at all in respect of M/s Izhar 
Steel (Pvt) Ltd. or to contractual assignment thereof.  
38.  Sysd Ishtiaq Haider, ASC ha s submitted Concise Statement 
(CMA 4965/2013) on behalf of M/s Jaffer Brother, M/s GECI Espanola 
& M/s Murshid Builders (JGM) stating therein that a contract was 
signed on 10.12.2012 between JGM and CAA for Package -7B relating 
to supply and installation of  “Navigational Aids & Air Traffic Control 
Equipment ” for NBBIAP. The construction of the Air Traffic Control 
Tower (ATC) and the Radio & Radar Building is yet to be completed 
where the equipments which are being supplied by JGM under Package 
7B are to be i nstalled. The JGM approached CAA vide letter 
No.NBBIAP/P -7B-L054/06 -11/2013 dated 13.06.2013 on the subject of 
delays being faced by JGM JV with regard to slow pace of System Const.P.33/13  60
Design Document (SDD) approval and non -completion of 
infrastructure. JGM has plac ed the orders for the supply of the 
equipment but the same will be supplied only when the required 
information is furnished and the Project commences on the approval of 
System Design Document. JGM is facing financial loss due to delay in 
the commencement a nd completion of the Package 7B.  
39.   Dr. Tariq Hassan, ASC , has submitted Concise Statement 
(CMA 4966/2013) on behalf  on behalf of M/s Husnain Cotex  Ltd. 
(HCL), wherein the responses were given to the reports of the Inquiry 
Committee  as well as Auditor General of Pakistan . According to learned 
counsel , HCL is not involved in the construction of the Project at 
present. In fact, HCL has not been involved in the Project, in any 
capacity whatsoever, for over three years, since January 2010, rather 
was only a  minority partner in the Lagan -Hasnain JV that was initially 
awarded the CAA Contract for the Project. However, in accordance 
with the provisions of the Operating Agreement (clause 12) and Joint 
Venture Agreement (clause 17), HCL exited the Joint Venture w ith 
Lagan and settled all outstanding rights and obligations with regard to 
the Joint Venture, with complete knowledge and accord of CAA. To 
this, a Settlement as well as Release Agreement was duly signed 
between HCL and Lagan, and the same were duly accor ded to by CAA 
through a tri -party agreement dated 27.01.2007. The consequent 
departure of HCL from the JV was that 40% shares in the JV were 
transferred its to the majority partner (Lagan). HCL's exit from the 
Project, completed in accordance with the law  and no extra claim or 
payments had been made to the JV. All variations and escalations in 
the Project have only been done much after HCL's exit from the Const.P.33/13  61
Project. HCL has been afforded no concessions or benefits above or 
beyond the strict contours of the C AA Contract with CAA and the Joint 
Venture agreement with Lagan. No detriment or loss of revenue has 
resulted to the CAA from HCL exiting the Project.  
40.   It was further submitted that theInquiry  Report admits 
that the Contract allows the JV to change i ts composition. The contents 
of the paragraph also allege that the Project  was progressing slowly  at 
the time of HCL's exit from the JV. According to learned counsel, in 
such international tenders and projects, the progress is usually slower 
in the initial  stages of the Project, and only picks up pace once all the 
requisite approvals and infrastructure are in place. In this regard, it is 
important to note that at the time when the first package of the CAA 
Contract was awarded, there were enormous difficulti es on the Project 
site. Most, if not all delays emanated from the conduct of the CAA. To 
this end, up until January 2010, HCL, through the JV, kept the CAA 
fully informed of the causes and consequences of any delays being 
experienced. At the time of HCL's departure from the Project, there 
was still ample time for the Project to be completed per the timeline 
envisaged in the CAA Contract.  
41.  The Petitioner, in response, averred that  Respondent No. 
3 was appointed as DG, CAA in May, 2011  illegally without  observing 
the fair play requirements , through an Executive order made by the 
then Minister for Defense. He was then given the charge of the two 
Mega Projects, namely, the BNBI Air port and the Multan International 
Airport. On the 3rd of November, 2012 Respondent No. 3 was again 
appointed as DG, CAA on contract basis for a period of 2 years on 
deputation replacing Capt. Nadeem Khan Yousafzai. The Petitioner Const.P.33/13  62
submitted that the Pakistan Engineering Council has directed that all 
assignments requiring supervisi on of Engineering projects be headed 
by an Engineer. However, Respondent No. 3 is not an Engineer but an 
Ex-member of the Pakistan Air Force. He has no knowledge or 
experience of any engineering project yet he was first made Chief 
Coordinator mega projects  and then made DG, CAA to supervise 
construction of the two Mega Airports at a combined cost of nearly 100 
billion in utter violation of the dictates of the Pakistan Engineering 
Council. The petitioner further submitted that the respondent No. 3 
had no exp erience of flying a civilian aircraft prior to the appointment 
as DGCAA  and thus, did not fulfill the requirement of being a pilot in 
command of a Civil Aircraft. His appointment was in violation of the 
Rules governing the appointment of DG, CAA. The Petitioner 
emphasized that the previous DG, CAA  Capt. Nadeem Khan Yousafzai 
was, prior to his appointment as DG, CAA, the MD of Pakistan 
International Airlines ( PIA), he was a pilot as well as an Engineer and 
had varied experience at higher levels of PIA. He wa s forced to 
relinquish charge in order to create a vacancy for the induction of 
Respondent No. 3. In this way the removal of Capt. Nadeem Khan 
Yousafzai and induction of respondent No. 3 were both illegal.  
42.  In response, the CAA submitted that Air Mars hal (Retd.) 
Khalid Choudhry was appointed as DG, CAA on contract for a period of 
two years with immediate effect as per Establishment Division 
Notification No. 1/60/206 -E-6 dated 07.05.2011. The said officer 
assumed charge of the post of DG, CAA on 13.05.2 011. Subsequently, 
Cabinet Secretariat / Establishment Division vide its notification No. 
1/38/2012 -E-6 dated 24.03.2012 terminated his contract  of Const.P.33/13  63
appointment. During his tenure, the officer focused on mega projects 
of CAA i.e. New Benazir Bhutto Internat ional Airport; Extension of 
Multan International Airport; New Gwadar International Airport due to 
which normal functions as DGCAA might have been slightly 
overlooked. The Ministry of Defence (Defence Division) Government of 
Pakistan vide notification No. 2 -2/CAA/2012 dated 18.07.2012, has 
conveyed HQCAA that Air Marshal (Retd) Khalid Choudhry was 
appointed as Chief Coordinator (Mega Projects) in CAA on contract 
basis for a period of two years with immediate effect and until further 
orders. It was further in timated that his terms & conditions of 
appointment shall be notified separately. Furthermore, Ministry of 
Defence vide its letter No. 2 -2/2012 -CAA dated 23.07.2012 required 
HQCAA that the draft terms and conditions of above named officer’s 
appointment incl uding his pay package may be forwarded for obtaining 
approval of Competent Forum. Besides, mode of payment of the Pay 
Package from different Mega Projects was also required to be 
indicated. It was further apprised by the Competent Authority that 
issue of d elegation/devolution of the administrative/financial powers of 
DG, CAA to Chief Coordinator (Mega Projects) of CAA be presented in 
the next CAA Board Meeting for consideration/decision.  
43.   It was further stated in the comments that Air Marshal 
(Retd.) Khalid Chaudhry is not a qualified Engineer and the directive of 
Pakistan Engineering Council to all Government Organization is 
available in this regard. Appointment of the said officer as Chief 
Coordinator, Mega Projects (CCMP) is thus apparently in contr avention 
of directive of Pakistan Engineering Council. It is also correct that the 
project is always looked after in all respects by the Project Director or Const.P.33/13  64
Project Manager (as the case may be) who are always Civil Engineers 
having professional Degrees of Civil Engineering and registered with 
Pakistan Engineering Council. In fact, all the ongoing projects are 
being managed by the qualified engineers in CAA. As per Appendix “B” 
to CAA Service Regulations 2000, CAA has adopted Pay Groups 01 to 
11 for its empl oyees including posts in Ex -Cadre C, B, & A (Equivalent 
to Pay Groups 09,  10). There are, in addition, only two pay scales 
against which DG CAA and Deputy DG CAA are appointed i.e. M -I & 
(Mega Projects) -II, respectively.  
44.  Respondent No.3 in his reply has submitted that the New 
Benazir Bhutto International Airport was initially planned to be 
completed by December, 2010 i.e. six months before his appointment 
as DG, CAA. However, the Project has indeed suffered from delays and 
cost over runs. The NBBIAP P roject could not have been completed in 
December, 2011 because the design for the Passenger Terminal 
Building (PTB) was finalized in December, 2009 and the selection of 
the “Contractor” (China State Construction and Engineering Company) 
for the PTB was fin alized in March, 2011 i.e. 02 months before his 
appointment as DG, Civil Aviation on 13.05.2011. The contract was 
formally signed in June, 2011 with a completion time of 27 months i.e. 
by September, 2013, but he was removed from the post of DG, CAA in 
March, 2012. According to the Respondent No.3, the work on the PTB 
slowed down in 2012, because an alternate option was being explored 
between the Chinese Construction Company and CAA for awarding all 
remaining contracts to the former along with complete finan cing for 
the same. The proposal, however, did not materialize but the progress 
on the PTB took a serious blow. When he (respondent No.3) was re -Const.P.33/13  65
appointed as DG, CAA on 05.11.2012, the progress on the PTB was 
5% as against the scheduled progress of 60%. On assuming charge 
again, he wrote a severe warming letter to be sent to the Chairman 
China State Construction and Engineering Company. On hearing of the 
plan to dispatch the said letter, the President of the Company (Bureau -
3) flew in to Pakistan on three da y notice. He accepted the problems, 
and gave a written assurance to complete his (CSCEC) share of work 
by March, 2014 with all liabilities towards the company. The progress 
today is 32% and the work is progressing on schedule as assured by 
the President CS CEC. All present work on the Project is planned to be 
completed by 31.07.2014 after which systems testing and dry run by 
CAA will take place. It was claimed that t he airport will open for real 
operations by the end of October, 2014.  
45.   On 25.09.2013, upon the Court’s direction, a statement 
has been filed in the Court on behalf of the Project Director , CAA which 
reads as follows: - 
“1. That the New Benazir Bhutto International Airport 
Project (“The Project”) from its very inception was not 
conceived and pl anned properly.  
 
2. That to start with, the selection of the Project Site 
was faulty and to date there is no water availability for the 
Project. Initially, it was planned that water would be 
brought from the nearby Shahpur Dam which is 
approximately twenty -one (21) kilometers away from the 
Project Site. More perplexingly, there is not enough water 
in the Shahpur Dam, hence, the plan now is to construct 
small dams by harvesting rain water.  
 
3. That the PC -1 of the Project was approved at all 
levels without t he design and other essential components Const.P.33/13  66
relating to different aspects of the Project. Importantly, 
the work on the Project was started without any design.  
 
4. That the Project was divided into seventeen (17) 
packages which created enormous interface/integ ration 
issues resulting in delay and cost overruns.  
 
5. That strangely enough, separate packages for piling 
and pile -caps were created and, that too, without the 
design of the Passenger Terminal Building.  
 
6. That all payments to the Contractors were made in 
strict conformity with applicable contractual provisions 
(clause 67.1 of the Special Conditions of Contract) where 
under CAA was bound to forthwith give effect to PMC 
(Engineer)’s decisions regardless of final resolution of a 
disputed payment. Failing t o give effect to the PMC’s 
decision was to result in accruing of interest on the 
pending payment in addition to the contractor’s right to 
suspend works.  
 
7. That be that as it may, the Federal Government is 
fully cognizant of the importance and gravity of the matter 
and has already referred the same to the Federal 
Investigation Agency which has already nominated a team 
of competent officers to investigate the matter.  
 
8. That meanwhile, the Federal Government is fully 
committed and determined to complete th e Project and 
has passed instructions to this effect. At present, around 
sixty-seven percent (67%) of the works of the Project are 
complete with approximately ninety -two percent (92%) 
airside infrastructure complete and approximately fifty -five 
percent (55 %) of the Passenger Terminal Building.  
 
9. That the Contractors are being pushed for timely 
completion of their scope of works and penal action against 
Contractors is also being taken where necessary. For Const.P.33/13  67
example, two contracts i.e. Package -8B (Electric Po wer & 
Telecommunication) and Package -8C1 (ATC Complex) 
have been terminated and their respective scope of work is 
to be completed at the risk and cost of the terminated 
Contractors as per the scheme of contract. Early 
completion is the utmost desire of the  Government”.  
The above report is, prima facie, not acceptable as correct.  
 
46.   It is well settled by now that this Court has wide powers in 
terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution to ensure  that acts/actions 
of the other organs of the State, namely,  Executive and Legislature  do 
not breach the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution . 
Under the principle of trichotomy of powers, the Judiciary is entrusted 
with the responsibility of enforcement of Fundamental Rights, which 
calls for an indepen dent and vigilant system of judicial administration 
so that all acts and actions leading to infringement of Fundamental 
Rights are nullified and the rule of law upheld in the society. The 
discharge of constitutional duty by the State functionaries in devia tion 
to the spirit of the Constitution is is anathema  to the Constitution and 
is challengeable on diverse grounds including mala fide  and colourable 
exercise of power for ulterior motive. It is not possible for judiciary to 
confer validity and immunity to the act s or action s which suffers from 
mala fide  in exercise of power of judicial review. Reference in this 
behalf may be made to the cases of Miss Benazir Bhutto v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416), Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President 
of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473), Wasey Zafar v. Government of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1994 SC 621), Sabir Shah v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 1994 SC 738), Al-Jehad Trust v.  Federation of Pakistan  (PLD Const.P.33/13  68
1996 SC 324), Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 161), 
Benazir Bh utto v. President of Pakistan   (PLD 1998 SC 388), Wukala 
Mahaz Barai Tahafaz Dastoor v.  Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 
1263), Farooq Ahmad Khan  Leghari v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
1999 SC 57), Liaqat Hussain v.  Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1999 S C 
504), Khan Asfandyar Wali v.  Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2001 SC 
607), In the matter of Reference  No.2 of 2005 By the President of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 873), Javed Jabbar v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2003 SC 955), Iqbal Haider v. Capital Development  Authority  
(PLD 2006 SC 394), Muhammad Mubeen -us-Salam v. Federation of 
Pakistan   (PLD 2006 SC 602), Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2006 SC 697), Pakistan  Muslim League (N) v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2007 SC 642), Sindh  High Court Bar As sociation v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 879), Mobashir Hassan v.  
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265), Bank of Punjab v. Haris  
Steel Industries (Pvt) Ltd.  (PLD 2010 SC 1109), Shahid Orakzai v.  
Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 365), Munir Hussain Bhatt i v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 407), Federation of Pakistan v. Munir Hussain  
Bhatti  (PLD 2011 SC 752), Watan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2011 SC 997) and Maulana Abdul Haque Baloch v. Government of 
Balochistan  (PLD 2013 SC 641) . There i s no unfettered power in public 
law. A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public 
good. This imposes duty to act fairly. [ Food Corporation of India v. 
Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries  (AIR 1993 SC 1601) = (1993) 1 SCC 
71]. In matters in w hich the Government bodies exercise their 
contractual powers, the principle of judicial review cannot be denied. 
However, in such matters, judicial review is intended to prevent Const.P.33/13  69
arbitrariness or favouritism and it must be exercised in larger public 
interes t. It has also been held by the Courts that in matters of judicial 
review the basic test is to see whether there is any infirmity in the 
decision making process. Since the power of judicial review is not an 
appeal from the decision, the Court cannot substi tute its decision for 
that of the decision maker. The interference with the decision making 
process is warranted where it is vitiated on account of arbitrariness, 
illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety or where it is 
actuated by mala fides. See: Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International 
Airport Authority of India  [(1979) 3 SCC 489  = AIR 1979 SC 1628 ]; 
Tata Cellular v. Union of India  [AIR 1996 SC 11  = (1994) 6 SCC 651 
=]; Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Construction Ltd.  [(1999) 1 
SCC 492  = AIR 1999 SC 393 ]; Air India Ltd. v, Cochin International 
Airport Ltd.  [(2000) 2 SCC 617  = AIR 2000 SC 801 ];  Reliance Energy 
Ltd. v. Maharashtra State Road Development Corpn. Ltd.  [(2007) 8 
SCC 1], and Suo Motu Case No.13 of 2009: In the matter of Joint 
Venture Agreement between CDA and Multi -Professional Cooperative 
Housing Society (MPCHS) for development of land in Sector E -11 
Islamabad  (PLD 2011 SC 619 ). In the last mentioned judgment it has 
further been held that  the Governmental bodies are invested with 
powers to dispense and regulate special services by means of leases, 
licences, contracts, quotas, etc., where they are expected to act fairly, 
justly and in a transparent manner and such powers cannot be 
exercised in an arbitrary or irrational manner. Tran sparency lies at the 
heart of every transaction entered into by, or on behalf of, a public 
body. To ensure transparency and fairness in contracts, inviting of 
open bids is a prerequisite. The reservations or restrictions, if any, in Const.P.33/13  70
that behalf should not be arbitrary and must be justifiable on the basis 
of some policy or valid principles, which themselves are reasonable 
and not discriminatory. It was further observed that a ny transaction, 
which is not transparent, and goes against the interests of the 
general public constitutes violation of Article 9 of the Constitution, 
which guarantees right to life to all persons.  
47.  It is to be noted that t he duty of the Court is to confine 
itself to the question of legality. Its concern should be whether a 
decision -making authority exceeded its powers; committed an error of 
law; committed a breach of the rules of natural justice; reached a 
decision which no reasonable tribunal would have reached; or abused 
its powers. Therefore, it is not for the Court to determine w hether a 
particular policy or particular decision taken in the fulfil lment of that 
policy is fair. It is only concerned with the manner in which those 
decisions have been taken. The extent of the duty to act fairly will vary 
from case to case. Shortly, put , there are three  grounds upon which an 
administrative action is subject to control by judicial review; namely, 
illegality which means the decision -maker must understand correctly 
the law that regulates his decision -making power and must give effect 
to it;  irrationality which means unreasonableness; and procedural 
impropriety. These are only the broad grounds but it does not rule out 
addition of further grounds in course of time. [ Tata Cellular v. Union of 
India (1994) 6 SCC 651]. The judicial review is int ended to prevent 
arbitrariness or favouritism and it is exercised in the larger public 
interest or if it is brought to the notice of the Court that in the matter 
of award of a contract power has been exercised for any collateral 
purpose. [see: Asia Foundat ion and Construction Ltd. v. Trafalgar Const.P.33/13  71
House Construction  [(1997) 1 SCC 738] . It cannot be denied that the 
principles of judicial review would apply to the exercise of contractual 
powers by Government bodies in order to prevent arbitrariness or 
favoritism.  However, it must be clearly stated that there are inherent 
limitations in exercise of that power of judicial review. Government is 
the guardian of the finances of the State. It is expected to protect the 
financial interest of the State. The right to refus e the lowest or any 
other tender is always available to the Government. But, the principles 
laid down in the Constitution have to be kept in view while accepting 
or refusing a tender. There can be no question of infringement of 
Constitutional provisions if  the Government tries to get the best person 
or the best quotation. The right to choose cannot be considered to be 
an arbitrary power. Of course, if the said power is exercised for any 
collateral purpose the exercise of that power will be struck down. 
Judicial quest in administrative matters has been to find the right 
balance between the administrative discretion to decide matters 
whether contractual or political in nature or issues of social policy; 
thus they are not essentially justifiable and the need to  remedy any 
unfairness. Such an unfairness is set right by judicial review , which  is 
concerned with reviewing not the merits of the decision in support of 
which the application for judicial review is made, but the decision -
making process itself. [see: Tata Cellular v. Union of India  (AIR 1996 
SC 11) = [(1994) 6 SCC 651]. If the contract has been entered into 
without ignoring the procedure which can be said to be basic in nature 
and after an objective consideration of different options available 
taking into account the interest of the State and the public, then Court 
cannot act as an appellate authority by substituting its opinion in Const.P.33/13  72
respect of selection made for entering into such contract. But, once 
the procedure adopted by an authority for purpose of enter ing into a 
contract is held to be against the mandate of the Constitution, the 
Courts cannot ignore such action saying that the authorities concerned 
must have some latitude or liberty in contractual matters and any 
interference by court amounts to encroac hment on the exclusive right 
of the executive to take such decision. [see: Sterling Computers Ltd. 
v. Messrs, M. and N. Publications Ltd  (AIR 1996 SC 51)].  
48.   There is no cavil with the proposition that as far as 
transparency in the implementation of th e policy, if available, the 
process of awarding contract is concerned, it squarely falls within the 
jurisdiction of this Court available to it under the Constitution and the 
power of judicial review. Reference in this behalf may be made to the 
cases of Iqbal Haider v. Capital Development Authority  (PLD 2006 SC 
394), Matter of Privatization of Pakistan Steel Mill   (PLD 2010 SC 759), 
HRC No.  4688/06   (PLD 2001 SC 619), In the matter of: Alleged 
Corruption in Rental Power Plants etc.  (2012 SCMR 773) . Ramana 
Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India  [ibid]; Tata 
Cellular v. Union  of India  [ibid); Raunaq  International Ltd. v. I.V.R. 
Construction Ltd.  (ibid]; Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport 
Ltd.  [ibid] and Reliance Energy Ltd. v . Maharashtra State Road 
Development Corp. Ltd.  [ibid]. It is duty of the Court to ensure that 
the relevant laws are adhered to strictly to exhibit transparency. It is 
universally recognized principle that transactions involving public 
money must be made i n transparent manner for the satisfaction of the 
people, who are the virtual owners of the national exchequer, which is 
being invested in these projects. [ M/s Airport Support Services v. The Const.P.33/13  73
Airport Manager, Quaid -e-Azam International Airport, Karachi  (1998 
SCMR 2268) , M/s Ramna pipe and General Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. v. M/s. Sui 
Northern Gas Pipe Lines (Pvt) Ltd.  (2004 SCMR 1274) and In re: 
Action regarding huge loss to public exchequer in  awarding LNG 
Contract.  (PLD 2010 SC 731)]  
49.  It is to be noted that a total number of seventeen (17) 
contracts were awarded during the construction of New Benazir Bhutto 
International Airport Project (NBBIAP). Unfortunately, due to 
extremely poor performance of Project Management Consultant, 
coupled with mismanagement and f avouritism to selected contractors 
by the concerned officials of Civil Aviation Authority, the project right 
from its onset has suffered tremendous setback, causing grave loss of 
national exchequer, as depicted in the Inquiry  report. Apart from what 
has be en mentioned in the report the following irregularity has been 
notice d. During the construction of NBBIAP, the following joint 
ventures (JVs) were formed: - 
 M/s Louis Berger Group USA & ECIL  
Later on, ECIL was replaced by NESPAK without any 
procedure.  
 
 M/s ADPI France & NESPAK  
 
 M/s Logan – Husnain   
Later on, JV was transformed as Logan – Tapl & Habib 
without any procedure.  
 
 M/s Beixin – Gammon  
 
 M/s Sambu – Sachal  
 
 M/s CSCEC – FWO 
 
In gross violation of laid down P akistan Engineering Council  Rules and 
procedu re, it has been observed that in most of the above JVs, the Const.P.33/13  74
leading foreign companies (lead partner ) either remained absent or did  
not participate with men and material as per the contract most 
probably in collusion with their supporting Pakistani companie s (local 
partners). In most of the JVs the joint venture has not performed in 
true sense.  The documents reveal that at the time of prequalification 
because of the joint venture with a foreign company extra points are 
given resultantly the tender is won. Si milarly, the bidder also commits 
to provide expatriate technical staff & equipment in its bidding 
document. For example, M/s Louis Berger participated as the “lead 
partner” during the PQ stage and thus won the tender . They were 
suppose d to provide key pers ons i.e. qualified project and construction 
managers and various specialists and engineers, in all about twenty of 
them as per appendix C-I of the original contract . However,  only some 
actually appeared on the ground whereas others came for a very short 
period even for months and some were not  even qualified enough, but 
most of the positions remained vacant till date. The main job was done 
by unqualified people of the local supporting partner with insufficient 
capacity and capability, thus damag ing the proj ect. In spite of all this 
the CAA and PMU failed to implement the contract clauses in its true 
spirit, they even did not terminate the contract, thus the project 
suffered heavy losses.  The Inquiry Report  is very clear on the 
mismanagement and corruption in  the project for which CAA & PMU 
are responsible.  
50.   Notwithstanding th e inquiry being conducted by FIA  as it 
has been directed in the short order  of even date , the PD and the 
concerned officials of project management unit of the under 
construction air port should be replaced with competent officials and if Const.P.33/13  75
such personnel are not available within CAA, then they should be 
taken on deputation from other department(s). The Secretary aviation 
should evolve a strategy by making a steering committee to monitor  
the project and to ensure that all procurements hence forth are as per 
specification and PPRA rules and should not be left alone to the PMC 
and PMU.  
51.   Now it would be examined that whether Air Marshal (R) 
Khalid Ch. , Respondent No.3 has been appointed  as DG, CAA  in 
accordance with section 9 of Civil Aviation Authority Ordinance, 1982 
read with schedule attached to the Recruitment  Rules for Civil Aviation 
Class-I Posts, issued by the Ministry of Defence (Aviation Division), 
Karachi vide SRO 822(IC)/70 d ated 08.08.1970. In this regard i t may 
be noted that respondent Khalid Ch audhry  was working as Chief 
Coordinator Mega Projects of CAA and his duties included supervision 
of construction of NBBIAP and Multan Airport, from where he was 
appointed as DG, CAA o n 13.05.2011 but the contract was signed in 
June, 2011 ; thereafter, he was removed from the said post in March, 
2012 and re -appointed on 5.11.2012.  
52.   The Petitioner emphasized that appointment of Respondent 
No. 3 Khalid Ch audhry  was not made on merit as the law and the rules 
on the subject were not adhered to. And according to him , the favour 
shown by the competent authority by appointing him in a non -
transparent manner  has cost a massive loss es to the public exchequer. 
To substantiate his plea, he ref erred to the relevant provisions of rules 
and also vehemently contended that irregularities, illegalities, corrupt 
practices in awarding contract , etc., of the project were noticed in his Const.P.33/13  76
(Khalid Ch audhry’s ) presence by General (R) Shahid Niaz as he himsel f 
was the member of the Inquiry Committee and on filing of the report, 
which has been relied upon by him, he could not himself step down 
because of his alleged involvement in corruption and corrupt practices , 
due to which , besides the losses to the public exchequer , a delay has 
also been caused in the completion of the airports.  
53.   On the other hand learned counsel for Air Marshal (R) 
Khalid Ch audhry contended that he has already completed 
construction of Multan Airport and due to his presence, after ha ving 
taken over the charge of post of DG, CAA on 5.11.2012, he had the 
project work  accelerated.  Otherwise , there was likelihood of enormous 
sufferings on account of losses by the CAA. He further stated that  
Respondent No.3 had an experience to his credit  being Air Marshal in 
Pakistan Air F orce, so he was subject -related expert and was duly 
capable to deal with affairs of the CAA . It ha also been averred that 
during his tenure , the authority generated billions of rupees worth of 
business and funds .  
54.   Learned Additional Attorney General at the initial stage 
supported to the appointment of Respondent No.3 htrough his  
categorical statement . However,  when the documents/files were called 
from the Ministry he confin ed himself  to the documents thereto, 
withou t  advanc ing further  arguments.  
55.   It is to be noted that in the cases of Muhammad Ashraf 
Tiwana v. Pakistan and others (2013 SCMR 1159) and Khawaja 
Muhammad Asif v. Federation of Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 1205) this 
Court in exercise of powers under Article  184(3) of the Constitution Const.P.33/13  77
has concluded that in the public interest and also to e nforce their 
Fundamental Rights , appointments must be made on merit, lest it 
should cause damage to the institution s responsible for running 
different affairs of the Governm ent and also generat ing funds for the 
purpose of spending on the welfare of the citizens with a view to 
improve standard of their life in terms of Article 9 of the Constitution. 
If there is corruption and corrupt practices on account of appointment 
of the concerned functionaries, including in pursuance of unlawful 
exercise of power or by causing loss in running of the affairs of public 
institutions , the citizen s are bound to be affected  directly or indirectly . 
Therefore, their Fundamental Rights under Artic le 9 of the Constitution 
are not enforced in letter and spirit.  
56.   It is admitted fact that Respondent  No. 3  being Air Marshal 
had joined CAA as Coordinator in charge and in this capacity he had 
obligation to coordinate the construction of Mega Project s of CAA 
named above. However, a s far as construction work essentially relates 
to engineering discipline. Respondent No.3 admittedly was not an 
engineer . Therefore, before making his appointment it was necessary 
to apply the test of ‘fit and proper ’ person  capable to supervise the 
construction of two Mega Projects. It is not understandable  what were 
the reasons which persuaded the Federal Government to make his 
appointment as a Coordinator in charge . However, as the same is not 
under challenge and noting about this aspect of his qualification is 
mentioned to infer that his appointment as Coordinator cannot be 
considered as an added qualification. Strictly speaking , plain reading of 
the section 8 of the Ordinance 1982 reveals that no qualification for 
the ap pointment of the Director General has been mentioned . Const.P.33/13  78
Therefore, reference is required to be made to the Schedule appended 
with Recruitment Rules, 1970, which prescribe the appointment of DG, 
Civil Aviation Authority in the following terms: - 
“From the incu mbents of the next lower posts in any 
technical Branch of the Department with minimum 15 
years Class 1 Service  
Or 
An officer of proven executive ability with a minimum of 18 
years Class 1 Service in any Govt aeronautical 
Organization or service preferably with experience as Pilot 
in command”.  
A perusal of above rule suggest that there was possibility to make the 
promotion of next lower post in any technical branch of the 
Department and the Ministry while moving summary for his  
appointment to the Chief Execu tive. However, in the summary moved 
by Lt. Gen (R) Asif Yasin Malik, Secretary Defence, it is mentioned as 
follows: - 
“3. In the above perspective and as desired, it is proposed 
that the present incumbent DG CAA may be reverted back to his 
parent department  i.e. PIAC and in his place Air Marshal (R) 
Khalid Chaudhry may be appointed as DG CAA on contract basis 
for a period of two years with immediate effect and until further 
orders on the basis of the following: - 
a. Air Marshal (Retd) Khalid Chaudhry has earl ier 
served as DG, CAA w.e.f.13 May 2011 to 01 April 2012. 
By virtue of his previous appointment as Air Marshal in 
PAF and as DG CAA, he has vast experience in the field of 
aviation industry and his services would be very beneficial 
for CAA.  
b. the above na med officer is currently serving as Const.P.33/13  79
Chief Coordinator (Mega Projects) of CAA, which is an 
additional experience best suited to the post of DG CAA. 
However, his present appointment would cease with 
effect from the date he assumes the charge of DG CA A.” 
57.   It is important to note that in case of non -availability of 
departmental candidate, the Department could have appointed an 
officer as prescribed in Column -4 of the Rules, reproduced 
hereinabove.  
58.   From perusal of the summary reproduced hereinabove, it 
seems that , on the desire of Prime Minister Respondent No. 3’s 
summary was moved and he has been appointed  without following the 
principle of transparent appointment, at least by applying judicial mind 
keeping in view the rules and regulations .. This pr inciple has been 
highlighted  in Khawaja Asif’s case (ibid) , wherein it has been held that , 
“all public appointments must be governed by the overriding principle 
of selection based on merit, out of individuals who through abilities, 
experience and qualities  have a proven record that they best match 
the need of the public body in question. No public appointment must 
take place without first being recommended by the Commission. The 
appointments procedures should be subject ed to the principle of 
proportionality , that is, what is appropriate for the nature of the post 
and the size and weight of its responsibilities. Those, selected must be 
committed to the principles and values of public service and perform 
their duties with highest level of integrity. The inform ation provided 
about the potential appointees must be made public.  …”  
59.   Thus, it is held that appointment of Air Marshal (R) Khalid 
Chaudhryhas been made in non -transparent manner as is evident from Const.P.33/13  80
the discussion made hereinabove. We are not in agree ment with the 
learned counsel appearing for him that after having taken over the 
charge he had brought improvement in the CAA because learned 
counsel is persuading us to believe about the objective achievements 
of Respondent No.3 during his tenure as DG, C AA without 
substantiating the same. Be that as it may, if it is accepted for sake of 
argument that contention of the learned counsel is correct but despite 
that, his appointment was required to be made in transparent manner 
after applying the rules noted h ereinabove, no t on the basis of 
ambition and desire of someone else, who was interested in his 
appointment.   
60.   Therefore, in view of  the above discussion, we are inclined 
to hold that contracts awarded to 17 contractors and their subsequent 
performanc e as it has been noted in the Inquiry Report and Audit 
Report is not transparent  and thus militates against fundamental rights 
of general public/tax payers.  
61.  These are the reasons of our short orde r of even date, 
concluding Paras  therefrom are reproduc ed hereinbelow: -  
 
“(i) That the appointment of Air Martial (Retd.) Khalid 
Chaudhry has been made in a non -transparent 
manner as well as without strictly following the 
available law on the subject. Therefore, the 
notification of appointment of Air Martial  (Retd.) 
Khalid Chaudhry dated 18th July, 2012 is declared 
illegal, void ab initio and of no legal consequence.  
(ii) As the appointment of the DG, CAA has been 
declared void ab initio , illegal being made in non -
transparent manner, therefore, the Federal 
Government is directed to appoint DG, CAA as early 
as could be possible by following the law and rules 
on the subject as well as the principles of 
transparency.  
(iii) The project of the New Benazir Bhutto International 
Airport Project, Islamabad (NBBIAP), prima facie, Const.P.33/13  81
suffers from illegalities, irregularities, corruption and 
corrupt practices and the delay caused in its 
completion on account of illegal deeds, omissions 
and commissions of the consultants Louis Burger and 
all other concerned persons who were re sponsible for 
selecting the site, preparing the designs and also 
awarding contracts to the contractors.  
(iv) The Contractors responsible for the completion of 
different respective projects except Al -Tariq Pvt. 
Ltd., prima facie are responsible for causing  the 
delay in the completion of the projects as on account 
of their such conduct the value/prices of the projects 
has increased inasmuch as raising its cost from 
Rs.37 billion to Rs.73 billion. There is no possibility 
to complete the project in the near fu ture except a 
tentative assessment by the respondents that the 
project may be completed in the year 2014 -2015. 
Therefore, subject to all just exceptions, this case 
requires a thorough probe on the basis of tentative 
assessments made in the Committee’s repo rt of Let. 
Gen. (Retd.) Shahid Niaz as well as the audit report 
prepared by the Auditor General of Pakistan and the 
stance taken by the Project Director reference to 
which, with certain exceptions, have already been 
made hereinabove.  
(v) The Government of Pakistan had already made the 
reference for conducting inquiries/investigations and 
to fix criminal liabilities upon all the concerned 
persons/contractors, therefore, we direct the DG 
Investigation, FIA to supervise the inquiries/ 
investigations himself an d to complete the same 
expeditiously.  
(vi) The Federal Government is required to take all 
necessary steps to ensure the completion of the 
project as early as could be possible. However, it is 
made clear that subject to the contractual 
agreements the consul tants, designers and all other 
Contractors to whom contracts have been awarded, 
shall continue to complete the work and the 
competent authority if need be, proceed against any 
one of them for the purpose of ensuring completion 
of the work as early as possi ble and if so required, to 
constitute a committee headed by a senior officer to 
supervise the completion of work and to remove any 
and all difficulties in this way.  
(vii) As regards report of the Auditor General in respect of 
over-payment of Rs.1556.47 mil lion is concerned, 
this audit objection so far has not been removed, 
therefore, LTH(JV) is required to deposit this amount 
with the Exchequer within a period of seven days 
subject to intimation to the Registrar for our perusal 
in Chambers.  
(viii) As all th e respondents have cooperated with the 
Court by making their appearance through counsel, Const.P.33/13  82
therefore, the passports which were deposited by 
them with the Registrar, shall be returned back to 
them subject to furnishing undertaking that 
whenever they are requi red to appear before the FIA 
or any other Agency/Committee for the purpose of 
inquiry or investigation, they shall cooperate without 
any hesitation and in case of non -cooperation, the 
FIA shall be free to undertake any steps under the 
law to enforce their attendance.  
(ix) The FIA is directed that inquiry process must be 
completed in the shortest possible time. Subject to 
outcome of inquiry by the FIA or any other 
Agency/Committee constituted by the Government, 
the LTH(JV) Pvt. Ltd. shall be entitled to adju st the 
amount which has been  deposited if payments are 
cleared by the competent authority in accordance 
with law and rules and in view of the observations 
made herein above.  
8. The instant matter stands disposed of. The parties are left 
to bear their own c osts.” 
 
Chief Justice  
Judge  
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
25th September, 2013  
Nisar/*  
  Approved for Reporting  