SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial   
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 
Civil Petitions No. 5178 , 5179  & 5180  of 2021 .  
(Against the orders dated 26.08.2021 of the Islamabad High Court,  
Islamabad passed in W.P s. No .1244, 1242 and 2862 of 2021)  
 
Saif ur Rehman Khan (in all cases)  
...…. Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Chairman, NAB, NAB Headquarters, Islamabad, etc. 
(in CPs-5178  & 5180  of 2021)  
SECP through its Chairman, etc. (in CP -5179/2021)  
……. Respondent(s)  
 
For the petitioner(s):  Mr. Muhammad Latif Khan Khosa, Sr. ASC.  
    Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, ASC.  
    a/w Sai fur Rehman -petitioner.  
             
For the NAB(s):   Mr. Sattar Awan, Spl. Prosecutor.  
    Irfan Naeem Mangi, D.G. NAB.  
    Fayaz Ahmad Qureshi, D.G. H.Q.NAB.  
    Sardar Muzaffar Ahmad Khan, DPGA.  
    Syed Jamil -ur-Rehman, A.D.  
    M. Adil Shehzad, A.D. NAB  
    Shahid Islam, A.D. NAB  
    Haider Azma t, A.D. NAB  
    Qasim Hussain, ASI.  
    M. Sadiq, H.C.  
    Farrukh Abbas Shah, H.C.  
    Abid Nazir, Constable  
    Abrar Hussain Shah, Constable.  
Date of hearing:   22.09.2021  
ORDER  
  Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - Briefly, the allegations against 
the petitioner are that by using the business name of B4U Global 
(changed to SR Group during the pendency of the inquiry) through social 
media platforms he induced and lured the members of the general public 
(“investors”) t o invest money i n “B4U Global” promising them unrealistic 
profit of 7% to 20% per month (equal to 84% to 240% per year). 
According to the National Accountability Bureau (“NAB”) the lucrative 
return on investment promised by B4U Global/ SR Group is a ponzi  or a 
pyramid scheme  to defraud and cheat the public at large and to deprive 
them of their money. As a result , the members of the general public  CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 2
enticed by the  ponzi scheme  of the petitioner, deposited money into 
various accounts in the names of certain in dividuals, registered 
companies and unregistered businesses, all controlled and managed by 
the petitioner. On the inquiry conducted by the NAB, the petitioner has 
so far been found to have defrauded the public at large to the tune of  
Rs.10.86 billion . 
2. On receipt of the complaints filed against petitioner, the NAB 
initiated proceedings under Section 9(a)(ix)(x) of the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 (“NAB Ordinance”). The NAB issued a 
notice to the petitioner, the Chief Executive Officer of the B4U Group of 
companies, under Section 19 of the NAB Ordinance on 3 March 2021, 
requesting him to furnish certain information relating to the B4U Group 
and its associate companies. The petitioner did not provide the 
information sought for. The NAB then issued t wo call up notices to the 
petitioner requiring him to appear along with record of the B4U Group of 
companies, its subsidiary companies and the list of bank accounts 
maintained by him and the companies of B4U Group, in the NAB office 
at Islamabad on 12 Marc h 2021 and 19 March 2021 respectively, to 
make his statement. The petitioner did not turn up before the NAB, 
rather challenged the legality of the said three notices in the Islamabad 
High Court by invoking its constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 of 
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 (“Constitution”)  
through filing two writ petitions : one regarding the information requiring 
notice and the other regarding the call up notices. The petitioner also 
prayed for restraining the NAB from arresting him and for grant of bail 
before arrest, in the said petitions. The High Court issued notice to the 
NAB on the said writ petitions and meanwhile granted the relief of ad -
interim bail before arrest to him, on 1 April 2021.  
3. In the aforesaid w rit petitions, the petitioner praying for 
quashing of the said notices inter alia  pleaded that he owns private 
limited companies registered with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission of Pakistan (“SECP”) under valid licenses/certificates; that 
the SECP ha s already issued him the show cause notice regarding the 
same matter of inviting investments, on 25 January 2021, under the 
relevant laws, namely, the Companies Act, 2017 (“Companies Act”) and 
the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act, 1997 (“ SECP 
Act”), which proceedings are pending before the SECP, the competent 
authority; that the initiation of proceedings by the NAB amounts to  CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 3
double jeopardy; and that the proceedings initiated by the NAB without a 
Reference from the SECP are also barred b y the specific provisions of 
Section 41 -B of the SECP Act.  
4. During pendency of the said writ petitions, the proceedings 
initiated by the SECP were concluded vide orders dated 20.05.2021, and 
the SECP also made a Reference to the NAB, on 9 July 2021, for 
proceedings under the NAB Ordinance, in terms of Section 41 -B of the 
SECP Act. Regarding this Reference, the petitioner filed a third writ 
petition  in the High Court praying for quash ing of the Reference , mainly 
on the grounds that the Reference has been sent by the SECP to the NAB 
to fill the lacuna and defeat the a djudication of his pending two writ 
petitions; that the proceedings by the NAB on the Reference would 
amount to double jeopardy and thus infringe his fundamental right 
guaranteed by Article 13 of the Constitution; and that only the Court of 
Sessions can ta ke cognizance of any offence under the Companies Act, in 
terms of Section 37 of the SECP Act and Section 482 of the Companies 
Act.  
5. The High Court dismissed the said three writ petitions of the 
petitioner, vide its short orders dated 26.08.2021, and also r ecalled the 
ad-interim bail before arrest granted to him. The petitioner, therefore, 
has approached this Court seeking leave to appeal against the said 
orders of the High Court and praying for the same reliefs that have been 
declined to him by the High Cou rt. 
6. The main stance of the petitioner before the High Court as 
well as before this Court is that he has not collect ed any amount for 
investment fro m any person; these are his private limited companies 
registered with the SECP that have received investment of money from 
the investors. Therefore, the matter falls within the exclusive domain of 
the SECP. We find the stance is totally misconceived. As per the material 
collected by the NAB so far, money from the investors has been received 
not only in the bank a ccounts of the registered companies but also in the 
personal accounts of the petitioner and his family members as well as of 
their unregistered companies, which does not fall within the domain of 
the SECP. The actions taken by the SECP under the Companies Act, in 
the present matter, relates to the alleged illegal acts of the registered 
companies and their directors, not to those alleged illegal acts that have CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 4
been done by the petitioner and his family members in their personal 
capacity.  
7. Even as to registere d companies, under Section 264 (3) of 
the Companies Act a person who forms a company for any fraudulent or 
unlawful purpose, or carries on unauthorized business, is liable to be 
proceeded against for any other action provided in any other law for the 
time being in force, in addition to the action taken under Subsection (1) 
of that Section. Likewise, under Section 500 of the Companies Act a 
person who acts as a director or officer of the company and is 
responsible for carrying on any business or any transact ion which is 
ultra vires of the company is also personally liable for the liabilities and 
obligations arising out of such business or tran saction. These provisions 
leave  little doubt to find that there is no bar for the NAB to inquire into 
and investigate the commission of alleged offence under Section 9 of the 
NAB Ordinance by the petitioner and to proceed further against him 
under that Ordinance.  
8. The bar of Section 41B of the SECP Act vehemently pleaded 
on behalf of the petitioner is not, in our opinion, attracted to the present 
matter. Section 41B relates to “any regulated activity, regulated 
securities activity, transaction, process or permission granted under this 
Act or any administered legislation”. The petitioner has failed to show 
that the allegatio ns against him falls within the scope of any of the said 
matters. Similarly the bar of Section 37 of the SECP Act and Section 482 
of the Companies Act pleaded by the petitioner is also not attracted to 
the investigation of the allegations against him by th e NAB or taking 
cognizance of the alleged offences punishable under the NAB Ordinance 
by the Accountability Court, as the provisions of the said Sections of 
both the Acts relate to taking cognizance of any offence punishable under 
those  Acts, not to the of fences punishable under other laws.   
9. It has also been argued on behalf of the petitioner that the 
provisions of the Companies Act and the SECP Act have the effect 
notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force and are to 
prevail over the provis ions of the NAB Ordinance. We are of the opinion 
that the question of taking precedence of those Acts over the NAB 
Ordinance does not arise unless it is shown that the offences of cheating 
as defined in Section 415 of the PPC  and thereby dishonestly induci ng 
members of the public at large to deliver any property including money CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 5
or valuable security to any person and criminal breach of trust as 
defined in Section 405 of the PPC with regard to any property including 
money or valuable security entrusted by mem bers of the public at large, 
as defined and made punishable under the NAB Ordinance, are also 
punishable under the Companies Act and the SECP Act.  
10. The provisions of Section 496(1)(d) of the Companies Act 
referred to on behalf of the petitioner relate to a ny fraudulent scheme, 
artifice or practice that is employed in the course of business of the 
company . It is not the petitioner’s case before us that it was the business 
of the petitioner’s companies to invite and accept deposits from the 
public as those companies were admittedly not the banking companies; 
therefore, the alleged Ponzi scheme  was not emplo yed by the companies 
in the course of business of those companies. Therefore, we are of a 
prima facie  view that the mischief addressed in the aforesaid laws has a 
limited scope restricted to invitation of deposits by companies, which can 
be both through fr aud or by a bonafide  mistake. The aforesaid laws in no 
way impede NAB to assume jurisdiction under section 9(a) (ix) & (x) of 
the NAB Ordinance. The NAB enjoys a totally different jurisdiction, which 
does not overlap with the Companies Act or SECP  Act. The  question of 
cheating the public at large and of breach of trust does not fall within the 
domain of Companies Act or SECP Act , but squarely fall s under the NAB 
Ordinance. Therefore, the SECP sending a reference to the NAB or the 
NAB taking cognizance on th e basis of the reference has little significance 
in the facts and circumstances of the case, when NAB in our tentative 
view could have  taken cognizance on their own.  
11. The provisions of Section 84 of the Companies Act referred to 
on behalf of the petitioner relate to mere inviting or accepting deposits 
from the public; they do not relate to commission of offence of cheating 
and criminal breach of trust in relation to the money deposited by the 
public. A company may invite and accept deposits from the public 
without any intention of committing, or actual commission of, cheating 
and criminal breach of trust in relation to the deposits of the public. In 
other words, if cheating and/or criminal breach of trust is not 
committed, or alleged to have committed, in inv iting and accepting 
deposits, such act of a company and its officer in default is though still 
punishable under Section 84 of the Companies Act, but it is not 
punishable under the PPC or the NAB Ordinance. And, conversely the 
offences of cheating and crimi nal breach of trust in relation to inviting CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 6
and accepting deposits from the public, which are punishable under the 
PPC and the NAB Ordinance, are not punishable under Section 84 of 
Companies Act. T here is thus no conflict between the provisions of 
Section 84 of the Companies Act and the provisions of Section 9 of the 
NAB Ordinance, and the question of giving precedence to one over the 
other does not arise.  
12. Similarly, the ground agitated by the petitioner that in view 
of the proceedings conducted by the SECP , the second proceedings by 
the NAB regarding the same matter would amount to double jeopardy 
and thus infringe his fundamental right to protection against double 
punishment guaranteed by Article 13 of the Constitution, is also not 
legally tenable. Article  13(a) provides that no person shall be prosecuted  
or punished for the same offence  more than once. The expressions 
“prosecuted” and “same offence” used in Article 13 are of vital 
significance in determining the scope of the protection guaranteed. The 
expression “prosecuted” means prosecuted on a charge of criminal 
nature before a Court of law; i t does not include prosecution o n the basis 
of breach of some code of conduct by a disciplinary authority or breach 
of some regulatory framework by an administrativ e authority. The 
expression “same offence” means offence constituted of the same 
ingredients and does not mean “same matter” or “same facts”. The 
ingredients of the offence earlier charged and the offence subsequently 
charged should be the same, to attract  the bar of Article 13, in the sense 
that the facts constituting the offence earlier charged were also sufficient 
to justify the conviction of the offence subsequently charged (See 
Jehangir Badar v. Chairman, NAB 2004 SCMR 1632 and Hoot Khan v. 
NIRC PLD 19 77 Kar 145) . The SECP is not a court of law, nor are the 
offences under the Companies Act for which it has imposed penalties on 
the petitioner and his companies constituted , of the same ingredients as 
that of the offence defined in Section 9 of the NAB Ordinance, as 
explained above. The shield of Article 13 of the Constitution is therefore 
not available to the petitioner to prevent the proceedings against him 
under the NAB Or dinance.  
13. In view of the above legal and factual position, it cannot be 
said that the proceedings being conducted by the NAB, in the present 
matter, against the petitioner are without lawful authority.  CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 7
14. So far as the prayer of the petitioner for grant of b ail before 
arrest is concerned, we find no merits in that also. The NAB has recorded 
the statements of many affectees of the alleged fraud of the petitioners 
under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 and collected 
the credit and debit record  of the bank accounts operated by the 
petitioner and his family members as well as the tax record of the 
petitioner and his alleged shell companies, and the record of the 
properties in name of the petitioner. The NAB has found, during inquiry, 
that about 5 7 bank accounts have been used for collecting money f rom 
the investors: out of which 26 are in name of the petitioner, his wives 
and son, 18 are in the name of registered companies and 16 in the name 
of unregistered companies. The petitioner, his wives and  son, being the 
authorized  signatories, also operate the accounts in the name of 
registered and unregistered companies. We find that, in view of the said 
material collected by the NAB so far, the accusation against the 
petitioner is well founded, and his c ustody is also required to the NAB for 
the purpose of completing investigation of the case. The prayer of the 
petitioner for grant of bail before arrest is therefore not sustainable.  
15. It may be pertinent to mention here that a fter arguing the 
case at length , the learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention 
to the fact that the High Court has not yet given the detailed reasons in 
support of the impugned short orders. Although this Court ordinarily 
waits for the detailed reasons before deciding the ap peals or the petitions 
for leave to appeals filed against the short orders passed by the High 
Courts, but the peculiar facts and circumstances of a case, as those of 
the present case, may justify departure from this rule of practice and 
propriety, which is  neither a rule of law nor is an absolute one and, like 
most of the rules, admits exception(s). The present case involves a bail 
matter, which is usually considered as an urgent one; the arguments 
advanced by learned counsel for the parties mainly relates to the scope 
and applicability of certain legal provisions, and not to deep appraisal of 
the disputed facts and the evidence thereon; and we having heard the 
arguments of learned counsel for the parties in detail and perusing the 
material available on reco rd with their able assistance, have reached a 
conclusion which is no different from the one arrived at by the High 
Court in its short order s. In these circumstances, we deem it 
unnecessary to wait for the detailed reasons to be given by the High 
Court in s upport of the impugned short orders before pronouncing the CP-5178/2021, etc.  
 
 8
decision we have made. It is not uncommon that this Court maintains 
the decisions of the High Courts, in several cases, for its own reasons 
different from that of the High Courts.  
16. For all what has been discussed above, we find that the High 
Court has rightly dismissed the writ petitions filed by the petitioner. The 
present petitions are meritless; they are therefore dismissed and leave to 
appeal is declined.  
17. These are the reasons for our short order dated 22.09.2021, 
operative part of which is reproduced here for ease of reference and 
completion of the record:  
His [petitioner’s] contentions on the alleged jurisdictional defects 
and the merits of the case have  been heard and so have the 
submissions by the Special Prosecutor for NAB. Having examined 
both aspects of the case and for the reasons to be recorded later, 
the ad -interim bail before arrest granted to the petitioner on 
30.08.2021 is hereby recalled and C ivil petition No.5178 of 2021, 
Civil Petition No.5179 of 2021 and Civil Petition No.5180 of 2021 
are dismissed.  
  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad , 
22nd September, 2021 . 
Approved for reporting  
Sadaqat  Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 