Yahya Afridi, J. - Invoking the original jurisdiction of this Court vested under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution  of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(“Constitution”) , and that too, on a suo motu motion, should be  scarcely 
exercised. This caution of judicial restraint should be further guarded when the 
matter for determination is inquisitorial, requiring a factual probe before a 
definite  declaration, and /or, direction is rendered by this Court.  
2. In the instant matter, none can doubt the bone fide of invoking the suo 
motu jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. However, when the 
letter of the six worthy Judges of the Islamabad High Court craves for 
formulating the administrative course of conduct for serving judges to not only 
address a ny intrusion of the executive in their judicial functions, but more 
importantly, their mode and manner of interaction with the executive, to 
judicially proceed in the present proceedings would surely lead to an adverse 
spectacle – a sight I seriously urge should be avoided.  
3.      To proceed on the proposed action of suo motu  would negate the lessons 
we have learnt from our recent judicial precedents and, thus, we must not be 
moved into action by public sentiments no matter how pressing the issue may 
appea r.  
4. One must also not ignore that the High Courts under the Constitution 
are independent establishments, envisaged to regulate not only their 
administrative functions, but also provide security to and safeguard judicial 
officers in their discharge of ju dicial functions. Law on the matter is already in 
the field. The inaction on the part of the Chief Justice or the Judges of the High 
Court not to exercise the jurisdiction and powers vested in him or them, should 
not lead this Court to super -impose the exe rcise of its jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution. This may affect the functioning of the worthy Chief S.M.C. 1 of 2024  2
Justices and worthy Judges of the High Courts, and would to my mind amount 
to interference in the independence of the High Courts.   
5. Given the above, none can dispute that the anxiety of the six worthy 
Judges of the Islamabad High Court raised in their letter dated 25.03.2024 
addressed to the Supreme Judicial Council, most certainly warrants positive 
consideration, inter alia , for inserting appropriate provisions to regulate the 
interaction of judges with the executive and the remedial response of the 
judiciary to any attempt or actual interference in its judicial functions in the 
Code of Conduct of Judges of the superior judi ciary, as provided under Article 
209(8) of the Constitution.  
6. And thus, I respectfully recuse myself from the bench hearing the 
present suo motu  proceedings.  
 
         Judge  
  
 