IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT:  MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR , HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
 
SUO MOTU NOTICE TAKEN IN COURT  
(Action taken on the advertisements in various print 
and electr onic media regarding projects/works done 
by the Governments of Punjab,  Sindh and Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa)  
 
   
In attendance :  
 Mr. Qasim Chohan, Addl. AG, Punjab.  
 Mr. Shehryar Qazi, Addl. AG, Sindh  
 Mr. Waqar Ahmed Khan, Addl. KPK.  
  
 
Date of Hearing:   28.02.2018 
 
ORDER  
 
  It has come to our notice that the Governments of 
Punjab,  Sindh  and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa are running 
advertisements in various print and electronic media forums. 
Through such advertisements they are indulging in self projection 
and aggran dizement under the garb of informing the public about 
the projects completed or being undertaken by them in their 
respective provinces during their tenure as the Government(s) 
(Provincial)  in power. Such advertisements and paid content contain 
photographs of prominent politicians and leaders of the political 
parties in power. Such profligacy which is obviously undertaken at 
government expense and taxpayers money should not be 
burdening the public exchequer. It not only causes wastage of  -: 2 :- 
public funds which c ould otherwise be allocated and utilized for 
welfare of the public, it also results in providing an unfair 
advantage to the ruling party in the forthcoming elections. 
Moreover, in the present circumstances being an election year this 
may tantamount to pre -poll rigging.  
2.  Let complete and accurate details be submitted before 
this Court inter alia about the following matters: - 
i) all the expenditures/amounts incurred/used on such 
advertisements with separate details relating to 
electronic and print media.  
 
ii) Identity of print and electronic media houses / groups 
who have been paid to publish / telecast / broadcast 
such advertisements.  
 
iii)  Names / identification of newspapers / magazines / 
TV channels /Radio stations which have run such 
advertisements /  paid  content and aggregate amounts 
paid / payable to each in the last three months.  
 
iv) The names of government departments, semi 
government entities, government companies other 
departments / entities / organizations who have been 
directed to pay such a mounts or through which such 
amounts have been paid.  
 
v) A summary of the aggregate amount that each 
Province has spent so far in such extravagant displays 
and self -projection by the respective Provincial 
Governments.  
 
3.  A detailed report containing the above information 
shall be submitted under the signatures of the respective 
Secretaries Information of each province which shall be 
countersigned by Chief Secretary of each Province. The Chief 
Secretaries shall also submit sworn affidavits with each report  
confirming that all information has been checked and rechecked it 
is accurate and supported by the relevant record and no 
information has been concealed / misstated or withheld for any 
reason. Such report shall be filed within a period of one week from  -: 3 :- 
today. The office shall transmit copies of this order through courier 
service/Fax/email to Chief Secretaries of all provinces for 
compliance. Re -list on 12.03.2018.  
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
ISLAMABAD.  
28th February, 2018. 
Mudassar / 
 
 
 