IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN.  
    (Original Jurisdiction).  
 
 
PRESENT.  
  MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, HCJ  
  MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN.  
  MR. JUSTICE TARIQ PARVEZ  
 
 
 
Const. P.77 of 2010 and HRCs No.13124 -P, 40303 -P, 40220 -G and 
43103 -B/2011 And C.M.A. 42 -43/2012  
 
President Balochistan High Court  Vs. Federation of Pakistan & others  
Bar Association  
 
AND 
 
 
C.M.A NO.431 OF 2012 In Const. Petition No.77 of 2010  
(Gruesome & Sensational Murder of wife and daughter of  
Mir Bakhtiar Domki at Kara chi on 30.01.2012)  
 
 
AND 
 
C.M.A NO.178 -Q OF 2012 In Const. Petition No.77 of 2010  
(Appeal for missing persons cases of Balochistan)  
 
 
 
For the petitioner (s):   Syed Ayaz Zahoor, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Hadi Shakeel Ahmed, ASC  
Mr. Kamran Murtaza, ASC  
     Syed Qair Sh ah, ASC  
     Malik Zahoor Shahwani, Adv.  
     President B alochistan High Court Bar  
 
 
Complainants:    Mr. Nasrullah Baloch,  
     Voice for Baloch Missing Persons  
 
     Mr. Bajiar Baloch, Ms. Farzana Majeed,  
Mr. Allah Bakhsh, Mst. Bakhtawar Bibi,  
Ms. Sami, Ms. Sumair Baloch and  
Ghulam Farooq  (all in person)  
 
On Court Notice :   Malik Sikandar Khan, Dy. Attorney General  
 
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, Advocate General  
     Mr. Tariq Ali Tahir, Addl. A.G.  
     Mr. Babar Yaqoob Fateh Muhamma d, C.S  2 
     Mr. Naseebullah Bazai, Secy. Home Deptt.  
Rao Amin Hashim, I.G. P.  
     Mr. Munir Badini, Secy. Education  
     Mr. Naseem Lahri, Commissioner Quetta  
     Mr. Ahsan Mahboob, CCPO, Quetta  
     Mr. Hamid Shakeel, DIG Quetta  
     Qazi Abdul Wahid, D IG Operation  
     Mr. Noshair Younis, Focal person  
      
 
For Sindh Police:    Mr. Mushtaq Mahr, DIG. CID  
     Mr. Naeem Sheikh, SSP  
     Mr. Tariq Darejo, SP  
     Mr. Zamir DSP  
 
 
For M/o Defence, IB & FC : Nemo  
 
Date of hearing:    05-04-2012 
 
 
ORDER  
 
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — Mr. Naseebullah Khan 
Bazai, Secretary  Home Department,  Government of Balochistan  has 
placed on record a list of dead bodies recovered from the year 2010 to 1st 
April, 2012 . (He has not claimed con fidentiality  of its contents. ) According 
to the details stated therein during the period mentioned hereinbefore 
349 dead bodies have been recovered. In some of the cases FIRs have 
been registered , particularly in the area which is controlled by the Police , 
known as ‘A’  area. As far as th e dead bodies recovered from ‘B’ area,  
controlled by Levies, are concerned , in some of the cases FIRs have been 
registered . Unfortunate aspect of the  case is that no thorough 
investigation has been conducted  to draw a logical conclusion , although in 
some o f the cases accused were nominated and possibility  of the ir 
involvement or not in the cases has also not been ascertained.  For 
instance , in one of the cases pertaining to the murder of  Jalil Reki matter 
has not been taken forward except lodging FIR.  No dou bt it is the right of  3 
the complainant and accused under the Constitution that they s hould be 
dealt in accord ance with  law. When police conduct s investig ation with out 
fear and favour, t here is always  possibility to reach to a just conclusion. 
Presumption , however,  cannot be drawn against the persons, who have 
been involved in the cases unless evidence is collected. The police 
authorities as well as the Levies under the law are bound to collect the 
evidence and finally determine about the guilt or innocence o f the persons  
nominated in FIR . 
2. We are not in agreement that the police cannot deliver because in 
some of the cases , which have been brought in our notice when the police 
started investigation actively,  they have achieved the objects , as few 
days before  a considerable quantity of arms and ammunitions/explosives 
were recovered and the gangs operating in Balochistan for kidnapping the 
persons for ransom have also been brought to book, which indicates that 
intentionally in majority of the cases police and l evies have failed to 
discharge their duties , therefore, under the circumstances, we direct 
that:-  
(i) Let both the agencies register FIRs in respect of 
dead bodies found in ‘A’ area as well as ‘B’ area forthwith, 
if already FIR s have not been registered and c onduct 
investigation within stipulated time and reach at a logical 
conclusion;   
(ii) Surprisingly, no compensation has been paid by the 
State/Provincial Government to the heirs of the persons, 
whose dead bodies were found lying abundant in different 
areas of th e Province as well as the injured  persons . The 
Provincial Government through Chief Secretary is directed 
to make compensation as per the policy and if there is no 
policy they should immediately frame a policy in this behalf 
and respectable persons should a pproach the persons  4 
whose families are suffering and pay the compensation to 
them;  
(iii) If any of the persons, who had died  during  service, 
benefits which are ordinarily given to them, be also 
extended. However, extending of above benefit does not 
mean that Pr ovincial Governments/Law Enforcing Agencies 
are absolved from their duties to trace out the accused, 
whosoever he may be and how his status is high, they 
should be brought into book and matter be reported to 
Registrar of this Court for our perusal;  
3. It has been reported that there are personnel of F.C, who are 
involved in killing some of the persons as this fact was disclosed by Mir 
Muhammad Sadiq Umrani, Provincial Minister, whose statement has been 
supported by Haji Ali Madad Jattak during the proceedi ng of the Provincial 
Assembly dated 06.02.2012. W hile making statement , the former had 
stated that incident of kidnapping of two persons had been shown by him 
alongwith Mir Zafar ullah Zehri, Home Minister and Mr. Younas Mullazai, 
Provincial Minister and ne xt day when they were coming from Qalat to 
Quetta they have found dead bodies of the same. Surprisingly, no action 
has been taken on this report. Copy of the se statement s be sent to the 
learned Attorney General , who  should appea r tomorrow, alongwith I.G, 
F.C, Balochistan and file explanation about  whatever have been said at 
floor of the Assembly.  
4.  Another statement has been filed by the Home Secretary 
under the headings ‘ Target and Sectarian Killings ’; according to which 
number  of total target killings  is 1085.  Surprisingly, in the statement 
already placed on record in C.M.A 5908/2011, except fifteen (15) 
persons, no accused has been arrested. Explanation for the same is not 
available. It is to be noted that as far as sectarian killing is concerned, it 
is rising day by day. Few days before on 29th March, 2012 six persons 
and between 4th and 5th April, 2012 two persons were killed  for sectarian 
reasons reportedly. Similarly, few days ago five persons of NGOs were 
kidnapped but no progress so far has been m ade. Neither I.G.P, who is 
chief of Police, nor Home Secretary, who is chief of Levies Force, have 
explanation, meaning thereby that they had not taken interest. Had they  5 
shown interest , there was no difficulty to trace the crime and cause arrest 
of the ac cused persons. However, they are directed to explain about the 
registration of FIR s and investigation  conducted by them , involvement of 
accused persons and progress of the cases of above incidents . They are 
also directed to make payment of compensation to the heirs, whose 
persons have been killed/ injured . If any of the person s belonging to the 
law-enforcing agencies has been killed/injured should be extended the 
benefit, permissible under the policy. Again it is repeated that by 
extending this benefit it wo uld not mean that law -enforcing agencies are 
absolved from  causing arrest of the accused and brining to book them in 
order to ensure rule of law in the Province.  
5.  Third category of crime which is rising day by day is 
abduction/ kidnapping for ransom. For example in Quetta i n the year 2010 
and 2011, 194 case of kidnapping/abduction have been reported. 
According to learned Advocate General in all these cases FIRs have been 
registered and majority of the persons have been recovered. However, 
statement has b een contradicted by learned counsel appearing for the 
petitioner and explained that police cannot claim credit of the same  
because these persons came back after making payment of ransom. Even 
by the time , five persons from BRSP and one person namely, Dr. R ajesh, 
belonging to Hindu community, are still missing; whereas, two persons 
belonging to Sindh have returned after making payment of ransom. Home 
Secretary claims that on account of hectic efforts made by law -enforcing 
agencies a good of number of persons  involved in abduction/kidnapping 
have been arrested. We may for the time being accept this statement, 
but at the same time in the print and electronic  media , Mir Zafar ullah 
Zehri, Home Minister has  admitted publically that some of the Ministers of 
the Balochistan  are involved in the offences of abduction/kidnapping for 
ransom etc. This statement w as made few days before, but no action was 
taken by I.G.P or any other member of the law -enforcing agencies, 
responsible in the Province to ensure the law and ord er. In view of such 
important disclosure I.G.P, Home Secretary and other important officers 
should have immediately taken action on the basis of credible 
information, which was coming from the mouth of not a person less than 
the Provincial Minister of the Government. However, after hearing of the  6 
case on 3rd April, 2012 Qazi Abdul Wahid , D.I.G Operation, had recorded 
his statement; contents whereof are reproduced herein below:  
 
“1. That I am performing my duties as Minister for Home & 
Tribal Affairs Depart ment, Government of Balochistan 
since April, 2008.  
2. That the total Members of the Balochistan Provincial 
Assembly are 65 elected from Balochistan. They are 
representing their concerned area. Out of the 65 
members there are 54 Ministers and Advisors.  
3. That the incidents of kidnapping for ransom in various 
Districts of the Province during the past few year has 
escalated which has created sense of insecurity amongst 
the common masses and brought bad name to the 
provincial government on the whole particular ly to the 
Ministry of Home Tribal Affairs Department for the law 
and order situation in the province.  
4. That there had been reports in the news papers from 
different circles about the alleged involvement of 
Ministers in the crimes of kidnapping for ransom  and also 
I had received Telephone Call off and on from different 
areas of the province alleging that the Ministers are 
involved in the cases of kidnapping for ransom.  
5. I had been holding meetings with senior officers of the 
Police and Levies to further investigate into the alleged 
charges against the Ministers of their involvement in the 
crimes i.e. Kidnapping for ransom and once a strong and 
material evidence appears on record against any of the 
Ministers the same will be brought on record and I will be  
in a position to also give my final statement.  
   
6. It seems that in the above statement, he had avoided to disclose 
the names of Ministers . Contrary to it, in his press talk, he had stated 
that he has disclosed t he names to the Chief Minister and number  of such  
Ministers , who are involved, are two to three. His press talk has been 
displayed on the multimedia in the Court. Transcript of his statement, 
wherein he has taken the stand, is as follows:   7 
 
  8 
 
 
 
7.  In view of both the above statements on beh alf of the Home 
Minister, Province of Balochistan, no further comments are called for as 
both the statements are self -explanatory. The I.G.P present in Court, is 
directed to collect both the statements and proceed in accordance with 
law and whosoever is in volved, notwithstanding the fact that what is his 
status, be dealt according to law, without being influenced in any manner.   9 
8.  I.G.P has informed that due to shortage of police officers, it is 
not possible to take action against culprits as presently po lice force is 
running by the shortage of 26 officers, but despite issuance of notification 
by the Federal Government no one has come forward to serve in 
Balochistan. Under the circum stances we direct the Secretary Ministry of 
Interior as well as Secretary Establishment , Government of Pakistan  that 
accordi ng to rules/regulations, issue n otification s of such officers and 
depute them in Balochistan so that law and order situ ation is brought 
under  control and send copy of such n otifications to Registrar of this  
Court and the I.G.P would inform that as to whether notification has been 
acted  upon or not, enabling us to pass appropriate order in Court for such 
officers, who are reluctant to join duty despite the fact that under the 
provisions of Civil Servants Act they should have no hesitation to serve in 
the Province of Balochistan . This order be communicated to the Attorney 
General during course of the day, who will take up the matter with both 
the Federal Secretaries and ensure that notification is issued as ear ly as 
possible and report in this behalf be submitted tomorrow  positively .  
9. Next important issue prevailing in Balochistan is about the missing 
persons. According to the President of Balochistan High Court Bar 
Association, Human Rights Commission has re ported that 72 persons are 
presently missing from the different areas of the province.  
10. Ms. Farzana Majeed appeared and state d that her brother Zakir 
Majeed, resident of Khuzdar was student of MA English and is missing 
since 8th June, 2009 . He was pick ed up  by the Agencies from Mastung 
when he was coming from Noshk accompanying his two friends , who  
were also abducted but subsequently were released. They had narrated to 
her family members that in the vehicle there were people of agencies and 
FC. They are  running from pillar to post but no one has helped them in 
this behalf. She had also submitted the a pplication to the Chief Justice, 
Supreme Court and appeared  before Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal,  who had 
stated that their brother will come but so far no progre ss has been made. 
However, according to the report of the Human Rights Commission, 
placed on record by the President of High Court Bar Association, his name 
has appeared at Sr. No.159 of the list and he has been shown as traced. 
In respect of missing of Za kir Majeed, FIR No.62/2010 at PS Sadar,  10 
Mastung dated 29th June, 2010  was also registered . It seems that this FIR 
was registered on the recommendation of the Commission appointed by 
the Government  of Pakistan  for tracing him, however, facts remains that 
so far he has not been traced as per the statement of his sister and 
continuously he is missing since 8th June, 2009.  
11. Allah Bakhsh  and Mst. Bakhtawar, parents of Hafiz Saeed ur 
Rehman appeared and stated that their son is missing since 4th July, 
2003. D espite efforts he has not been traced out so far. He has placed on 
record a letter dated 7th December, 2009 of Government of Balochistan, 
Home and Tribal Affairs Department , signed by Zafar Iqbal  contents 
whereof are reproduced hereinbelow:  
“2. It has been  intimated by the Ministry of Interior, National 
Crisis Management Cell Islamabad vide letter 1/1/2007 (R&A) 
dated 6th June, 2009, that Mr. Hafiz Saeed -ur-Rehman s/o Allah 
Bux who was arrested on 04.07.2003 from Quetta is undergoing 
RI for 25 years onward through FGCM in Gujranwala jail.  
3. Above in view it is, therefore, requested that kindly confirm 
his presence within two days positively by return Fax No.081 -
9201835. As the cases is the Supreme Court. ” 
 
12. Mr. Hamid Shakeel, Acting DIG, Investigation st ated that efforts are 
being made to trace the missing person s and in this behalf two dead 
bodies were de -entered but those were found of other pe rsons. Mr. 
Kamran Murtaza, learned counsel, however, stated that according to the 
contents of the letter of Gov ernment of Balochistan, reproduced 
hereinabove,  he is undergoing RI 25 years t hrough FGCM in Gujranwala 
Jail but no one has probed this aspect of the case. Mr. Hamid Shakeel, 
Acting DIG is directed to check up the letter and submit report about the 
veracit y of the same. In the meanwhile, efforts should also be made to 
trace Hafiz Saeed -ur-Rehman. Copy of this letter be sent to the learned 
Attorney General who will collect necessary information from the Interior 
Ministry and shall submit report tomorrow. Malik Zahoor Shahwani, 
Advocate, President High Court Bar Association  stated that in the list he 
has been shown as traced but otherwise he has not been traced as 
indicated from the facts noted hereinabove.   11 
13. Ms. Sami appeared and stated  that she is daughte r of Dr. Di n 
Muhammad, who is resident of Mashakai, Awaran. He is missing w.e.f. 
28th June, 2009 when he was performing his dut ies in Rural Health 
Centre, Ornaj. His servant/cook Ramzan informed that at about 12:00  am 
4-5 persons entered into his house and  picked him up. All those persons 
were in the civil dress es. They c ame to his house in Toyota Sarf vehicle 
and on the following day FIR  was lodged. Mr. Noshair , SP stated that 
investigation was conducted from agencies as well but so far he has not 
been tra ced out. According to SP he had no politi cal activities but 
Nasrullah Baloch stated that Dr. Di n Muhammad was Member of Central 
Committee , BNM for the last about three years. His name is appearing at 
Sr. No. 64 of the list of Pakistan Human Rights Commissio n, submitted by 
President of High Court Bar Association.  
14. Ms. Sumaira  appeared and stated that on 1st March, 2012 a raid 
was conducted at her home situat ed at Saryab Mills and 10 persons were 
arrested. Three person namely Muhammad Hanif, Muhammad Shabb ir 
and Lal Muhammad have returned after 22 days, whereas sevens persons 
namely Amir Khan, Mir Jan, Gul Mir, Balagh Sher, Hazar Khan, Mazar 
Khan and Javed all by cost Mari are still missing. When we inquired form 
the IGP, DIG Investigation and DIG Operation , they stated that no report 
has been registered about this incident, however, Ms. Sumaira stated that 
on the following day road was blocked by the residents of the area and 
the police came over there and assured that FIR will be registered but so 
far no F IR has been registered. In view of the facts which have been 
narrated hereinabove, we are of the opinion that police is fully aware of 
the incident because a confidential report has been shown to us wherein 
request has been made for transfer of the case to  the crime branch. They 
are directed to effect recovery of seven persons and produce them before 
the Court tomorrow , positively .  
15. Ghulam Farooq appeared and stated that  Ali Asghar  Bangalzai is 
missing from the year 2010. I.G.P. is directed to put up a comprehensive 
report in this behalf.  
16. There are so many persons who are missing. The President of High 
Court Bar Association shall submit details of the same after consulting the  12 
concerned. The learned Attorney General is directed to look into the 
matter and submit report tomorrow, explaining that how many persons 
are missing; as to why they have not been traced and what efforts are 
being made by the Federal Government. Similar  statement has to be 
made the Advocate General.  
17. It is reported by the Pr esident High Court Bar Association that 
Hamza Shahwani has been traced and is no more missing person but 
Munir Mardani is still missing from Khuzdar. The Secretary Interior is 
directed to look into the matter and inquire from the concerned quarters 
and exp lain the position tomorrow.  
18. We have noted that in Balochistan the main problem is of socio -
economic nature, which can only be solved, if the general public of the 
province is empowered by holding the election of the local bodies, which 
otherwise is the obligation of the Government in term of Article 32 of the 
Constitution, which provides: - 
“The State shall encourage local Government institutions composed of 
elected representatives of the areas concerned and in such institutions 
special representation w ill be given to peasants, workers and women. ” 
 
The Chief Secretary informed that he has recently taken over the charge 
and had no full knowledge, except the process of de -limitation, which is 
likely to be completed shortly and he will discuss this issue wi th the Chief 
Minister. He may do so but we are of the opinion that after passing of 18th 
Amendment in the Constitution, under Article 140 -A, each provincial 
government is bound by law  to establish a local government system and 
devolve political, administra tive and financial responsibility and authority 
to the elected representatives of the local governments.  It is not only the 
province of Balochistan but other provinces as well as Territory  of 
Islamabad  have not held election so far. We would like to have c omments 
of all the Chief Secretaries , in this behalf . Learned Attorney General may 
seek instructions from all of them and submit statement under his own 
signatures.  
19. A CMA bearing No.178 -Q/2012  has been moved by Nasraullah  
Baloch . Notice be issued to t he Attorney General to file reply of the same.  
  13 
C.M.A NO.431 OF 2012 : Mr. Mushtaq Mahr , DIG, CID, Karachi 
submitted a  report and stated that some time be given to them to do the 
needful. As the report was claimed to be confidential, therefore, same has 
been returned to them.  
It is to be note that despite repeated directions , so far no progress 
has been  made  and every time police authorities  come forward with the 
request for extension of time. We have pointed out to them that if they 
feel difficulty in con ducting the investigation or th ey are not in a position 
to deli ver, they should point out to the Court so we may pass appropriate 
order against them and dire ct to someone else for the purpose of 
investigating the case. Previously, Mr. Shabbir Sheikh, Addit ional I.G. was 
conducting the case but now he has been allowed to proceed to America 
on Course.    
Case is a djourned for tomorrow  i.e. 06.04.2012 .  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Quetta, the   
5th April, 2012  
Nisar/*  
 