IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam, Chairman  
Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
Dr. Muhammad Al -Ghazali, Ad -hoc Member -I 
Dr. Muhammad Khalid  Masud , Ad-hoc Member -II  
 
 
 
Criminal Shariat Appeal No. 16 of 2017  
(On appeal against the judgment dated 
03.05.2013 passed by the Federal Shariat 
Court, Islamabad , in Jail Criminal Appeal 
No.28/I of 2012 )  
 
 
Muhammad Hanif  
 
  …Appellant (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
The State  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Appellant (s): Mr. Ansar Mehmood Mirza, ASC  
 
For the State:  Ch. M. Sarwar Sidhu,  
 Addl. Prosecutor General Punjab.  
 
For the Complainant:  Muhammad Zafar, witness.  
 
Date of hearing:  01.12.2020.  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Ziarat Be Jan, 60, was 
spotted lying dead on a cot inside her home by her sister -in-law 
Zubaida Bibi (PW -1) and Safeena Bibi (PW -12), residents next door; as 
they approached the deceased,  the appellant  was seen , hurriedly 
leaving the room; the witnesses were joined by Zafar Iqbal (PW -2), 
Muhammad Sheezan and Muhammad Ayyaz who attempted to 
intercept the appellant albeit with no success; the deceased was lying 
without her loincloth  with multiple injuries on her face  with blood 
coming out of the  nostrils as well as the  mouth; the legs were 
disentangled with constriction; she was suspected to have been done to 
death with some blunt weapon . The deceased  was survived by five 
sons, statedly married. Looked down in the neighbourhood, the 
appellant was arrayed as suspect. Aut opsy was conducted at 11:00 Criminal Shariat Appeal No. 16 of 2017  
 2
p.m; fracture of hyoid bone suggested asphyxial death; blood was 
visible in the nasal, oral and vaginal cavities; wall s, ribs, cartilages and 
trachea  were fractured; upon dissection, the medical officer noted a 
bruise 5 x 3 cm o n the parietal bone; skull contained intracranial  
bleeding with rigor mortis found in developing stage; vaginal swabs did 
not carry seminal  stains; death was estimated to have occurred 
immediate ly within preceding twelve hours. Inventory from the spot 
included bloodstained hammer (P -1), ligature  (P-2) and pillow cover  
(P-4). The appellant  was arrested on 01.5.2006; indicted for homicide 
as well as carnal assault, he claimed trial on 30.10.2007 that resulted 
into acquittal on latter charge whereas on the fo rmer, convicted under 
clause (b) of section 302 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 , he was 
sentenced to imprisonment for life, maintained by the Federal Shariat 
Court vide impugned judgment  dated 03.0 5.2013, being assailed 
through leave of the Court  
2.    Learned counsel for the appellant contends that after 
prosecution ’s failure on the charge of rape, the very foundation  of its 
case against the appellant  is raised to the ground; that hapless lonely 
widow appears to have been done to death for reasons that re main a 
mystery as there is far more than what meets the eye requiring a 
scapegoat conveniently found in the appellant who certainly could not 
escape the witnesses in a small rural neighbourhood; the bottom line is 
that petitioner’ s nomination is  calculated  to hush up the tragedy . The 
learned Law Officer faithfully defended the impugned judgment .  
3.  Heard. Record perused.  
4.  The deceased was survived by five sons, each married with 
a family, ranging 40 years to 19 years in age, admittedly  residing in the 
same household; it is surprising that none, except the deceased, from 
such a sizable clan was present on the fateful day; their absence 
clamours  for explanation  and in retrospect spells out a scenario 
diametrically incompatible with the story set up in the  crime report. 
Prosecution ’s bid to frame the appellant  as a suspect in the crime on 
his questionable credentials is hit by Article 68 of the Qanun -e-
Shahadat Order, 1984  and as such by itself does not advance its case. 
Allegation that the appellant forcib ly committed rape upon the 
deceased stands negated by medical evidence leaving no apparent  
motive for him in the field to take on the deceased. Magnitude of 
violence , essentially reflecting a time intensive assault with obvious Criminal Shariat Appeal No. 16 of 2017  
 3
resistance by an able bodied  village -hardened woman could not have 
gone unnoticed  by the residents of the houses located nearby.  
Constricted legs  reflecting onslaught  of rigor mortis negates the  
hypothesis of  witnesses ’ arrival  within the time frame,  suggested in the  
crime report.  An assailant actuated by carnal designs is not expected 
to bring a hammer with him to  accomplish the task ; web of 
circumstances, each mindboggling, heavily intrigue upon the  integrity 
of prosecution case, unmistakably found fraught with doubts, 
deducible from  its own record, benefit whereof, cannot be withheld . 
Criminal Shariat Appeal No.16 of 2017 is allowed; impugned judgment 
is set aside; the appellant is acquitted of the charge and shall be 
released forthwith if not required to be detained in any other cas e.  
 
 
 
Chairman  
 
 
Member   Member  
 
 
Member   Member  
Islamabad, the  
1st December , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 