IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
C.M.A . NO.3470 OF 2013 IN C.M.A. N O.1536 OF 2013  
IN CIVIL APPEAL N O.191-L & 409 OF 2010.  
 
(Action taken o n News Clipping dated 4.6.2013,  
published in Daily Jang, against the Parliamentarians  
having fake/bogus degrees)  
 
 
On Court Notice    
 
For the ECP   
:  
Mr. Abdul Rehman Khan, DG (Law)  
   
For the HEC  : Mian Muhammad Hanif, ASC  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
   
For Ms. Samina 
Khawar Hayat  : Mr. Tariq Mahmood, Sr. ASC  
 
   
Date s of Hearing  : 09 and 10 July, 2013.  
 
JUDGMENT  
  SH. AZMAT SAEED, J. - The matter pertaining to 
Ms. Samina Khawar Hayat, MPA, has a rather chequered 
history. She sub mitted her Nomination  Papers on 25.11.2007 
for election to the wome n reserved seat for the Provincial 
Assembly of the Punjab . She was elected to such seat in the 
General Elections of 2008. In her Nomination Papers, she had 
disclosed her educational qualifi cation as B.Sc. (Home CMA.3470/2013.  2
Economics). Apparently, a Degree of Bachelor of Business 
Administration dated 22.09.2004, allegedly issued by Riphah 
International University, Islamabad, was appended with her 
Nomination Papers . On verification , the said Degree was 
found to be fake and the Election Commission of Pakistan 
(ECP) was informed accordingly by the Higher Education 
Commission (HEC)  vide letter dated 05.08.2010. Ms. Samina 
Khawar Hayat was summoned by the ECP and she took up the 
plea in her written statement that “… I was shocked to see a 
degree which was appended with my documents does not 
belongs to me.”.  It is her case that she had graduated from 
PIMSAT in the year 2006 with a Degree of Bach elor of 
Business Administration. The ECP vide 3-2 majority decision,  
dated 14.03.2012 held that Ms. Samina Khawar Hayat had not 
made a mis -declaration nor filed a bogus Degree  and the 
testimonial s of PIMSAT were genuine.  
2.  Pursuant to the Order of this Court dated 
01.04.2013, the testimonial s of various Parliamentarians  were 
subjected to verification. The matter was again taken up by the 
ECP, which vide unanimous Order dated 03.04.2013 held as 
follows:  
 “6. The Supreme Court in its order has 
made it clear that the Graduation degree or CMA.3470/2013.  3
its equivalent appended with the nom ination 
form is the document, which has to be 
probed into by the Commission regarding its 
genuineness or otherwise through the aegis 
of the High er Education Commission. The 
degree from Riphah International University 
was declared BOGUS and detailed views 
were given by the Vice Chancellor, Riphah 
International University. We have come 
across many cases of fake degrees where the 
usual stance taken by the Parliamentarians is 
that the degree appended with the 
nomination form, which subsequently is 
declared BOGU S through inquiry, by the 
concerned University does not belong to 
them and has been planted by their opponent 
in consort with the staff of the Returning 
Officer or the ECP after receiving their 
pound of flesh. Another degree/degrees 
from various Universiti es are thereafter 
produced. Such subsequent degrees have no 
weight in the eyes of law, rather compounds 
and cements the offence of corrupt practice. 
It is because of intervention of the Hon’ble 
Apex Court that the lady has been trapped 
for her dishonest an d fraudulent steps 
precipitated by her to avoid the clutches of 
law. Her own doing has earned her 
disqualification.  The office shall, therefore, 
de-notify her as Member Provincial 
Assembly on the date when she was elected. 
Simultaneously, Provincial Electi on CMA.3470/2013.  4
Commissioner, Punjab shall initiate criminal 
proceedings against  her before the Session 
Judge concerned under Section 82 of 
ROPA, 1976 and other provisions of law. 
Returning Officer for Reserved Seats, who 
is no one else but our own Provincial 
Election Commissioner, Punjab, Lahore will 
be informed that if she is again nominated 
on the Reserved Seat for Women by her 
party the nomination be rejected.”  
 
3.  Pursuant to the said Order, a criminal complaint has 
been filed which is stated to be pending adjudic ation before the 
learned Sessions Judge, Lahore.  
4.  In the meanwhile, the General Elections were 
eventually held on 11th of May, 2013 . Ms. Samina Khawar 
Hayat again submitted her Nomination Papers for the reserved 
seat for women of the Provincial Assembl y of the Province of 
the Punjab  and h er Nomination Papers were rejected. Being 
aggrieved, she filed an appeal before the learned Election 
Tribunal, which was accepted vide its Order dated 15.04.2013 
and she was permitted to participate in the electoral pro cess. 
She was elected  and is now a sitting Member of the Provincial 
Assembly  of the Punjab . 
5.  We have heard the learned counsel for Ms. Samina 
Khawar Hayat as well as the learned counsel for the HEC and CMA.3470/2013.  5
the representative of the ECP and examined the reco rd as made 
available.  
6.  Ms. Samina Khawar Hayat had  filed her 
Nomination Papers on 2 5.11.2007. In support of her claim 
with regard to educational qualification, testimonials were 
submitted . The ECP through the HEC during the process of 
verification had  declared  that the Degree purportedly issued by 
the Riphah International University, Islamabad, was fake. On 
being summoned by the ECP, she filed a written statement that 
“… I was shocked to see a degree which was appended wi th 
my documents does not belongs  to me. ”. The said written 
statement is on record at page 14 of Civil Misc. Application 
No.4412 of 2013, filed by the HEC. S he did not specifically 
deny that the said Degree of Riphah International University, 
Islamabad, was not appended with her Nominatio n Papers. The 
relevant portion of the said written statement  has been 
reproduced herein above. However, she took up the plea that in 
fact she is a graduate from the PIMSAT. The ECP vide its 
Order dated 05.04.2013 concluded that she had filed a bogus 
Degree with her Nomination Papers  and the Petitioner had 
indulged in unfair means to substantiate h er educational 
qualification to contest the General Elections of 2002. And as CMA.3470/2013.  6
has been held by this Court in the case titled as Muddasar 
Qayyum Nahra v. Ch. Bilal Ijaz and others  (2011 SCMR 80) 
such a person who uses unfair means in attempting to establish 
his educational qualification to contest the election or makes a 
wrong declaration cannot be considered to be an honest, 
righteous or ameen, hence, does not posse ss the qualifications 
prescribed under Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, to become a Member of 
the Parliament or the Provincial Assembly.  
7.  The effect of the Order date d 05. 04.2013 of the 
ECP and the observat ions made therein quoted herein above, 
upon the qualification or lack thereof of the Petitioner to 
contest the General Elections of 2013 needs to be examined. A 
similar issue came up before this Court in Civil Appeals 
No.411 to 414 of 2013, titled as Abdul  Ghafoor Lehri v. The 
Returning Officer, PB -29, Naseerabad -II & others , wherein it 
was held as follows:  
“12. Since the Sanad produced by the 
appellant while contesting election, 2002 has 
been declared not equivalent to B.A. degree for 
the reasons mentioned  in the preceding 
paragraphs, therefore, appellant was not at all 
qualified to contest election.  Now the question 
arises as to whether the appellant is disqualified 
to contest election, 2013 or not.  In this regard it CMA.3470/2013.  7
is noticed that while producing afore said Sanad, 
the appellant sworn an affidavit to the effect that 
the Sanad produced by him was issued to him 
by a recognized institution and equivalent to a 
bachelor degree made false statement and 
submitted false or incorrect declaration in 
respect of his educational qualification, thus, he 
was not righteous, sagacious, non -profligate, 
honest and Ameen within the meaning of 
Article 62(f) of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, as such, was not 
qualified to be elected or chosen as a member  of 
Majlis -e-Shoora.  
 
13. … This Court in the case of Malik Iqbal 
Ahmad Langrial  vs. Jamshaid Alam and others  
(PLD 2013 SC 179) has held that a person who 
indulges into using unfair means in procuring 
his educational qualifications does not deserve 
to clai m to be an honest, righteous or Ameen 
person so that he be assigned the high 
responsibilities of performing national functions 
of running the affairs of the country. …”  
 
14.  … For this reason alone, Article 62 does 
not provide any period after which a per son, 
who was declared disqualified under the said 
Article, can be eligible to contest the elections 
of the Parliament.  In such view of the matter 
we hold that a person who is not qualified under 
Article 62(1)(f) cannot become qualified by 
efflux of time.  Reference in this regard may 
also be made to the case of Imtiaz Ahmed Lali  v. 
Ghulam Muhammad Lali  (PLD 2007 SC 369). 
In such circumstances the appellant has rightly CMA.3470/2013.  8
been disqualified to be elected as member of the 
Parliament by the learned Election Tribu nal by 
allowing the election appeal filed against 
acceptance of his nomination papers by the 
Returning Officer which findings were upheld 
by the High Court of Balochistan. …”  
 
8.  This Court in a case reported as Mian Najeeb -ud-
Din Owasi and another v. Ami r Yar Waran and others  (PLD 
2013 SC 482) held as follows:  
“5. Notwithstanding whether the condition of 
being a graduate or having a degree equal to the 
requisite academic skill was not available 
subsequent to the General Election 2008, and 
the judgement in  the case of Muhammad Nasir 
Mahmood and others  vs.  Federation of 
Pakistan thr. Secretary M/o Law  (PLD 2009 
SC 107) yet if a candidate has made a 
declaration in the column meant for academic 
qualification and declared himself to be a 
graduate, but subsequ ently, it is found that he 
was not a graduate then he would equally be 
liable to face the consequences under Articles 
62 & 63 of the Constitution or the other relevant 
provisions of the PPC. It is further to be 
observed that once there is a disqualificatio n, it 
is always a disqualification; therefore, while 
making declaration in the nomination papers, a 
candidate must provide, a crystal clear statement 
about his credentials and antecedents. There is 
no scope of making or providing information, 
which is not correct, because he is one of the CMA.3470/2013.  9
persons whom the electorate of a constituency, 
which may be having a strength of 50 thousand, 
are going to elect their representative. 
Therefore, whatever, he possesses in terms of 
academic qualification, bank credits and taxes 
etc. he shall have to declare each and every 
thing required for the qualification to contest the 
election.  
6. ……………………………………………  
 
7. ……………………………………………  
 
8. ……………………………………………  
 
9. We have no objection on the decision of 
ECP, falling under categories A &  B. but as 
categories C to H are concerned, we may 
observe that for declaring a person to be 
disqualified, no period of limitation, as pointed 
out, would be relevant because such 
disqualification, was suffered at the time when 
he filed the nomination paper s by making a 
declaration, while having a fake degree in his 
hand, therefore, in such cases, no time period 
can be prescribed. …  
 
10. ………………………………… …..…………  
 
11. …………………………………… …..………  
 
12. ……………………………………… …..……  
13. Be that as it may, we are conscious that 
gentlemen whose names are mentioned were 
members of the Parliamentarians i.e. Members 
of the National Assembly, Provincial 
Assemblies and the Senate, therefore, the HEC 
and the ECP shall provide them another 
opportunity to satisfy the requirements to verify CMA.3470/2013.  10
their degrees as per the law, because if any 
decisive step is taken by this Court, there is 
every likelihood that they might loose their 
status retrospectively to be a Member of the 
National Assembly, Provincial Assembly or the 
Senate, notwithstanding the fa ct that the 
Assembly was dissolved after completion of 5 
years. Such disqualification will commence 
from the date when the notification declaring 
them to be a successful candidate was issued by 
the ECP, if at that time they were not qualified 
as the declar ation made have been found to be 
incorrect then they have no right to claim such 
status. Therefore, in the interest of justice, we 
allow to all of them i.e. 189 Parliamentarians, 
whose names have been mentioned in the list, 
furnished by the HEC to the ECP,  to get their 
degrees verified on or before 5.4.2013. Their 
names are available with the ECP and if they 
have already received notice they themselves 
shall approach the HEC. However, the HEC 
may also issue them notices, intimating them 
about the pendency o f verification of their 
degrees. This exercise has to be completed upto 
the date noted herein above. The ECP, in the 
meanwhile, shall inform the respective 
Returning Officers, before whom they may have 
filed the nomination papers, if they are again 
contest ing for the General Elections to give their 
decision in respect of their educational 
qualification after receipt of the decision by the 
HEC. Similarly, the same exercise shall be put 
into effect in respect of 27 Parliamentarians, 
whose cases were closed.”  CMA.3470/2013.  11
 
9.  While adjudicating  upon the case titled Allah Dino 
Khan Bhayo v. Election Commission of Pakistan, Islamabad 
and others  in Civil Petition No.1033 of 2013, this Court vide 
judgment dated 09.07.2013, held as follows:  
“11. In order to contest the electio ns of the 
Parliament or to the Provincial Assembly or be 
a Member thereof a person must possesses the 
qualification as enumerated in Article 62 of the 
Constitution and not suffer from the 
disqualification as mentioned in Article 63 of 
the Constitution. The  provisions of the said 
Articles when examined in the light of the 
judgment of this Court referred to and 
reproduced herein above reveal that certain 
disqualifications are removed by the afflux of 
time e.g. disqualification on account of 
conviction or remo val from service. Similarly, 
the qualifications can be acquired by some 
future act of the candidate e.g. by acquiring 
exclusive citizenship so as to become qualified 
in terms of Article 62(1)(a) of the Constitution. 
However, with regards to a qualification  in 
terms of Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution, 
the framers of the Constitution have chosen not 
to prescribe any period of time through the flux 
whereof or any act or omission through which 
such qualification can be acquired if a 
candidate or a member h as been held not to 
possess the same. Consequently, if a person is 
held not to be qualified in terms of Article CMA.3470/2013.  12
62(1)(f) of the Constitution such absence of 
qualification in law will haunt him forever.”  
 
10.  In the aforesaid facts and circumstance s, and i n 
view of the law laid down by this Court in various judgments 
referred to and reproduced herein above, it is clear and obvious 
that the Petitioner did not possess the qualification as set forth 
in Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitution of the Isla mic Republ ic 
of Pakistan, 1973 , to contest the Elections or to be Member of 
the Parliament of Provincial Assembly . Consequently, the 
Notification declaring Ms. Samina Khawar Hayat as a returned 
candidate for the reserved seat for the women in the Provincial 
Assembly  of the Punjab being  invalid is hereby set aside. The 
ECP shall proceed further in the matter strictly in accordance 
with the law  to fill the resulting vacancy . 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
 Judge  
 