IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Musarrat  Hilali  
 
Criminal Petition s No.1054 -L and 1344 -L of 2023  
(Against the order s dated 16.10.2023 and 27.11.2023 respectively of 
the Lahore High Court, Lahore passed in Crl. Revision No. 68011/2023  
and Crl. Misc. No. 41772 -B/2023)  
 
Mubarik Ahmad Sani.       … Petitioner  
(in both cases)  
     Versus  
The State and another.       … Respondent s 
(in both cases)  
 
For the Petitioner :   Sh. UsmanKarim -ud-Din, ASC.  
(In both cases)  
 
For the State :   Mr. Ahmed Raza  Gillani,  
(In both cases)     Additional Prosecutor -General, Punjab.  
a/w Shabraiz, DSP.    
 
For the Complainant:   Mr. M. Shahid  Tasawar  Rao, ASC.  
(In both cases)  
 
Date of Hearing:    06.02.2024. 
 
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ .  
 
Criminal Petition No. 1054 -L/2023 : Through this petition the petitioner 
seeks the deletion of certain charges from the Charge  framed against him. 
The learned counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner was charged 
for three offences pursuant to the case arising out of FIR No. 661 /22 
registered against him on 6 December 2022, at Police Station Chenab 
Nagar, District Chiniot . The t hree offences  for which the petitioner is 
charged were under : (a) section 7 rea d with section 9 of the Punjab Holy 
Quran (Printing and Recording) Act, 2011, ( b) under section 298-C of the 
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (‘PPC’), and ( c) under section 295 -B of the PPC.  
 
2. It was alleged in the FIR that the petitioner was 
distributing/ disseminating a  proscribed book – Tafseer -e-Sagheer . Learned 
counsel submits that distributing/disseminating a proscribed book was 
made an offence by the Punjab Holy Quran (Printing and Recording) 
(Amendment) Act  in the year  2021  whereas the FIR alleged th at the Criminal Petition No. 1054 -L/23 etc. 
 2 
petitioner had done this in 2019. We have examined the original law and 
the changes made to it, and the contention of the learned counsel that the 
said offence was incorporated into the law in 2021 is correct.  
 
3. The Constitution of the Islamic Rep ublic of Pakistan (‘ the 
Constitution ’) stipulates that a person cannot be charged for something 
which was not an offence when it was done. Article 12(1) of the 
Constitution stipulates that:  
‘12. (1)  No law shall authorize the punishment of a person - 
 (a) for an act or omission that was not punishable by law at 
 the time of the act or omission; or  
 
(b) for an offence by a penalty greater than, or of a kind 
different from, the penalty prescribed by law for that 
offence at the time the offence was committed. ’ 
 
 Therefore, since in the year 2019 the distribution/ dissemination of a 
proscribed book was not an offence , the petitioner could not have been 
charged for it.  
 
4. As regards the offence s under section s 298-C and 295 -B of the PPC 
for which the petitioner is also charged his learned counsel  submits that 
neither the FIR nor the police report ( challan ), submitted after investigation 
by the police , allege that the petitioner had done any of the acts mentioned 
therein to constitute these offences .  
 
5. The learned counsel representing the complainant read out the FIR , 
but not hing is stated therein to constitute the offences under sections 298 -
C and 295 -B of the PPC . The challan  is also silent in this regard.  The 
Charge  framed on 24 June 2023 by t he Additional Sessions Judge, Lalian 
to the extent of charging the petitioner for the offences under sections 298 -
C and 295 -B of the PPC did not accord with the provisions of Chapter XIX 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (‘ the Code ’), which pertain t o 
Charge . The instant case is also not one wherein the charge  could be 
altered or where the petitioner could have been convicted of a lesser offence 
to those under sections 298-C and 295-B of the PPC . Therefore , the  
offences under sections 298 -C and 295 -B of the PPC are removed from the 
Charge  framed against the petitioner.  
 
6. Courts must exercise extreme caution when dealing with matters of 
faith. The Islamic faith is based on the Holy Qur’an which , in its surah Al -Criminal Petition No. 1054 -L/23 etc. 
 3 
Baqarah  (chapter 2), verse 256  reproduced hereunder , expounds that there 
must not be any compulsion in religion . 
لَااِِلََْهََاِِاهدِّي نِاقَدْاتَبََّينَاهلَُّشْدُامِنَا اهلغَِّافَمَنْايَكْفَُْابِالطناغُا وتِاوَيُؤْمِنْا 
بِاَّللنِافَقَدِا اهسْتَمْسَكَابِالْعَُْوَةِاهلْوُثَْقَالَا اههفََِاََالَََااوَهَّللنُاسَمِعٌ اََِِعٌ ا ا
 
7. Religious c ompulsion also violates the Divine scheme of 
accountability in the Hereafter. Even Prophet Muhammad (peace and 
blessings of Almighty Allah be upon him) was t old by the Creator that he is 
required to only convey the Message and should not compel people to 
believe , as stipulated in surah Ar -Ra’d (chapter 13), verse 40 and in surah  
Yunus  (chapter 10), verse 99  of the Holy Qur’an . Freedom of faith is one of 
the fundamental tenets of Islam. But sadly, in matters of religion tempers 
flare up and the Qur’anic  mandate is forsaken.  
 
8. The Holy Qur’an  requires that all matters of significance should be 
pondered over and reflected upon  (surah An -Nahl (chapter 16), verse 44 and 
surah Yunus  (chapter 10), verse 24 ). All those concerned with this case 
should have done so, instead they were eager to demonstrate that the Holy 
Qur’an  was desecrated and that God’s Last Messenger (peace and blessings 
of Almigh ty Allah be upon him) was denigrated. They should also have 
consider ed verse 9 of surah al -Hijr (chapter 15) where Almighty Allah says:  
ِِهنا اَنَۡنُا اهَزنۡلَۡا اٱ لِّلََۡا اِإَوهنا الَُا ۥا لَحََٰفِظُونَا  
The translation of the above verse is,  ‘We have, without  doubt, sent down 
the Message;  and we will assuredly guard it .’    
 
9. The principle of there being no compulsion in religion  mentioned in the 
Holy Qur’an is enshrined in the Constitution as a Fundamental Right. 
Clause (a) of Article 20 of the Constitution stipulates that , ‘every citizen 
shall have the right to profess, practice and propagate his religion ’ and 
clause (b) of Article 20 states that, ‘every religious denomination and every 
sect thereof shall have the right to establish, main tain and manage its 
religious institutions ’. Article 22 of the Constitution requires and prescribes 
that, ‘no religio us community or denomination shall be prevented from 
providing religious instruction for pupils of that community or denomination in 
any ed ucational institution maintained wholly by that community or 
denomination ’. These Fundamental Rights cannot be derogated  from, 
circumvented or diluted . Criminal Petition No. 1054 -L/23 etc. 
 4 
10. If only the functionaries of the State had heeded the Holy Qur’an , 
considered the Constitution and examined the law then the FIR would not 
have been registered in respect of the abovementioned offences. Therefore, 
Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1054 -L of 2023 is converted into 
an appeal and allowed by setting aside the impugned order and by deleting 
section 7 read with section 9 of the Punjab Holy Quran (Printing and 
Recording) Act, 2011 and section 298 -C and 295 -B of the PPC from the 
Charge  framed against the petitioner.  
 
11. Criminal Petition No. 1344 -L/2023 : Through this petition the 
petitioner seeks bail. On the last date of hearing the following order was 
passed:  
 
‘Learned counsel states that the petitioner was arrested on 7 
January 2023 and if at all the offence is made out it would be 
under section 5 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932, as 
the allegation against him is that he distributed a proscribed 
book, th at is, Tafseer -e-Sagheer , which section attracts a 
maximum imprisonment of six months. Learned counsel further 
states that the FIR was registered on 6 December 2022 whereas 
the alleged offence was state d to have been committed on 7 
March 2019 without expla ining the delay and the petitioner has 
remained incarcerated since 7 January 2023. Issue notice for 6 
February 2023.’  
 
12. We enquired from the learned Additional Prosecutor  General, Punjab 
(‘APG’) whether the above contention of the learned counsel for th e 
petitioner was incorrect and the learned APG stated that it was not .  
 
13. Though the petitioner has not been charged under section 5 of the 
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932, however, it could be contended that 
its ingredients were mentioned in the FIR a nd in the Charge , therefore, the 
charge could be altered under section 227 of the Code and the trial could 
continue as the alteration would not prejudice the petitioner. Therefore, we 
proceed to consider whether the petitioner should be granted bail in res pect 
of the said section 5.  
 
14. The petition er was arrested on 7 January 2023 and has remained 
incarcerated for thirteen months, which is more than double the 
permissible punishment  under section 5 of the Criminal Law Amendment 
Act, 1932 . Trials in respect of offences where the maximum sentence of 
imprisonment is relatively short must be conducted promptly or the 
accused should be granted bail. However, bail was declined to the Criminal Petition No. 1054 -L/23 etc. 
 5 
petitioner by the Additional Sessions Judge on 10 June 2023, without 
considering that the petitioner had already served out the maximum 
prescribed imprisonment for the said offence. The learned Judge of the 
High Court also dismissed the petitioner’s bail application, through the 
impugned order dated 27 November 2023 , by overlooking this crucially 
important aspect of the case.   
 
15. Therefore, since the petitioner has already served out the maximum 
imprisonment of six months prescribed for the offence if he is found to be 
guilty of having committed  it, keeping him in carcerated would violate a 
number of his Fundamental Rights . Article 9 of the Constitution stipulates 
that a person shall not be deprived of his liberty save in accordance with 
law; the law no longer permits his detention . And, Article 10A of the 
Constitut ion guarantees right to a fair trial and due process , which too the 
petitioner is now being denied. In addition to the violation of these two 
Fundamental Rights is the overarching right stipulated in Article 4 of the 
Constitution , ‘To enjoy the protection of law, and, to be treated in accordance 
with law is the inalienable right  of every citizen. ’ The petitioner is no longer 
being treated in accordance with law  because while waiting for the 
conclusion of his trial he has remained imprisoned for a period much 
longer than what he could have been punished for if he is found guilty.  
 
16. We regretfully note that in dealing with cases pertaining to offences 
against religion  facts give way to emotions, as seems to have happened in 
this case too , and individual com plainants supplant the State, even though 
the very nature of these offences is not against an individual or with regard 
to personal property.  
 
17. Therefore, Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 1344 -L of 2023 is 
converted into an appeal and allowed by setting aside the impugned orders  
and it is ordered that the petitioner be  immediately released upon provision 
of a personal bond in the sum of five thousand rupees in respect of the 
case arising out of the abovementioned FIR  No. 661/22 .  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
06.02.2024 
(M. Tauseef)  
Approved for Reporting  