IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
C.P.1692 -L/2020 , C.P.1792 -L/2020  and C.P.5 -L/2021  
(Against the orders of Lahore High Court, Lahore dated 08.09.2020, 
passed in W.P. No.40067/2020, dated 15.09.2020 passed in W.P. 
No.415/2020, dated 17.11.2020 passed in W.P. No.32377/2020)  
 
Province of Punjab through Secret ary Primary & Secondary 
Healthcare, Punjab, Lahore, etc.  (In CP 1692 -L/2020  & 5-L/2021)  
Province of Punjab through Drug Inspector, Tehsil & District 
Sargodha, etc.  (In CP 1792 -L of 2020)    
...….Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
M/s Bloom Pharmaceuticals (Pvt.) Limited  (In CP 1692 -L of 2020)  
International Pharma Labs, Lahore  (In CP 1792 -L of 2020)  
M/S Zafa Pharmaceutical Laboratories (Pvt.) Limited, Lahore  (In 
CP 5-L of 2021)                   …….Respondent (s) 
For the petitioner(s):  Rana Shamshad Khan, Addl. A.G.  
   (In all cases)  a/w Mr. Shaheen Iqbal, Secretary  
  Aleem Akhtar Cheema, Law Officer  
  M. Farooq Bashir Butt, Director.  
         
For the respondent(s):  Rana Maqsood Afzal,  ASC (In CP  1692 -L/20)  
  Mr. Haroon Dugal, ASC (In CP  5-L/2021)  
In CP 1792 -L/2020  N.R. 
Date of hearing:  28.01.2021  
JUDGEMENT  
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. -  The question  that 
requires determination by us revolves around the interpretation of 
section 22  sub-sections (4) and (5) of the Drugs Act, 1976 (“ Act”). 
The question is whether the Provincial Quality Control Board 
("Board") , etc. enjoys  the “discretion”  under section 22(5) of the Act  
to either allow or reject the request of the accused or the 
complainant for re -testing of the drug. The occasion of re -testing 
arises only when  the drug has already been tested and the Report 
of the Government Analyst has been challenged within ten days1 
before the Board , etc. by the person from who m the sample has 
been taken or the warrantor of the drug . 
                                                
1 as per Punjab Amendment brought about through The Punjab Drugs 
(Amendment) Act (V of 2017)  dated 13.02.2017  C.P.1692 -L of 20 20 etc.  2 
 
 
2.  Learned Addl. A.G. representing the petitioners 
submits that it is the discretion of the Board, etc . to allow or 
disallow such a request as has been clearly p rovided under section 
22 (5) of the Act. While on the other hand, learned counse l for the 
respondent companies argues  that if the R eport of the Government 
Analyst ("Report") is challenged by the accused or his warrantor 
within 10 days of the receipt of the said R eport in terms of Section 
22 (4)  of the Act , the subsequent request by the accused for re -
testing of the drug from the Federal Drug Laboratory, etc . is a mere 
mechanical requirement  and the Board , etc. has no discretion to 
disallow such a request for re -testing.  
3. We have heard the arguments of the learned counsel 
for the parties and have examined Section 22 sub-sections (4) and  
(5) of the Drugs Act, 1976  (Punjab Amendment) , which are 
reproduced hereunder for ready reference: - 
"Section 22. Reports of Government Analysts. – (1) 
The Government Analyst to whom a sample of any 
drug has been submitted for test and analysis under 
sub-section (3) of section 19 shall deliver to the 
Inspector submitting it a signed report in 
quadruplicate in the prescribed form and forward 
one copy thereof to the authority as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) …  
(3) …  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other  
law for the time being in force, any document 
purporting to be a report signed by a Government 
Analyst [or the Notified Drugs Laboratory] shall be 
admissible as evidence of the facts stated therein 
without formal proof and such evidence shall be 
conclusiv e unless the person from whom the sample 
was taken or the said warrantor has, within [ten 
days] of the receipt of a copy of the report notified in 
writing to the Inspector or [Provincial Quality Control 
Board or, as the case may be, the Central Licensing 
Board or the Registration Board or the Drug Court] 
before which any proceedings in respect of the 
sample are pending that he intends to adduce 
evidence in contravention of the report.  
(5) Where a person has, under sub -section (4), 
notified his intention of adducing evidence in 
contravention of a [report of Government Analyst or 
of Notified Drugs Laboratory] [Provincial Quality 
Control Board or, as the case may be, the Central 
Licensing Board or the Registration Board or the 
Drug Court] may, of its own motion  or in its 
discretion at the request either of the complainant or 
the accused, cause the sample of the drug lying with 
the Board concerned under sub -section (3) of section C.P.1692 -L of 20 20 etc.  3 
 
19 to be sent for test or analysis to the Federal Drug 
Laboratory or any other labor atory specified for the 
purpose by the Federal Government [or the 
Provincial Government] which shall make the test or 
analysis and report in writing signed by, or under the 
authority of, the person for the time being Incharge 
of the Federal Drug Laboratory , or, as the case may 
be, such other laboratory, the result thereof and 
such report shall be conclusive evidence of the facts 
stated therein. " 
 
Perusal of the above provision show s that once the R eport is 
received by the person, from w hom the sample was ta ken (referr ed 
to as  an accused  in sub -section 5) , he can within ten days file , in 
writing , before the Inspector, or the Board, etc . where his case is 
pending, his intention to adduce evidence in contravention of the 
Report. This intention of adducing evidence in contravention of the 
Report  actually is in the nature of a complaint against the Report 
specifying  the grounds of contravention of  the Report, on the basi s 
of which, the person  proposes to  adduce evidence later on.  Unless, 
sub-section 5 is inv oked, the complaint against the Report  takes 
its lawful course and the matter is finally concluded by the Board, 
etc. which has received such a  complaint .  
4.  However, before the matter regarding the Report is 
concluded under sub -section 4, sub-section 5  of section 22 
provides yet another avenue  to the accused, as well as, the 
complainant . Once  the complaint is  filed against the Report by the  
accused  within ten days as required by section 22(4) , the Board  or 
any other authority, before whom such a complaint against the 
Repo rt is pending, can on its own motion  or in it s discretion  on the 
request of the accused or the complainant may allow re -testing of 
the drug from the Federal Drug Laboratory, etc.  Other than the 
suo mot u power enjoyed by  the Board, etc . to send  the drug for re -
testing, the Board,  etc. also enjoys the discretion to allow or 
disallow the request for re -testing by the accused or the 
complainant.  The request will be examined on the basis of the 
grounds already raised by the acc used against the Report filed 
within ten days under section 22(4) of the Act. The said request, 
does not stand alone and must be preceded with a complaint 
under section 22(4) of the Act as discussed above. There is  no 
timeframe under the law for filing suc h a request but according to C.P.1692 -L of 20 20 etc.  4 
 
the scheme of the law such a request is to be made prior to the 
decision of the complaint filed by the accused  against the Report  
under section 22(4) . On the whole , we are of the view  that the 
Board, etc . enjoy s independent  discretion to allow or disallow the 
request of the accuse d or the complain ant for re -testing after 
considering the grounds against the Report and by passing a 
speaking order in this regard.  
5.  The view expressed by the High Court that the Board, 
etc. does no enjoy  any such discretion in the matter of  re-testing  
the drug is no t correct . We, therefore,  set aside the impugned 
judgment s and direct  the Board, etc . or (where ever the matter is 
pending)  to decide the request  of the respondent accused, in 
accordanc e with law  and in the light of this judgment , by passing a 
speaking order within a month from the receipt of this order.  
6.  For the above reasons, the impugned orders passed by 
the High Court are set aside and these petitions are converted into 
appeals a nd allowed in the above terms.   
 
 
 
 
Lahore , 
28th January, 2021 . 
Approved for reporting  
Iqbal   
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 