Civil Appeal No.1498/2018, etc  1 
 
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah , J.-  I have had the privilege of perusing 
the eloquent  opinions recorded by my learned brethren , Justice 
Mushir Alam and Justice Munib Akhtar . With all deference , I could 
not make myself agree to the opinion of Justice Mushir Alam . I 
concur with the opinion handed down by my learned brother 
Justice  Munib Akhtar  that the Election Commission (“Commission”) 
has no jurisdiction, either under Article 218(3) of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 (“Constitution”) or under 
Section 9 (1) of the E lection Act  2017 (“Election Act”) to deal with 
and decide the matter of alleged pre -election qualification or 
disqualification of a returned candidate , and that the present 
appeals should therefore be allowed. I also agree with the 
interpretation of  the provisions of A rticle 218 of the Constitution 
and generally on the construction  of the provisions of Section 9 of 
the Election Act, by Justice Munib Akhtar . With respect, I have a 
slightly different view on the construction of Section 9(1) and its 
Explanation , which I consider my solemn obligation to express; 
hence this note.  
2.   I respectfully disagree with the view of my learned 
brother stated in para 20 of the judgment that “the Commission no 
longer has the p ower to declare the poll in a constituency (or in any 
one or more polling stations) void except in the special case.”  To my 
humble understanding, the power of the Commission to declare the 
poll at one or more polling stations or in the whole constituency 
void, being ancillary and incidental, is implied in the power 
conferred on the Commission by Section 9(1) to declare that grave 
illegalities or violations of the provisions of the Act or the Rules have 
materially affected the result of the poll and in its power to call upon 
the voters in the polling station or stations concerned or in the 
whole constituency, as the case may be, to recast their votes. This 
was also the mandate of Section 103AA of the erstwhile law, i.e., the 
Representation of the People Act 1976. It is obvious that without 
declaring the result of the earlier poll(s) void (i.e., cancelled) the 
Commission cannot call upon the voters to recast their votes – the 
result of two polls cannot co -exist. Therefore, it i s inevitable for the 
Commission to declare the result of the earlier poll(s) void before 
calling upon the voters to recast their votes.   Civil Appeal No.1498/2018, etc  2 
 
3.  My learned brother has  held that Section 9(1) read with 
its “Explanation ” specifies three conditions in which the 
Commission could exercise its jurisdiction under t hat Section, 
namely;  (i) grave illegalities, (ii) violation of the provisions of the Act 
or the rules, and (iii) implementation of an agreement restraining 
women from casting their votes, while Section 103A A(1) of the 
erstwhile law stipulated only the first two  conditions . I, with respect , 
differ and  find that the conditions still continue to be two under the 
new law , as were the case under the old law: (i) grave illegalities, 
and (ii) violation of the provisions of the Act or the rules . “The 
implementation of an agreement  restraining women from casting 
their votes ” is not, in my opinion, an independent third condition 
rather is  part of the first two condition s. The word ‘including’ used 
in Section 9(1) has led me to this finding.  The Election Act contains 
several provisions to ensure par ticipation of women in the election 
process1, and p reventing women from exercising their  right to vote 
has been made an offence of corrup t practice under its Section 
167(a) read with Section 170(vii).  The implementation of an 
agreement  restraining women from casting their votes  is thus a 
grave illegality and violation of the provisions of the Act, which 
materially affects the result of the poll.    
4.  My next concern is as to the finding of  my learned 
brother to the effect that the “Explanation ” to Section 9(1) can 
render in some “special case” the entire election in the constituency 
void meaning thereby that fresh elections shall be held in the 
constituency, as opposed to  declaring the  poll(s) void resulting in 
recasting of the votes for the same contesting candidates afresh.  In 
my humble understanding, the “Explanation ” to Section 9(1) serves 
the ordinary purpose  that an Explanation is supposed to serve , i.e., 
to facilitate the proper understanding of a provision . The power of 
the Commission under S ection 9(1) is  only to declare the poll at one 
or more polling statio ns or in the whole constituency  void, which 
then leads t o recasting of the votes for the same candidates. The 
grounds of declaring the polls to be void are: (i) grave illegalities , or 
(ii) viola tion of the provisions of the Act or the rules  including  “the 
                                                             
1 (See Section 12(c)  about measures for public awareness regarding participation of women in 
elections, Section 47 about special measures for enrolment of women voters, Section 91(1) about 
preparing statement about turnout of women voters, Section 91(3) about making special report 
regarding restraining the women voters from exercising their right to vote, etc.)  Civil Appeal No.1498/2018, etc  3 
 
implementation of an agreement  restraining women from casting 
their votes .” The Explanation simply adds a presumption in the 
context of  the ground of “implementation of an agreement 
restraining women from casting their votes” and provides  that if the 
turnout of women voters is less than ten percent of the total vote s 
polled in a constituency , the C ommission may presume that the 
women voters have been re strained through an agreement from 
casting their votes.  In pith and substa nce, this is all what the 
Explanation explains .  The word “election”  used in the Explanation 
is though some what confusing , but  in order to harmonize and 
balance the meaning and import of the “Explanation” and also to 
keep it within the fold of the main provision , the word “election ” may 
be read to mean “poll”; as the meaning of an Explanation cannot 
generally go beyond the controlling main provision. The Explanation 
to Section 9(1), in my understanding , does not attract  any “special 
case,” where the “election” instead of the “poll” in the whole 
constituency  may be declared void.  However, we are not faced with 
the interpr etation of the word “election” in this case, therefore , it is 
best to leave it to be considered more ela borately in an appropriate 
case, where the facts of the case would so require.  
 
Judge  
 
  
 