IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
MR. JUSTICE YAHYA AFRIDI  
 
Civil Petition s No. 1319 of 2020 and 1410 of 2021  
(Against the  order dated  02.03.2020 &  23.12.2020 passed by 
the Islamabad High Court, I slamabad in F.A.O. No. 67 of 2019 
and Regular First Appeal No. 64 of 2017)   
 
Muhammad Farrukh Iqbal  (in both cases)  
…Petitioner  
     Versus  
Mrs. Ayesha Iram, etc.  (in both cases)   
      …Respondent  
                 
For the  petitioner s: Mr. Muhammad Koukab  Iqbal, 
AOR/ASC  
 With the petitioner in person.  
 (in both cases)  
 
For the respondents : N.R. (in both cases)  
 
Date of hearing:    21.06.2021   
 
ORDER  
 
 
Qazi Faez Isa, J . CPLA  No. 1410 of 2021 assails two concurrent 
judgments , respectively of the Trial Court a nd of the High Court 
acting as the Appellate Court. And CPLA No. 1319 of 2020 assails 
the execution proceedings pursuant to the two impugned 
judgments. A suit was filed on 31 July 2002 by the respondent No. 
1 claiming her right to inheritance in House No. 18 situated on 
Street No. 27, Sector F -6/2, Islamabad (‘the House ’) asserting that 
it was owned by her late father , Col. Muhammad Safdar Iqbal , who 
died on 17 December 2000 and on his death it devolved on his 
legal heirs , that is, two sons and three daught ers, the petitioner 
and the respondent s herein . The petitioner filed his written 
statement alleging therein that the House was gifted to him by his 
father through ‘ Declaration of Oral Gift ’, a two page written 
document  dated 2 September 2000  (‘the gift doc ument ’). 
 
2. The learned counsel submits  that the gift document was 
validly executed and constituted a gift, was witnessed by two Civil Petitions No. 1319 of 2020 & 1410 of 2021  2
daughters  of the deceased and that the ‘Acceptance of Gift’ 
endorsed therein below was witnessed by two witnesses , namely , 
Shahid Ghani Mughal and Farrukh Saeed Qureshi; Shahid Ghani 
Mughal testified but the other witness Farrukh Saeed Qureshi 
could not do so because he had passed away  and his death was 
confirmed by the death certificate produced  in evidence. The 
learned co unsel states that the courts did not  appreciate that 
Farrukh Saeed Qureshi had passed away and further that the gift 
document was not one which came within  the definition of a 
document under Article 17(a) of the Qanun -e-Shahadat,  1984 as it 
was not in respect of  financial  or future  obligation  but came under 
clause (b) of the said Article  in respect whereof one witness may be 
accepted . He further submits that the learned Judge misread/non -
read the relevant evidence and if the same was read properly the 
suit would have been dismissed.  
 
3. In response to our query , the learned counsel states that the 
gift document did not require registration as Muhammadan Law  
prevails over the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the 
Registration Act, 1908 and re ferred to the case of Bilawar Khan v 
Amir Sabar Rahman  (PLD 2013 Peshawar 38) . He further state s 
that a Muslim is not required to make a gift in a particular format 
and a gift can be made simply on a plain piece of paper.  
 
4. We have heard the learned counsel and with his assis tance 
examined the documents on the record. The Trial Court’s judgment 
is comprehensive and the learned Judge gave a number of reasons 
for discounting the gift document , including that there was no 
signature or thumb impression of the donor on the first pa ge while 
there were three thumb impression s, purporting to be of the donor , 
on the second page. The learned Judge also considered the 
document s produced by the petitioner which were stated to have 
been submitted to the Capital Development Authority (‘ CDA’) in the 
year 1994 for transfer of the property in the name of the petitioner 
but held that the same were not produced through a witness of 
CDA and that it is unbelievable that the same were not acted upon 
for a period of six years. The refore, the  courts held that the gift in Civil Petitions No. 1319 of 2020 & 1410 of 2021  3
favour of the petitio ner was not established.  Incidentally, the 
petitioner did not seek to challenge either CDA’s refusal to transfer 
the House in his favour nor took any action to implement the gift 
document. Col. Muhammad Safdar Iqbal  died on 17 December 
2000 and the House stood in his name , and continued to stand in 
his name , when the suit was filed on 31 July 2002.  
 
5. It is noteworthy that the petitioner relied on the said gift 
document and asserted that through it the House was gifted to 
him. Since the basis of the gift was the gift document w e drew the 
attention of the learned counsel to Chapter VII of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882 and to its section 123 , relevant portion whereof 
stipulates, that , ‘For the purpose of making a gift of immovable 
property, the transfer must be effected by a registered instrument 
signed by or on behalf of the donor and attested by at least two 
witnesses .’ We questioned how the gift document could be used to 
gift the House. The learned counsel respo nds by submitting that 
the gift was made orally as mentioned in the gift document , which 
is titled ‘Declaration of Oral Gift’ . We have examined the gift 
document which states that the, ‘ DONOR, hereby gift the above 
said property …’, that is, the House. It is thus clear that the gift 
document did not merely record an earlier oral gift but it was 
through the gift document that the House was purportedly gifted . 
The title  of the gift  document is inconsequential in view of its clear 
and unambiguous contents, whic h stated that the House was 
sought to be gifted  by and through t he gift document . The cited 
case of Bilawar Khan  has no relevance to the facts of the instant 
case.  
 
6. Section 17(a) of the Registration Act, 1908 requires that g ifts 
of immovable property made by or through written documents 
require registration . Therefore, the gift document require d 
registration. It would also require stamping pursuant to the Stamp 
Act, 1899. In the absence of the statutory requirement of 
registration of the gift document it  could not be used to transfer 
the property to the petitioner.  
 Civil Petitions No. 1319 of 2020 & 1410 of 2021  4
7.  Therefore, for the reasons mentioned above we are not 
inclined to grant leave because we have not been persuaded that 
the House had been gifted to the petitioner . Consequently, l eave to 
appeal is declined and these petitions are dismissed.  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
21.06.2021  
Arif 
Approved for reporting  
 