IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi  Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
 
 
Civil Misc. Application Nos. 6762 and 2797 of 2020  
(Non compliance of this Court’s order dated 11.2.2014  
passed in Civil Appeal No.  20 of 2014 ) 
in 
Civil Appeal No.  20/2014  
 
 
Administrator Municipal Corporation, Peshawar.   (in CMA 6762/20)  
Taimur Hussain Amin and others.     (in CMA 2797/20)  
         … Petitioners  
     Versus  
Taimur Hussain Amin and others.     (in CMA 6762/20)  
Administrator Municipal Corporation, Peshawar, etc.  (in CMA 2797/20)  
         … Respondent s 
 
 
On Court’s Notice  
 
For the Federation :  Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
     Attorney General for Pakistan and  
     Maulvi Ijaz -ul-Haq, DAG  
 
For Government of  
Balochistan :   Mr. Arbab Muhammad Zahir,  
Advocate General and  
     Mr. FareedDogar,  
     Additional Advocate General  
 
 
For Government of Khyber  
Pakhtunkhwa:    Mr. Shumail Ahmed Butt, Advocate General  
     & Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Add’l Advocate General  
 
 
For Government of Punjab:  Mr. Qasim Ali Chohan, Add’l Advocate 
General with Mr. Noorulamin Mengal, 
Secretary Local Government.  
 
For Government of Sindh:  Nemo  
 
 
For Election Commission of  
Pakistan:     Mr. Afnan KarimKundi, ASC  
     With Hon’ble Mr. Sikandar Sultan Raja,  CMA No. 6762/2020 etc.  
 
 
 2
Chief Election Commissioner & Members: 
Hon’ble Mr. Altaf Ibrahim Qureshi,  
     Hon’ble Mrs. IrshadQaiser,  
     Hon’ble Mr. Shah Muhammad Jatoi and  
     Hon’ble Mr. Nisar Ahmed Durrani.  
     Dr. Akhtar Nazir, Secretary and  
     Mr. Muhammad Arshad, D.G. (Law)  
 
For the Applicant  
(in CMA No. 2797/2020) :  Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
Date of Hearing:    04.02.2021  
 
ORDER  
 Further to the last order the Hon’ble Election Commission of 
Pakistan ( ‘ECP’) has filed CMA No. 492/2021, Province of Punjab has filed 
CMA No. 483/2021, Province of Balochistan has filed CMA No. 488/2021 
and Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa has filed CMA No. 497/2021. There 
is no representation of the Province of Sindh nor has any CMA been filed 
on its behalf despite issuance of notice to t he learned Advocate -General 
Sindh and asking him to submit his government’s position ‘ with regard to 
the holding of local government elections ’. In view of their failure we now 
direct the Government of Sindh, through Chief Secretary and Secretary 
Local Gov ernment, to submit the Government of Sindh’s position through 
the Advocate -General Sindh, who should be in attendance on the next 
date or ensure that his office is competently represented. Some of those 
who are present have stated that the local government  elections can not 
be held on account of one or more reasons as mentioned hereinbelow.  
 
2. The census held in the year 2017 is still awaiting approval by the 
Council of Common Interests ( ‘CCI’) where after it will be notified. In this 
regard the learned At torney -General for Pakistan (‘ Attorney -General ’) 
states that the Chairman of the CCI is the Prime Minister who will be 
convening a meeting of the CCI soon with regard to the census and 
requests that this mater may be adjourned to a date after three weeks. He 
further points out that the Government of Sindh has objected to the 
census results, particularly with regard to the provincial capital Karachi 
alleging that the numbers counted are considerably less than what they 
should be. He states that once the cens us is approved by the CCI and 
consequently notified the delimitation of constituencies of local CMA No. 6762/2020 etc.  
 
 
 3
governments as mentioned in Article 222(b) of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) will take place in accordance 
with Chapter I II of the Election Act, 201 7. Reference was also made to 
sub-article (5) of Article 51 and to its proviso. The learned Attorney -
General to submit minutes of the meeting of the CCI with regard to this 
matter.  
 
3. Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, the learned counsel representing the ECP, 
states that the delimitation in the Province of Punjab and in the Province 
of Khyber Pakhtukhwa has been done. The learned Additional Advocate 
General, Punjab supports his statement. However, the learned Advocate 
General, Khyber Pakht unkhwa disputes it with regard to his province and 
states that the exercise carried out by the ECP does not conform to the 
law and is subject to the CCI accepting the census results. Mr. Kundi 
responds by referring to sections 17(2) and 19(6) of Election A ct, 2017 
read with section 6(5)(e) of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Local Government 
Act, 2013. The learned Advocate General, Balochistan states that the 
Balochistan Local Government Act, 2010 was amended, however, it is 
proposed to be further amended in view of the guidelines provided by the 
ECP.  
 
4. Another reason stated for not holding local government elections is 
the prevalence of the Covid -19 virus. When we enquired from the learned 
Attorney -General whether this was a valid reason to not hold such 
elections and he referred to recent bye -elections and the elections held in 
Gilgit -Baltistan, and further submitted that the law does not provide any 
exception in this regard.  
 
5. It was also pointed out that the Balochistan High Court has 
suspended the operation of  a local government notification dated 17 
January 2019 vide its order dated 12 February 2019 passed in C. P No. 
143/2019 and such interim order has been extended from time to time 
and continues. However, the learned Judges of the High Court had noted 
on 7 October 2020 that, ‘ the issue of notification of the census is pending 
before the CCI and upon approval, would be notified ’. It is now almost two 
years since the said interim order was passed. We may observe that CMA No. 6762/2020 etc.  
 
 
 4
election matters and those cases which prev ent constitutional 
functionaries from carrying out their constitutional duties must be 
decided as soon as possible, particularly when a stay order has been 
issued the effect of which deters the holding of elections. Copy of this 
order and order dated 28 Ja nuary 2021 be sent to the Registrar of the 
High Court of Balochistan for the kind attention of the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice for early fixation and disposal of the said petition and for the 
communication of the decision to this Court.  
 
6. Reference was also ma de to C. P. No.D -2948/2020 before the High 
Court of Sindh, Karachi which has been filed against the ECP.  However, 
no injunctive order has been passed in such petition and order dated 26 
January 2021 states that the 2017 census results have ‘ been approved by 
the Federal Cabinet ’ on 22 December 2020 and that the ‘ matter has been 
forwarded to the CCI for final approval ’. The order also records that the 
representative of the CCI had said that a ‘ meeting of CCI will be convened 
within two weeks ’, which means by  or before 8 February 2021. Copies of 
this order and order dated 28 January 2021 be sent to the Registrar of the 
High Court of Sindh and it be placed on the record of the said petition; 
however, it is clarified that the matter before this Court should not be 
used as a pretext for not hearing and deciding the petition before the 
Hon’ble High Court, which we expect will be done as soon as possible.  
 
7. Whilst the tenure of the local governments in the provinces of 
Balochistan, Sindh and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa exp ired the subsisting 
tenure of the local representatives elected by the people of Punjab, we are 
informed by the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab (‘ AAG 
Punjab ’), was brought to an end by virtue of section 3(1) of the Punjab 
Local Government Act, 2019, reproduced hereunder:  
“3. Dissolution of existing local governments. -  
 
(1) All local governments constituted or continued under the 
Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 (Act XVIII of 2013) are 
hereby dissolved.”  
 
Since no reason for the dissolution of the subsisting local governments 
was mentioned in the cited provision we enquired from the learned AAG 
Punjab to inform us about the reason which uprooted grassroots CMA No. 6762/2020 etc.  
 
 
 5
democracy in the Province of Punjab, and he responded by stating that the 
dissolution has been challenged before this Court in CPLA Nos. 48/2019 
and 7/2020. Since the learned AGP Punjab did not answer our query we 
then asked him to respond to a hypothetical query (and one which had 
nothing to do with the merits of the referred to pending cases) : (1) Whether 
the Constitution, which mandates local governments, also envisages 
premature termination of local governments? (2) Whether local 
governments can be dissolved for no rhyme or reason? But, the learned 
AAG Punjab elected not to answer, and we ar e left to wonder whether his 
conscience prevented him from answering. Therefore, the Advocate -
General Punjab is directed to be in attendance on the next date of hearing 
and is directed to submit a written reply to our aforesaid queries as well 
as to the fo llowing queries: (3) Whether the majority of the members of a 
provincial assembly can dissolve local governments when those who are 
elected are their opponents? (4) Whether by not holding local government 
elections within the prescribed one year period men tioned in sub -section 
(2) of section 3 of the Punjab Local Government Act, 2019 (later extended 
to 21 months) the dissolved local governments stand resurrected?  
 
8. We also posed the aforenoted first question to the learned Attorney -
General who was refresh ingly candid to state that local governments are 
mandated by the Constitution and added that he has always disavowed 
arbitrary dissolution of any elected body and through his published 
articles had decried the erstwhile Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution , 
which was used to dissolve Parliament.  
 
9. To come up on Monday 1 March 2021  at 11.30 am . The office is 
directed to send copies of this order to all concerned.  
 
Judge 
 
 
 Judge  
Islamabad  
04.02.2021  
Rizwan 