SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate /Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, CJ  
   Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel       
 
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.4821 OF 2018  
IN 
S.M.C. NO.1 OF 2014  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Rights Commission of Pakistan  
through Chairperson, Dr. Mehdi Hasan 
and others  …Applicant (s) 
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan through Ministry 
of Education and others   
…Respondent (s) 
 
 
 
In attendance  : Mr. Sohail Mehmood,  
Addl. Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Shoaib Suddle,  
Chairman , One Man Commission  
Dr. Ramesh Kumar, MNA  
Mr. Saqib Jillani,  
Member of Commission  
(via video link from Lahore)  
Sanaullah Abbasi,  
D.G., FIA on Court call  
Mr. Shumail Ahmed Butt,  
A.G., Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  
Akber Ali Khan,  
Special Secretary Home, K.P.  
Syed Zak ir Hussain Afridi,  
Secretary Establishment, K.P.  
Hikmatullah,  
Addl. Secretary Establishment, K.P.  
Umer Nawaz Khan,  
D.S., Home Department, K.P.  
Muazam Jan Ansari, I.G., K.P.  
Shafiullah, DPO, Karak  
Tahir Ayub Khan, DIG, Kohat  
Moeen ud Din Hamayon,  
AOR for G ovt. of K.P.  
Mr. Muhammad Ikram Ch.,  
Sr. ASC for ETPB  
Raja Qasit Nawaz, ASC  
Mr. Samual Payara,  
Chairman, IMRE  
   
Date of Hearing  : 15.11.2021 CMA.4821 of 2018 in SMC.1 of 2014  
 - 2 - 
    
 
O R D E R 
 
  GULZAR AHMED, CJ. - The learned Advocate 
General, K hyber Pakhtunkhwa has filed a report (CMA 
No.11654 of 2021) in Court today  and states that such report is 
in partial compliance of this Court’s order dated 13.10.2021, 
inter alia, dealing with the question of recovery of the amount 
from individuals, who have caused destruction of Teri Mandar.  
At page  78 of the report, a list of 11 persons ha s been given 
from whom the recoveries have been made . Out of a total 
number of 123 people, about 68 persons are stated to have 
executed a bond /undertaking to make payment.  
2.  Let full compliance of the Court’s or der be made and 
a report in this respect be submitted.  
3.  The Chief Secretary, Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa  shall ensure that the amount so collected is 
utilized for the upkeep of the Mandar so also for the 
infrastructure development of the area and for the benefit of the 
people, who are settled in and around the Teri Mandar , in that, 
proper road shall be constructed leading to the Mandar from the 
main road and the Mandar  as well as the residents of the area, 
shall also be provided with the water faci lity and proper water 
lines in this respect shall be laid. Proper drainage system shall 
also be provided to the residents of the area so that no filth or 
dirt is accumulated in the area and constant effort is made to 
keep the town of the Teri clean, neat a nd tidy in all respect.  CMA.4821 of 2018 in SMC.1 of 2014  
 - 3 - 
   Proper play grounds and parks should also be made available to 
the residents of Teri.   
4.  It is informed by Dr. Ramesh Kumar , MNA  that he 
has been given death threat s by one Ma hboob Qa zi, stated to be 
a Government Servant , who has  come to his apartment in Bath 
Island in two Hilux vehicles bearing No. GS-102 B  and GS E-849 
and has also caused beating to his guard. Let a report from the 
Inspector General of Police, Sindh, be called regarding such an 
incident and in the meanwhile, the I nspector General of Police, 
Sindh, should take appropriate legal steps for ensuring that no 
such an incident occurs in future. The Inspector General of 
Police, Sindh, shall submit his report by tomorrow.  
5.  Adjourned for tomorrow i.e. 16.11.2021.  The off ice is 
directed to fix the complete case.  
 
    
 CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
Bench -I  
Islamabad  
15.11.2021 
‘NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ 
Mahtab /* JUDGE  
 