IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
  
Criminal  Petition No. 916 of 2020  
(Against the order dated 9.6.2020 passed by the 
Peshawar High Court, D.I. Khan Bench in Cr.M.BC 
No.10 -D/2020)  
 
Muhammad Waheed  
…Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State through AG KPK and another  
….Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s):  Mr. Muhammad Yousaf Khan, ASC  
 
For the  State : Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahzad ( State counsel ) 
with Haq Nawaz, SI.  
 
Date of hearing:  01.09.2020.  
    ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Muhammad Waheed, 
petitioner herein, blamed for attempt to have carnal knowledge with Nemat 
Ullah, 7/8, at 12.00 hours on 2.12.2019 within the precincts of Police 
Station   Daraban, District D.I. Khan, seeks revival of his bail granted by 
the Addl. Sessions Judge , subsequently cancelled by a learned Judge -in- 
Chamber of the Peshawar High Court, D.I. Khan Bench vide impugned 
order dated 9.6.2020 .  
After the assault, t he chil d was examined same day and the Medical 
Officer observed a bleeding anal orifice with  abrasions on the knee joint ; 
whitish material on the clothes were forensic ally opined as seminal stains .  
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that there was n o 
occasion for the learned High Court to cancel bail granted by a competent 
tribunal ; according to him, freedom once granted is seldom re -called more 
so in the absence of compelling reasons, conspicuously missing in the 
case. Learned Law Officer has faithf ully defended the impugned order; he 
contends that medical evidence unambiguously suggested  commission of 
crime of sodomy as the bleeding rectum confirms penetration, suff icient to 
constitute the offence and, thus, the investigating officer manifestly ran 
into error by viewing the incident as mere attempt , therefore, observations,    2 
Criminal Petition No.916 of 2020   
 
though tentative  in nature,  recorded by the High Court are not open to 
exception.   
3.  Heard. Record perused.  
4.  Certainly it is for the trial Court to finally settle petitioner’ s 
alleged culpability and the offence made thereunder on the strength of 
evidence, nonetheless, available material in the given circumstances 
constitutes “ reasonable grounds ” within the contemplation of section 497 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898  so as to bring his case within the 
remit of prohibition provided thereunder and, thus, there was no occasion 
for the learned Additional Sessions Judge  to release him on bail, an error 
justifiably rectified by the learned Judge -in-Chamber. On our own 
analysis , given extreme tender age of the child, trauma apparently endured 
by him, positively confirmed by medical evidence , we do not feel persuaded 
to subscribe to the parallel story of denial , structured upon complainant’s 
alleged animosity  based upon some previous litigation . Plea of juvenility  
though addressed at  the bar does not find mention  in the grounds taken 
before us though  there is an oblique reference before the Court of Session 
albeit with no supporting material . Petition fails. L eave declined.   
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
1st September , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 