IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed , ACJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal Petition No. 533 of 2019   
(Against the judgment dated 22.4.2019 
passed by the Peshawar High Court, Bannu 
Bench in Criminal Miscellaneous B.A. 
No.123-B/2019 ). 
 
Alamgir Khan  …Petitioner(s)  
 
VERSUS  
 
The State and another  …Respondent(s)  
  
For the Petitioner(s)  : Mr. Salahuddin Malik, ASC    
  Mr. M.A. Sheikh, AOR  
 
For the State  : Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi,  
Addl. A.G. KPK . 
Muhammad Alam, A.S.I.  
   
Date of Hearing  : 31.7.2019.  
 
O R D E R  
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.-   Alamgir Khan, 
petitioner herein, declined downstairs throughout, seeks 
admission to bail ; he was surprised by a raiding party, within 
the precincts of Police Station Lakki M arwat, surreptitiously 
siphoning  natural gas in a residential premises  to 
unauthorizedly generate electricity being distributed to a large 
number of consumers in the neigh borhood ; he is also accused 
of criminally intimidating the contingent , brandishing a pistol  
on them , however took to the heels on arrival of police.  
Appliances being used, comprising electric generators , 
stabilizers with electric panels as well as other paraphernalia  
to power the system  were secured vide invent ory. 
2.  Position taken  by the learned counsel for the 
petitioner require s an in-depth analysis, essentially on the Criminal Petition No.533 of 2019  
      2 
 
basis of evidence, yet to be recorded  and thus falls far outside  
the barriers of tentative assessment . Statements of the 
witnesses , functionaries of the State with no animus or malice , 
duly corroborated by apparatus secured from the spot, 
constitute ‘reasonable grounds’ , within the contemplation of 
Section 497 of the C ode of Criminal Procedure, 1898 to prima 
facie frame the petitioner with the charge that attracts the bar 
contained therein as Section 462 -C of the Pakistan Penal Code, 
1860 carries a punishment that may extend to ten years  
rigorous imprisonment . View take n by the Courts below being 
well within the remit of law is not open to any exception. 
Petition fails. Dismissed.   
   
 Acting Chief Justice  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
Islamabad , the 
31st of July , 2019  
Ghulam Raza/*  JUDGE  
 
 