Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 1 
Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 
 The above titled  Reference was unanimously answered in the terms mentioned 
in our short order dated 09 December 2022 , for detailed reasons to be recorded  later. 
Since the detailed judgment has not been rendered till date, therefore, I deem it 
appropriate to deliver my reasons through this  note.   
Facts  
2.  The Balochistan Development Authority (“ BDA ”) and a foreign investor , BHP  
Minerals International Explorations Inc. (“ BHP ”), entered into a joint venture  
agreement , namely,  the Chaghi Hills Exploration Joint Venture Agreement 
(“CHEJVA ”) and obtained a  license for prospecting copper , gold, and other minerals 
situated in  Reko Diq, District Chaghi , Balochistan (“ Reko Diq”) on 29.07.1993 . In the 
year 2000, BHP was succeeded by the Tethyan Copper Company Pty Limited 
(“TCCA ”). Subsequently, i n the year 2006, Barrick Gold Corporation (“ Barrick ”) and 
Antofagasta plc (“ Antofagasta ”) acquired TC CA in equal shares . In the year 2011, 
TCCA  requested for gra nt of a mining lease, which was declined b y the Government of 
Balochistan  (“GoB ”). At the same time , one Abdul Haque  challeng ed the CHEJVA  
through a  Constitution al Petition before the High Court of Balochista n, which was 
dismissed vide judgment dated 26.06.2007. Feeling aggrieved, a petition for leave to 
appeal against the said judgment was filed bef ore this Court , which was disposed of 
declaring the CHEJVA as void, inter alia , for the reasons  mentioned in this Court’s  
judgment1 dated 07.01.2013.  
3. The TCCA  initiated two international arbitration claims ; first against the 
Government of Pakistan (“ GoP”) before the International Centre for Settlement of 
Investment Disputes Tribunal (the “ICSID  Tribunal ”). It was alleged therein  that the 
GoP had violated its obligations under the Agreement between Australia and the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan on the Promotion and Protection of Investments ( the 
“Pak-Aus BIT”). The ICSID Tribunal on 12 July 2019, rendered an award of 
approximately US$ 6.5 billion  (including interest and costs)  in favour  of TCCA and 
                                                             
1 Maulana Abdul Haque Baloch  and others  v. Government of Balochistan  and others ; PLD 
2013 SC 641  Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 2 
against the GoP  (the “ICSID Award ”). The second  claim of TCCA was before the 
International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce (“ ICC”) 
against the GoB for its refusal to grant the mining lease , contrary to  the terms and 
conditions of the CHEJ VA. As per the assessment  of international legal and financial 
consultants , the liability of these proceedings was expected  to be around US$ 2 to 3 
billion  (the “expected ICC Award ”). However, on account  of the ongoing negotiations  
between the parties , the ICC proceedings were stayed before rendering of the final 
award. TCCA was owned equally by Antofagasta and Barrick, theref ore, the amount  of 
damage s arising out of both the arbitration proceedings was to be shared equally 
between  them.  
4. After considerable time and effort, the parties reached a consensu s for 
resolution of the dispute  through fresh agreements to be finalised , subject to the 
outcome of this Reference . As a result of the settlement , Antofagasta was to be  paid an 
amount of US$ 900 million  for its 50% share of the total amount awarded by the ICSID  
Tribunal  and for the expected ICC award . Whereas  Barrick agreed to  become 50% 
share holder in the newly constituted company  being its operator , known as the R eko 
Diq Mining Company (Private) Limited (“ RDMC ”), instead of getting  its share of  the 
decretal amount  awarded by the ICSID  Tribunal  and for the expected ICC award . The 
remaining 50% of the equity in the company was agreed to  be held by the local entit ies 
in the following terms : 
“(i) GoB holding a 10% free carried interest;  
 (ii) GoB holding a 15% fully participating interest indirectly;  
 (iii) GoB receiving royalty at the rate of 5%; and  
 (iv) GoP or designated Pakistani entities holding the remaining 25% fully 
participating interest. ” 
 
As a result of the settlement, t he liabilities connected with the previous Reko  Diq 
project were  finally  settled with TCCA ( Antofagasta and Barrick ). The terms and 
conditions of the settlement were reduced into the Implementation Agreement and 
Definitive Agreements (the “Agreement s”). Before signing the Agreement s, a 
Reference under Article 186 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , 
1973 (the “Constitution ”) was received from the President of the Islamic Republic of Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 3 
Pakistan  (the “President ”) concerning the Agreements with the following questions 
posed  for our consideration and opinion : 
“i) Whether the earlier judgment of this Honourable Court reported as 
([Maulana] Abdul Haque Baloch v. [Government of Balochistan] , PLD 
2013 SC 641 or the laws, public policy or Constitution of Pakistan 
prevent the GoB and the GoP from entering into the Implem entation 
Agreement and the Definitive Agreements [ Agreements ] or affect their 
validity?  
 ii) If enacted, would the proposed Foreign Investment (Protection and 
Promotion) Bill, 2022 ( FI Bill 2022 ) be valid and constitutional? ” 
 
5.  This Court took up the Reference for hearing  and framed five issues arising 
from it. With  the assistance of  the legal advisors , financial consultants, amici curiae , as 
well as the learned counsel for the parties, the first question referred to this Court by the 
President was ans wered in the negative , declaring that no judgment, law, public policy,  
or the Constitution prevent s the GoP and the GoB from entering into the Agreement s. 
The precise reasons in this behalf are mentioned in paragraph 9  of our short order , 
which is reproduced herein below:  
“9. In light of our answers to the foregoing issues which raise legal and 
constitutional questions, the first question referred to this Court by the 
President of Pakistan, reproduced in paragraph 6(i) above is answered in 
the negat ive for the following reasons:  
i) It is settled law that while disposal of public assets through a 
competitive process is the ordinary rule, it is not an invariable 
rule. The Constitution does not forbid disposal of public 
assets other than through a competitive process so long as 
such disposal has the support of the law and is justified on 
rational grounds, as is the case here.  
ii) Ever since the enactment of the Constitution, legislative 
competence to deal with mines and mineral development 
(other than m inerals used for nuclear energy) has rested 
exclusively with the Provincial Assemblies. Therefore, the 
Provincial Assemblies of Sindh and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
have already enacted comprehensive statutes dealing with 
mines and mineral development (other than minerals used for 
generation of nuclear energy). It follows from the legislative 
ambit of the Provincial Assemblies under the Constitution 
that they are competent to “alter, amend or repeal” any 
existing law to the extent that it deals with mines and miner al 
development. As far as the amendment incorporated in the 
Regulation of Mines and Oil fields and Mineral Development 
Reference No.2/2022 (Government Control) Act, 1948 (1948 
Act) is concerned, which has been introduced by way of the 
2022 Act, to the exte nt that the said statute applies to the 
Province of Balochistan it is intra vires the Constitution and 
the rules framed by the GoB under Section 2 of the 1948 Act. 
The 2022 Act can therefore be treated as a standalone Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 4 
provision that operates alongside the 1948 Act and the 
aforesaid rules insofar as the subject of mines and minerals 
development (other than oil fields and mineral resources 
necessary for generation of nuclear energy) falls within the 
exclusive legislative competence of the provincial legislatu re. 
iii) The Balochistan Cabinet has approved the decision to enter 
into the Agreements on the basis of a detailed summary, a 
copy of which has been filed with this Court. The summary 
considers ‘public interest’ inherent in the negotiated 
agreement and since th e Agreements pertain to an 
‘international obligation’ in terms of the 2022 Act (i.e., 
Pakistan’s obligation to make payment of approximately US$ 
6 billion under an ICSID award dated 12.07.2019), the formal 
obligations required under the 2022 Act for enteri ng into a 
negotiated agreement stand fulfilled.  
iv) The Federal Government has placed on record documents to 
show that an Apex Committee headed by the Prime Minister 
of Pakistan and attended by all the relevant stakeholders 
(including the Chief Minister and Ch ief Secretary of 
Balochistan) had carefully negotiated the terms of the 
Agreements with the help of international financial advisors, 
international legal advisors, international mining experts and 
international tax advisors in addition to independent Pakis tani 
advisors. As noted above, the international advisors also 
addressed the Court directly during proceedings in -person 
and through video link, and answered all the queries raised by 
the Court. Prima facie, the Agreements cannot be faulted for 
lack of due  diligence on the part of State authorities.  
v) The Agreements do not, prima facie, violate any of the 
findings recorded in the Abdul Haque Baloch case (PLD 
2013 SC 641). Unlike CHEJVA, the decision to enter into the 
Agreements is backed by law and has been t aken on the basis 
of careful negotiations during which authorized 
representatives of GoP/GoB were duly assisted by 
independent international consultants. Further, the obligation 
to act in accordance with “Applicable Law” contained in the 
Agreements as well  as the obligations of the Licensee to apply 
for consents in accordance with law and satisfy all conditions 
prescribed by the Applicable Law means that the statutory 
discretion of public functionaries is not being fettered by the 
Agreements.  
vi) We have also b een informed that the Provincial Assembly of 
Balochistan was given a detailed incamera briefing and was 
taken into confidence regarding the entire project and the 
terms and conditions of the proposed settlement between the 
parties were accepted without any  objections being raised by 
the chosen representatives of the people of Balochistan.  
vii) On our specific query relating to environmental 
considerations, particularly in relation to the use of water, we 
have been informed that the Agreements contain no 
exemptio n from Pakistan’s environmental laws. Rather, the 
Agreements require Barrick to act in accordance with both 
international environmental standards and domestic laws. ” 
 
Similarly, the second question referred to this Court by the President was answered in 
the affirmative for the reasons  mentioned in paragraph 10 of our short order which 
reads as under : Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 5 
“10. The second question is answered in the affirmative for the 
following reasons:  
 
i) Article 144 of the Constitution allows Provincial Assemblies 
to empower Parliament to pass a law dealing with issues 
within the legislative competence of the Provinces. Similarly, 
Article 147 of the Constitution allows the Provinces to 
entrust, either cond itionally or unconditionally, to the Federal 
Government or to its officers, functions in relation to any 
matter to which the executive authority of the Province 
extends.  
ii) We have been provided the draft resolutions proposed to be 
passed by the Provincial As semblies of Sindh and Balochistan 
to empower Parliament to enact the proposed FI Bill 2022. 
Provided that the draft resolutions are passed, Parliament will 
be competent to enact the FI Bill 2022, including the notified 
exemptions specified in the Bill and the protected benefits 
listed in the Third Schedule.  
iii) The provisions of Section 3 of the FI Bill 2022 do not in our 
opinion fetter the sovereignty of Parliament. It appears that 
the FI Bill 2022 represents a version of the Protection of 
Economic Reforms Act , 1992. It allows the Federal 
Government to notify certain benefits which may not be 
withdrawn to the prejudice of an investor. We have also been 
informed and there is consensus of all the learned counsel in 
this matter that Parliament remains at liberty t o repeal the 
entire FI Bill 2022, if it so desires, of course subject to the 
corresponding legal consequences that may arise from such 
repeal.  
On our query, we have also been informed that most of the 
exemptions proposed to be granted are already available  
under the regulatory regimes pertaining to Export Processing 
Zones and Special Technology Zones. Further, the 
exemptions being granted from the operation of Labour 
Laws do not denude the labour force of their rightful 
entitlement to fair wages, allowances  and guarantees/benefits 
provided by law. The learned counsel for Barrick has 
categorically assured us that the applicable minimum wage 
laws will be fully observed and the Agreements expressly 
provide that all operations will be carried out in accordance 
with International Mining Standards which are defined to 
include compliance with IFC Performance Standards, to the 
extent applicable. It has been pointed out to us that the IFC 
Performance Standards contain detailed provisions pertaining 
to labour rights. B arrick has also committed to act in 
accordance with the United Nations Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights. We have also been assured that 
Barrick will contribute substantially towards Corporate Social 
Responsibility by dedicating a percentage of its returns 
towards provision of fresh drinking water, health facilities, 
schools and local infrastructure to the people of Balochistan. 
In addition, most of the labour force will be employed from 
amongst the local population of the Province. In additio n, 
programs for development of skills will also be put in place. ” 
 
Opinion  
6.  In addition to the reasons mentioned in our short order in respect of the 
President’s first question, the  record reflects that the parameters set out in the judgment Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 6 
passed in Abdul Haque  were properly addressed and the requirements under the relevant 
provisions of law and the Balochistan Mineral Rules, 2002  (“BMR, 20 02”) were 
fulfilled. The Agreements are in line with relevant provision s of law and rules. I am 
conscious of the fact that the ICSID Award and the expected ICC Award, if enforced, 
could have had a serious financial implication on the country as a whole and on the 
Province of Balochistan in particular. Fortunately, such a huge liability of the country 
was averted as a result of the settlement.  The reconstitution of the Reko Diq project will 
enable the RDMC  to restart  work at Reko Diq, which will be beneficial for all the 
stakeholders. It will also facilitate and attract local and foreign investment , create 
employment opportunities,  and uplift the backward area of  the Province of Balochistan.  
The learned counsel representing  Barrick  has assured that  all International Mining 
Standards , labour practices , environmental laws, and particularly the conservation of 
water resources  shall be  adopted and complied  with. In the above background, we 
unanimously rendered our opinion for the reasons mentioned in our short order 
confirming the Agreements .  
7.  As far as the President’s second question with regard to the constitutionality and 
validity of the propose d Foreign Investment (Protection and Promotion) Bill, 2022 (“ FI 
Bill, 2022 ”) is concerned, we have already answered it in the affirmative, for the reasons 
mentioned in paragraph 10 of our short order reproduced above. Furthermore, the  said 
Bill was subsequently passed as the Foreign Investment (Protection and Promotion) 
Act, 2022 (Act No. XXXV of 2022) (“ FI Act, 2022 ”). The purpose of the FI Act, 2022 
has been enshrined in its preamble. Sub-section (2) of section 1 of the FI Act, 2022 was 
made applicable to the whole of Pakistan, however, through a subsequent amendment, 
for the purpose of the Province of Balochistan, it was restricted  only to the extent of 
qualified investment of the Reko Diq project , hence,  the FI Act, 2022 will not be 
applicable to projects in Balochistan other than Reko Diq. Article 144 of the 
Constitution empowers the Provincial Assemblies to amend or rep eal the FI Act, 2022 
to their extent at any time, if they deem it necessary.  
8.  We have been informed that t he Federal Government has declared the area 
leased for the Reko Diq project as an Export Processing Zone under the Export Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 7 
Processing Zones Authority Ordinance, 1980 (the “ Ordinance, 1980 ”) and has 
extended the benefit of S.R.O.881( I)/802 to it. Such initiative would certainly encourage 
Foreign Direct Investment  for the Reko Diq project. The Ordinance, 1980 is only 
applicable to industrial undertakings set up or operating in the Export Processing 
Zone s. It would , therefore,  be approp riate that the Federal Government the assigns 
status of an industr ial undertaking  to the mining sector  so as to make the Ordinance, 
1980 applicable to the mining areas.  This will attract  and encourage foreign and local 
investment as well as  ensure sustainable economic activity and growth , not only for 
Reko Diq, but for mining activity  all over  Pakistan.  
9.  One of the most significant aspects of the settlement is with regard to  the 
allocation of shares between the GoP and the GoB.  As per the Agreements, t he GoP 
retained its 25% share  in the RDMC through the State -Owned Entities (“ SOEs ”) on 
the pretext that as per the  settlement between the parties, it will  pay US$ 900 million  to 
Antofagasta . Under such circumstances, it was the sole responsibility of the GoP  to pay 
the decretal amount to right off its liability  through its own resources . Instead , the GoP  
shifted its burden upon the Province  of Balochistan , by adjusting the mineral -rich land 
owned by the Province  against its liability  arising out of the ICSID Award . Such 
treatment of the GoP in adjusting its liability against the property owned by the 
Province of Balochistan is not only  unjust , but also amounts to undermining the 
principle of Provincial  Autonomy . Despite this fact, t he GoB and the Provincial 
Assembly of Balochistan agree d with the settlement , considering  the gravity of the 
situation and the compelling circumstance s surround ing the country  such as  the 
expected time for enforcement  of the ICSID Award,  the inability of the GoP to pay 
such a huge  amount because of its dire financial condition s, and some other unknown 
reasons highlighted through the in-camera briefing given to  the Provincial Assembly .   
10. No doubt in the given circumstances, a reasonable  settlement has been arrived 
at between the parties. However, we must realize the causes of such massive financial 
implication s arising out of the previous agreement (CHEJVA) , so as to avoid the 
slightest possibility of such liability in the future. One of  the causes on the basis of 
                                                             
2 Exemption from custom duty and sales tax for all goods imported into and exported from the 
Export Processing Zones  Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 8 
which TCCA commenced arbitration proceedings against the GoP was the violation of 
its international obligations under the Pak -Aus BIT. The GoP did not provide any 
assistance to the GoB nor apprise it about the international comm itments  while entering 
into the previous agreement . Similarly, the violation of the CHEJVA was the other 
cause that enabled the TCCA to commence arbitration proceedings before the ICC 
against the GoB.  
Constitutional Position on Mineral Resources  
11. Under Article 172 of the Constitution, mineral s (except for mineral oil  and 
natural gas) if located in a Province shall vest exclusively with the Government of that  
Provinc e, and in any other case, with the Federal Government. The respective 
Governments are guardian s of such resources and have exclusive rights to freely exploit, 
manage , control,  and dispose of the same, subject to the applicable laws , rules, 
regulations,  and polic ies, in a manner beneficial to their people s. Thus, the Constitution 
holds  and protect s the  Provinces’ Permanent Sovereignty to freely exploit and 
determine the use an d dispos al of their natural resources. It is, therefore, the obligation 
of the Federal Government to accept and respect the property rights of each Provinc e, 
as guaranteed by the Constitution . Since minerals are provincial subjects, therefore, t he 
GoP must not undermine and encroach upon  the jurisdiction of the Provinces, nor 
should the rights of the ir peoples be infringed. In performance of its constitutional 
commitments, the GoP with the assistance of the Provincial Governments, launched a 
National Mineral Policy (“ Policy ”) in the year 1995, with an object to expand  the 
mineral sector activity in the Provinces as well as in the Federal Territories , keeping in 
mind  the principle of Provincial Autonomy  with regard to their properties . The Policy 
provides  a guideline , wherein considerable attention has been given  to the principle of 
Permanent Sovereignty of the Provinces  over their natural resources , therefore, it is 
required to be followed by the Provinces and the Federal Government when entering 
into any agreement and initiating mining activity anywhere in Pakistan. While e ntering 
into international agreements governed by  Bilateral Investment Treaties  in respect of 
minerals, the role of the GoP is restricted to the extent of  facilitat ing, advis ing, and 
coordinat ing with the Province  concerned , with the utmost care as to avoid  any Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 9 
violation under the international commitments . In order to properl y explore, manage, 
control,  and dispose of mines and minerals, the Provinces which have not enacted 
statutes  and framed rules  and regulations , may do so.  
12.  It has been reported that Reko Diq has one of the world’s largest copper -gold 
deposits , out of w hich only a limited area has been leased out to the RDMC . According 
to the available record, still a vast area of Reko  Diq and  the majority  of the area of the 
Province  having precious and other mineral  resources  remains  unexplored . Balochistan 
has been blessed with manifold range of natural resources , therefore,  it is a 
constitutional obligation of the Go B to protect and preserve the natural resources of its 
people s and to explore, deal, and manage the same for their benefit. In Abdul Haque , 
this Court  highlighted  a number of illeg alities, jurisdictional defects , maladministration,  
corruption, lack of expertise  and experience, and a colourful  exercise by the authorities 
concerned with regard to the previous Reko Diq deal , on the basis whereof , the 
CHEJ VA was declared null and void. Besides, this Court in the said judgment has also 
laid down  a set of guidelines to be adopted when entering into fresh mineral 
agreement (s). The GoB must have recognized  the repercussions of the previous 
agreement (CHEJVA) , which caused an irreparable loss to the Province  and stunned  the 
country as a whole . It is expected that the authorities concerned of the GoB must have 
gained  significant experience from the past, therefore, they should keep in mind the 
defects, flaws, and irregularities pointed out and the guidelines laid down in Abdul Haque  
to avoid any such ordeal in future.  Hence, any  future decision in respect of the 
properties of the Province must be taken in a manner  beneficial for the Province  and its 
peoples.  The GoB must also simplify the procedure for  allotment of prospecting 
license (s) and mining lease (s) to prevent any unnecessary impediments , for making 
investment in the mining sector more friendly .  
13.  The GoB has established the Balochistan Mineral Resources Limited 
(“BMRL ”) which has already been  assigned a 15% share in the RDMC . The purpose of 
establishing BMRL is  to secure the ownership rights of the  minerals of the Province  of 
Balochistan  by entering into joint venture agreeme nts with any potential investors , local 
or foreign . This is a correct  decision, which will not only preserve the property rights  of Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 10
the Province of Balochistan  but will also ensure retention of its maximum equity . Thus, 
any future agreement with regard to mineral  resources in the Province of Balochistan 
where significant data and information regarding  a potential mining site is available , may 
be through the BMRL  by way of a competitive bidding  process , being the ordinary rule  
and the best option  under the circumstances. The BMR, 2002 provides disposal of the 
minerals through open bidding/auction which has been reiterated by this Court in 
Abdul Haque . This is because in a competitive bidding process , the bidders compete 
against each other and ther eby, place the Government in a stronger negotiating 
position. This ensure s transparency  and a more favourable and realistic evaluation of the 
resources , in securing  the best contract terms  possible . It also expel s the pressure of any 
external factors . However, in case of limited information regarding  mineral deposits, the 
GoB may adopt different licensing procedures , keeping in view the relevant provisions 
of law, rules, regulations, and policies. Additionally , to reach a more comprehensive and 
favourab le agreement in the future  with respect to large -scale mining of precious 
minerals , the GoB  ought to  get assistance from reputable international mineral experts, 
financial and legal advisors , for their proper assessment  in terms of their quantity  and 
evaluation , and for the execution of compact, realistic , and workable agreements . This 
will not only safeguard the interest s of the Province but  will also reduce the  likelihood  
of dispute (s). Besides , with regard to  large-scale mining, especially for precious minerals, 
the GoB may also get input from and the endorsement of the Provincial Assembly.  
14.  The Intergenerational Equity Principle  is one of the important aspect s 
concerning the use and rights of future generations.  It states that every generation holds 
the Earth in common with members of the present generation and with other 
generations, past and future. The principle is the foundation of sustainable development 
and articulates a concept of fairness among generations in the use and conservation of 
the environment and its natural resources.3 Natural resources are also to be inherited by 
future generations, therefore,  the Federal as well as the Provincial Governments  being 
the trustee s on behalf of their people must not ignore the rights of future generations 
when taking any decision in this behalf . As such, mining must be performed in a 
                                                             
3 Weiss, E. B. (2021, April). Intergenerational Equity. Oxford Public International Law. 
(http://opil.ouplaw.com). (c) Oxford University Press, 2023.  Presidential Reference No. 2 of 2022  
 11
sustainable manner and the proceeds arising out of their respective shares may be 
allocated , utilized, and invested  in such way  to ensure that future generations receive the 
benefit of their inheritance. One of the options  in this behalf  or otherwise  for each  
Government is to adopt an investment strategy such as  the establish ment of  a Sovereign 
Wealth Fund . They may  park and invest a fixed portion of revenue  arising  from the 
proceeds of mining projects  in the said fund. This Reference is in respect of the 
Agreements in relation to the Reko Diq  project , therefore, it would be appropriate for 
the GoP and the GoB to  take initiative s and adopt such measures by allocating a fixed 
portion of the  proceeds of their shares and royalty arising thereof  for the benefit of 
future generations  in such like fund,  on terms and conditions to be determined by the 
GoB . The Agreements contained strict adherence of Corporate Social Responsibility 
(“CSR ”) and the  learned  counsel representing Barrick has assured compliance  thereof . 
We appreciate the commitments made by  Barrick in this behalf, however, p reference 
may be given to  health services and formal and technical education. Since the 
population  of Reko Diq is small, therefore, the CSR initiatives  may be extended for the 
socio -economic development of the Rakhshan Division in particular and for the entire 
Province of Balochistan  in general . 
 
 (Jamal Khan Mandokhail ) 
 Judge  
 
 
Islamabad  
K.Anees/Ammar  Ahmed Cheema , L.C.  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  