IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
MR. JUSTICE MUSHIR ALAM  
 
S.M.C. NO. 16 OF 2011 ETCETERA  
(Suo moto action regarding law and order 
situation in Karachi)  
(Implementation)  
 
In Attendance:  Mr. Abdul Fateh Malik, Advocate General, 
Sindh  
Mr. Javaid  Siddiqui, CEO Razi Sons  
Mr. Ahmed Pirzada, ASC, Special Counsel of 
BOR 
Mr. Aftab Memon, Member BOR  
Mr. Agha Jan Akhtar, Chairman, PQA  
Mr. Zia ud Din Sabir, Director  
Establishment Enforcement PIDA  
Mr. Shaiq Usmani, Sr. ASC  
Malik Israr, Sr. Member, BOR  
Mr. Zulifqar Ali Shah, Member, BOR 
(Reforms)  
Mr. Arif Aziz, SP  
Mr. Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi, in person  
Mr. Said Mohal, Conservator Forest  
Mr. Attaullah, DFO Hyderabad  
Mr. Mu hammad Nawaz, D.C. Hyderabad  
 
Date of Hearing:   24.06.2014  
 
ORDER  
 
CMA NO. 206 -K OF 2014  
  Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Shah, Member (Reforms) Board of 
Revenue and Malik Israr, Senior Member, Board of Revenue have 
submitted that about 59803 acres and 39 ghuntas is the  encroached 
land which includ both institutional and individual encroachments. 
They further add ed that an area of 2864 acres has been retrieved and 
the remaining is still under encroachment. On Court query, Mr. 
Zulfiqar Ali Shah submitted that the institut ional encroachment is 
52130 acres and it includes both the Federal and Provincial 
Institutions. He added that efforts are being made to have the land 
vacated but it may take a few months. However, on specific query 
about the timeline they submit that the B oard of Revenue would be SMC No. 16/2011 etc  2
able to have the land vacated within a period of six months. They are 
allowed to do so and this matter shall be taken up after six months.  
CMA NO. 257 -K/2014  
2.  Mr. Muhammad Nawaz, Deputy Commissioner, 
Hyderabad submits that purs uant to the order of this Court a land 
measuring 1446 acres was retrieved and its possession was handed 
over to the Forest Department last year (on 4.5.2013).  
3.  Mr. Muhammad Sadiq Mohal , Conservator Forest, 
confirms this. However, he adds that they had apprehended that the 
encroachers might take over the land again and they had requested 
the DPO to post a picket at the spot to prevent fresh encroachment, 
which has not been posted. However, he further adds that the Forest 
Department has prepared a compreh ensive plan to plant trees on the 
entire area and for that PC -I has also been prepared, which has been 
approved by the Provincial Government and in the current budget 
funds would be allocated.  
4.  In view of the above, we are persuaded to direct the 
Advoc ate Genera l, Sindh, present in Court to get in touch with the 
Chief Minister, Sindh, to ensure that the requisite funds are made 
available to the Forest Department. We also direct the DPO, 
Hyderabad, to post a picket as requested by the Forest Department t o 
prevent any encroachment. Since both the Deputy Commissioner and 
the Conservator Forest have submitted that the possession was 
handed over to the Forest Department  on 4.5.2013 , we are of the view 
that any order of status quo would enure to the benefit of  Forest 
Department which had already taken possession on the afore -referred 
date and the possession continues to be that of the Forest 
Department.  
CMA NO. 3969/2013  
5.  Pursuant to the order of this Court Mr. Agha Jan Akhtar, 
Chairman of the Port Qasim Authority  has appeared to submit that SMC No. 16/2011 etc  3
the 10 acres of land allotted to the applicant in Eastern Industrial 
Zone is owned by the Provincial Government of Sindh but it is 
situated between Port Qasim Authority Establishment and the 
Pakistan Steel Mills  and that there is no road access and other 
amenities available for proper land utilization. Adds that the PQA has 
certain issues with the Government of Sindh regarding ownership of 
land and there is misconception in certain quarters that there was 
some encroachmen t by the Authority. Further ad ds that he had a 
meeting with the Chief Secretary, Sindh, recently and hopefully all the 
issues are likely to be settled. So far as the grievance of the applicant 
is concerned, he added that notwithstanding the fact that the l and 
allotted is owned by the Government of Sindh but in deference to the 
proceedings of this Court and the fact that the applicant is a potential 
investor , the Port Qasim Authority shall provide access road to the 
applicant , of-course on payment of due cha rges, if possible from the 
land owned by the Port Qasim Authority and otherwise an alternative 
solution in this behalf shall be found in conjunction / with 
consultation with Board of Revenue and Pakistan Steel Mills. The 
Deputy Commissioner, Malir, having visited the spot confirmed that 
such an alternate solution could be found and applicant readily 
agrees. The Deputy Commissioner shall carry out this exercise and 
complete the same within a fortnight under intimation to the 
Assistant Registrar (Karachi) of this Court. Adjourned.  
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
Karachi, the  
24th of June, 2014  
Khurram  