IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
 
Constitution Petitions No.39 & 90 of 2011  
 
 
 
Ch. Nasir Iqbal & others  (in Const.P.39)  
Imran Khan, Chairman, PTI etc  (in Const.P.90)  
Petitioner(s)  
 
VERSUS  
 
Federation of Pakistan, thr. Secretary Law & others  (in Const.P.39)  
Federation of Pakistan  (in Const.P.90)  
Respondent(s)  
 
 
 
For the Petitioner(s)  :  
(In Const.P.39/2011)   Mian Abdul R auf, ASC  
(In Const.P.90/2011)   Nemo  
 
 
On Court’s Notice  : Mr. Ifran Qadir, Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, DAG  
  
For the ECP  : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, ASC  
Syed Sher Afghan, DG (Elections)  
 
 
For M/O Overseas & OPF  : Raja Muhammad Farooq, ASC  
Dr. M. Sarwar Zahid, Chief  
Mr. Fayyaz Ahmed Malik. Deputy Chief  
Mr. Khurram Shiraz, L.O. OPF  
 
For the NADRA  : Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC  
Mr. Tariq Malik, Chairman  
Mr. Saqib Jamal, Sr. LO  
 
For M/O Foreign Affairs  : Mr. Iftikhar Anjum , DG, Overseas Pakistanis  
 
 
For M/O Finance  : Mr. Sadaqat Ahmed, SO (L)  
 
 Const.P.39 & 90/11  2 
Dates of Hearing  : 26 & 29.04.2013  
 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
 IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. — The listed 
Constitution Petitions were disposed of vide short order dated 
29.04.2013 with the ob servations that let the ECP make all possible 
efforts to achieve the object, so the expatriates may also participate in 
the General Elections in exercise of their fundamental rights conferred 
under Article 17(2) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 .  
2.  In the meanwhile as it has been noted above, the Election 
Commission of Pakistan (ECP) took up the matter with the concerned 
Government Authorities and ultimately the President of Pakistan , in 
exercise of the powers conferred by cla use (1) of Article 89 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, promulgated the 
Election Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013  [Ordinance No. IV of 
2013] , published in the Extraordinary Official Gazette on 09.05.2013 , 
to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1976 (LXXXV of 1976) 
[ROPA] as well as the Electoral Rolls Act, 1974 (XXI of 1974) [ERA]. 
By means of section 2 of the Ordinance, 2013, Chapter V-B titled “ Out 
of Country Voting”, containing sections 47 -B to 47 -K, was inserted in 
ROPA . The said provisions are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“Chapter V -B 
Out of country Voting  
 
47-B. Polling Station .- (1) the Commission, at least fourteen 
days before   the day fixed for poll abroad, shall establish polling 
stations with as many polling booths as m ay be necessary in the 
premises of an Embassy, a Mission or a Consulate or any other 
public place notified by the Embassy, Mission or Consulate, in 
the countries as may be determined by it;  Const.P.39 & 90/11  3 
  
Provided that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs have obtained 
consent of such host country for establishment of the polling 
stations.  
 
47-C. Appointment of Presiding Officers, etc. _ The 
Commission from amongst  the officers of the Federal 
Government or Autonomous Bodies under the Federal 
Government, preferably posted abr oad, shall appoint as many 
Presiding Officers as the number of polling stations and as many 
Assistant Presiding Officers as the number of polling booths 
established in an Embassy, Mission, Consulate or public place 
notified for the purpose.  
 
47-D. Registr ation of Pakistani citizens living abroad .- (1) 
A Pakistani who lives abroad and is in possession of National 
Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis issued under the National 
Database and Registration Authority Ordinance 2000 (VIII of 
2000) may, not later t han ten days before the day fixed for poll 
abroad, register himself as an elector in the Embassy, Mission or 
Consulate, as the case may be, where he intends to cast his 
vote;  
 
(2)    For the purpose of registration, a Pakistani living abroad 
may make an a pplication through courier or in person, in the 
format provided by the Commission on its website, to the 
authorized officer who shall issue a receipt to the elector 
containing the information of the constituency in which he is 
registered in Pakistan if the applicant applies in person.  
  
(3)    The application through courier must be received at the 
Embassy or Mission at least ten days before polling day and the 
authorized officer shall send a receipt to the applicant at his 
address given in the application:   
 
Provided that any Pakistani living abroad shall not be entitled to 
be registered as elector if he:  
 
(i) is not registered as voter in any constituency in Pakistan;  
(ii) is in possession of National Identity Card for Overseas 
Pakistanis  issued to him for one country and he applies 
for registration from  another country;  
(iii) does not produce the original National Identity Card for 
Overseas  Pakistanis or such card has expired;  
(iv) seeks registration on the basis of Pakistan Origin Card.  
 Const.P.39 & 90/11  4 
(4)    The authorized officer sha ll electronically mark the elector 
in the voters’ list whereupon the elector shall become entitled to 
vote and such list shall be made available to the Presiding 
Officer at the Polling Station established abroad.  
 
Explanation: The authorized officer means any officer authorized 
by the Commission for the purpose of this section.  
 
47-E. Voting procedure. - (1) Where an elector presents 
himself at a polling station abroad, the Presiding Officer shall 
issue him a ballot paper, after satisfying himself about the  
identity of the elector and for that purpose may require him to 
produce his National Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis;  
 
(2) Before a ballot paper is issued to an elector, the Assistan t 
Presiding Officer shall:  
 
(i) verify the number and name of the Nati onal and 
Provincial Assembly constituency in Pakistan of the 
elector where his name appears in the electoral rolls 
database, with the help of his National  
Identity Card for Overseas Pakistanis;  
(ii) call out the name of the elector and his constituency 
number;  
(iii) mark the entry relating to the elector on the electoral roll 
to indicate that the elector has cast his vote;  
(iv) print a ballot paper with counterfoil containing the 
particulars of the elector and obtain the thumb impression 
of the elector on the counterfoil ; 
(v) stamp the ballot paper on its back with the official mark 
and sign it;  
 
(3)  After receiving the ballot paper the elector shall mark the 
ballot paper with Marking Aid Stamp at any place within the 
space containing the name and symbol of the contesting 
candidate for whom he wishes to vote and insert it in the ballot 
box. 
 
47-F. Election Monitors .- The Commission shall appoint as 
many independent monitors as may be necessary at a polling 
station abroad to ensure the conduct of free, fair and 
transparent pol l.   
 
47-G. Poll Day .- (1) For the purpose of out of country 
voting the poll day or days shall be the day or days fixed for 
polling abroad by the Commission.  Const.P.39 & 90/11  5 
 
(2)  The Commission shall fix the day or days and hours which 
shall not be less than eight hours,  during which the poll shall be 
held and the Presiding Officer shall give the public notice for the 
day or days and hours so fixed and hold the poll accordingly.    
 
47-H. Supply of election material .- The Commission shall 
provide well in advance, the elect ion material as may be 
required for the purpose at the relevant polling stations 
established abroad.  
 
47-I. Close of poll .- (1) At the close of poll, the Presiding 
Officer shall open the ballot boxes and take out all the ballot 
papers and segregate them Na tional and Provincial Assembly 
constituency -wise; count the ballot papers and prepare 
statement of count in respect of each candidate in the presence 
of the monitors and the Assistant Presiding Officers.  
 
(2) The Presiding Officer shall put the ballot pape rs in 
separate temper -evident bags constituency -wise and shall place 
a copy of the statement of count in each bag duly signed by the 
Presiding Officer and the monitors.  
 
(3) The Presiding Officer shall send through diplomatic bag, 
all the temper -evident ba gs containing the marked ballot 
papers, statement of the count and ballot paper account to the 
Commission.  
 
(4) The Commission on receipt of the diplomatic bag from the  
Presiding Officer shall take out all the temper -evident bags and 
send to the Returning Officer concerned the respective temper -
evident bags so as to reach him before the consolidation of 
results.  
 
47-J. Application of laws :- (1) Subject to the provisions 
of this Chapter, the provisions of this Act and the provisions of 
the Representation of the People (Conduct of Election) Rules , 
1977 shall mutatis mutandis  apply to our of country voting.    
 Const.P.39 & 90/11  6 
(2) The provinces of this Ordinance shall not apply to fill a 
casual vacancy in the Assembly which has fallen vacant for any 
reason after general electio ns, 2013.  
 
47-K. Removal of difficulties . If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect to any of the provisions of this Ordinance, the 
Commission may make such provision or pass such order not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act for the removal of th e 
difficulty as the Commission may deem fit. ” 
 
Similarly, by means of section 3 of the Ordinance, 2013, certain 
amendments were made in section 103A of ROPA to the following 
effect: -  
“3.    Amendment of section 103A, Act LXXXV of 1976 .- In 
the Representat ion of the People Act, 1976 (LXXXV of 1976), in 
section 103A, for the words, comma, figures and brackets ‘the 
Contempt of Court Act, 1976 (XLIV of 1976), the worlds, 
comma, figures and brackets ‘the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 
2003 (V of 2003)’ shall be s ubstituted.”   
Lastly, b y means of section 4 of the Ordinance, 2013, sub -section (6) 
was added to section 7 of the in ERA, which reads as under: - 
“(6) Any person holding National Identity Card for Overseas 
Pakistani and living abroad for any purpose shall be deemed to 
be resident in the electoral area in which he would have been 
resident if he had not been abroad.”  
 
In this way the order of the Court was implemented by the authorities.  
3.  We must assert that p olitical good governance depends on 
the parti cipation of the masses in the electoral process; hence, the 
role of every voter is very much important in bringing a true 
democracy. It  is participation of each and every individual which would 
bring about a positive change. Individuals use their right of vote to 
choose their representatives, which is provided in the Objectives 
Resolution. In order to achieve the Constitutional objective of Const.P.39 & 90/11  7 
democracy; we have to bear in mind the importance of every single 
voter as the primary stakeholder in the process of c onducting 
elections.  
4.  It is only the power of ballot which has the capacity to 
create a change in a country. Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th President 
of the United States  (1901 –1909),  has highlighted this point by 
asserting that “a vote is like a rifle; its usefulness depends upon the 
user.” Similarly, Lyndon B. Johnson, the 36th President of the United 
States (1963 -1696), has said that “the vote is the most powerful 
instrument ever devised by man for breaking down injustice and 
destroying the terrible wa lls which imprison men because they are 
different from other men.”   
5.  Sir Winston Churchill,  the Prime Minister of the United 
Kingdom  from 1940 to 1945,  said that “at the bottom of all tributes 
paid to democracy is the little man, walking into a little b ooth, with a 
little pencil making a little cross on a little bit of paper – no amount of 
rhetoric or voluminous discussion can possibly diminish the 
overwhelming importance of the point”.  It is in this context that we 
have time and again asserted that ever y necessary and possible step 
needs to be taken in order to encourage the people  to participate in 
this process.  
6.  Under Article 17 of the Constitution every citizen has right 
to vote to participate in the governance of the country through their 
chosen representatives. The law provides the people of this country, 
irrespective of their social ethnical status and religious affiliation, to 
choose their representative in whom they repose confidence. Hence, Const.P.39 & 90/11  8 
every eligible individual should be allowed to utili ze the right to vote 
irrespective of his caste or creed or any other consideration. The 
Supreme Court of Pakistan adjudged many cases on the aspect of 
access of voters to the credentials of the contesting candidates. 
Reference in this behalf may be made to  the case of Mian Najeeb -ud-
Din Owaisi vs. Amir Yar  (CMA 1535/2013 etc) wherein this Court held 
as under: - 
“The voters who are about to elect their representatives are one 
of the most important stakeholders, therefore, to achieve the 
object of honest, just  and fair elections, they would not 
constitutionally and legally allow a candidate to manage to 
sneak into Parliament without proving that he is qualified to 
represent them as such representative has to perform the 
noblest and honourable job of making poli cies and laws for the 
Nation.”  
Reference may also be made to the case of Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416) wherein it has been 
observed that Article 17(2) provides the basic guarantee to the citizen 
against usurpation of his will t o freely participate in the affairs of the 
governance of Pakistan through political activity relating thereto. The 
said observation was also reaffirmed by this Court in the Case of 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 
473).  Thus, ob jection raised by learned Attorney General  on the 
maintainability of petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, is 
overruled.  
7.  It is now settled in almost all countries of the world that 
every citizen of a country, irrespective of his place of residence, must 
be allowed to participate in and contribute to the democratic process 
of his country, though t he manners  and the  extent of the  right to vote Const.P.39 & 90/11  9 
differ from country to  another . Countries including Austria, Belgium, 
Croatia, France, Italy  and Norway allow voting to all the categories of 
non-resident citizens, including those permanently residing abroad 
while Bosnia & Herzegovina, Denmark, Germany  and United Kingdom 
are countries that allow  the right to vote to certain categories of 
citizens resid ing abroad.  
8 .  It is to be noted  that t here is no distinction between the 
citizens living within Pakistan or outside the country , with regard to 
the right to vote in terms of the Article  17 of the Constitution . The only 
difference is that the citizens li ving within the country have been 
provided the facilities to caste their vote in the elections , i.e. the 
Elections of National and Provincial Assemblies, Local  Bodies and 
others, whereas citizens living abroad are yet to be extended the 
mentioned facilitie s. It warrant s to mention that the right to vote has 
not been denied to the overseas Pakistanis, who are  as much 
important as  those living inside the country, but only the facilities to 
vote, which provides the sense of ownership and participation in the 
governance of the country , has not been extended to them. Needles to 
observe that the Pakistani citizens living abroad  earn money by 
working  there  and then send the same in the shape of foreign 
remittances  to the country. In this manner, they contribute to the 
welfare  of the state, well being of the citizens and good governance of 
the country by providing financial support through their families living 
inside Pakistan . 
9.  It must be clarified here that the overseas Pakistani s, as 
noted hereinabove,  enjoy th e right to participate in the election 
process in terms of Article 17 of the Constitution  being dignified Const.P.39 & 90/11  10
citizens of the country, though residing outside  its territory , as such  
they cannot be denied the same rights on technical grounds, i.e. 
logistic arra ngements made outside the country  for casting their votes . 
10.  This matter need not to be discussed any further on the 
strength of Constitutional provisions as well as the law discussed 
hereinabove,  and importantly  the government itself having realize d 
this aspect  of the issue , promulgated an  Ordinance on 09.05.2013 
making the necessary a mendments in the Election Laws.  However, t he 
only issue remains the implementation of the law  and converting it 
into an Act of the Parliament , for providing permanency  to its 
provisions,  thereby  ensuring fairness  in all kind s of elections including 
the elections of National and Provincial Assemblies as well as Loc al 
Bodies in terms of Article s 32 and 140 A of the Constitution.  
11.  It is vital to note , however,  that during h earing of the 
listed petitions, the Court insisted the Election Commission of Pakistan 
as well as the Federal Government to ensure the participation of 
Overseas Pakistanis in the  General Elections of  2013, but the 
Ordinance , whereby the required amendments  were made in the 
Election Laws,  was promulgated  and gazetted on 09.05.2013, only two  
days prior to the date of holding of General Elections , therefore, 
necessary arrangements could not have been made to extend the 
facility of voting  to the O verseas Pakist anis. 
12.  Now as the General Elections are over and a newly elected 
Government is in power, while, elections of Local Bodies are 
approaching, the Executive/Federal Government  is bound to discharge 
its Constitutional /legal obligations to ensure that the ci tizens/voter s Const.P.39 & 90/11  11
living outside the country are enabled to  participate in all kinds of 
elections in future including the fort hcoming elections of Local Bodies .  
13.  Needless to observe that  notwithstanding the fact that an 
Ordinance has been issued which is likely to be made an Act of the 
Parliament, but if, for any reason, the  said Ordinance lapses,  not being 
made an Act of  Parliament, it shall be deemed that Article 17 of the 
Constitution  continues to insist upon the Federal Government to 
extend the facilit y of voting  to overseas Pakistanis in the elec tion of 
the Parliament as well as  Local Bodies . 
14.  These are the reasons of our short order  of even date , 
which is reproduced hereinbelow: -        
“These Constitution Petitions have been filed under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973, on behalf of Ch. Nasir Iqbal and other Expatriate 
Pakistanis and by Mr. Imran Khan, Chairman, PTI and others, 
instituted as back as on 21.04.2011 and 19.12.2011. The relief 
claimed in bot h the mentioned Constitution Petitions is somehow 
an identical, therefore, from one of the Constitution Petition 
bearing No.39 of 2011, the same has been reproduced herein 
below: - 
“It is therefore most humbly prayed that the instant petition 
may kindly be accepted and respondents be directed to take all 
those steps which are necessary for implementation of the 
fundamental right of vote to all overseas Pakistanis including 
arrangements in Consulates and Embassies of Pakistan all over 
the world before the nex t General Election for National and 
Provincial Assemblies and an opportunity be provided to 
overseas Pakistanis of casting their votes.”  
 
2.  Both the said petitions came up for hearing before 
this Court on different dates commencing from 21.12.2011 
when a n order in the Constitution Petition No.90 of 2011, was 
passed. As we intend to dispose of both these Constitution 
Petitions for the reasons to be recorded later but consider it 
appropriate to reproduce the order noted hereinbefore in Const.P.39 & 90/11  12
extenso  for the sake of comprehending the background of the 
issues involved in the matters: - 
 “This petition has been filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. The issue being 
raised herein is about declaring that the citizens of Pakistan in 
terms of Article 51 of the Constitution but living outside the 
country, have the fundamental right of franchise, therefore, 
denying such right to the citizens, who are reportedly about 
eight millions living outside the country, raises the question of 
public importance.  
2. It may be noted that the citizens may be within or 
outside the country have a right to elect their representatives 
for the Parliament and any such person who is not residing in 
the country at the time when the polling takes place, canno t be 
denied the right of franchise solely for the reason that he is not 
available in the country.  
3. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner states that 
there are three categories of the citizens residing outside the 
country and are being deprived of their right of franchise. He 
has explained the three categories as follows: - 
a) Those who are citizens of Pakistan but living outside the 
country or born outside the country being national of 
Pakistan and the passport is issued to them by the 
Government o f Pakistan, and they are earning their 
livelihood outside the country and making remittances 
to support their dependants in the country;  
b) The Officers/Officials of the Diplomatic service;  
c) Those citizens, who were originally Pakistanis but have 
acquir ed the nationality of the other country and 
maintaining/ holding both the nationalities.  
4. He has also pointed out that as back as in the year 
1993, Constitution Petition No.26 of 1993 was filed before this 
Court claiming the same relief as it has been p rayed for by him 
and in that matter, a larger Bench of this Court vide judgment 
dated 15.11.1993 had forwarded the matter to the Government 
of Pakistan for consideration. According to him till date there 
had been correspondence between different Ministries  but so 
far no final decision in this regard has taken place. He has read 
before us paras 8, 9 and 10 of the judgment. For the sake of 
convenience, the same are reproduced herein below: - 
 “8. The leaned counsel for the petitioner finally 
suggested that th is matter which has already been 
brought to the notice of the Chief Election Commissioner 
and the Government should in the first instance be 
examined in depth by the Chief Election Commissioner 
and finally by the Government with a view to facilitate 
the ex ercise of franchise by the eligible Pakistanis living 
abroad. In this context the provisions on the subject 
contained in the other comparable Federal Constitutions 
may also be examined and appropriate steps taken 
depending upon the extent of resources of t he 
Government.  
9. We consider that this is a reasonable suggestion 
and before dealing with the question in the abstract on 
the legal and constitutional plane, it would be proper Const.P.39 & 90/11  13
that this exercise is undertaken in the first instance by 
the authorities cons titutionally entrusted with the task.  
10. As regards the extra territoriality of the laws, we 
may point out that the Constitution already provides 
that “obedience to the Constitution and the Laws is the 
obligation of every citizen wherever he may be”. Thi s 
suggests the Pakistanis living abroad to the laws of the 
land even those which do not have extra territoriality. 
With these observations, the Petition is disposed of.”  
5. The learned counsel has also referred to a write -up, 
purported to have been issued by the Electronic Government 
Directorate, Ministry of IT & Telecom, Government of Pakistan 
and has referred to its different captions which are as under: - 
 a) Grant of Right of vote to Overseas Pakistanis;  
 b) Representations of Overseas Pakistanis in th e National 
 and Provincial Assemblies;  
 c) Action taken on the issues.  
From the last mentioned caption ‘ action taken on the issues ’ 
following items being important and relevant to subject are 
noted for reference: - 
 
i) Giving a right to vote to citizens res iding overseas has 
precedent in many countries, e.g. France, United States, 
etc. 
ii) Determination/delimitation of a constituency for each 
Province (as proposed in the said summary) may not be 
possible for Overseas Pakistanis citizens.  
iii) Many Overseas Pakistanis  especially in the United States 
are not allowed to keep their Pakistanis citizenship if 
they become naturalized citizens there, in such a 
situation, they will not be able to vote for representation 
in Pakistani legislatives.   
iv) The Election Commission of P akistan has re -constituted 
the Special Committee on right of vote to overseas 
Pakistanis under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Election 
Commission of Pakistan including the representative 
from Prime Minister’s Secretariat, Ministry of Overseas 
Pakistanis, M /o Foreign Affairs, M/o Law & Justice, M/o 
Parliamentary Affairs, M/o Finance, National Database & 
Registration Authority (NADRA), Overseas Pakistanis 
Foundation (OPF) and offices of Election Commission of 
Pakistan.  
6. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan , however, 
requests that he needs some time to consult Ministry of Law & 
Justice, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Overseas 
Pakistanis and the Election Commission of Pakistan and states 
that after taking instructions from these departments, he woul d 
be in a better position to make his submissions.  
7. In above view of the matter, the case is adjourned. In 
the meantime, office is directed to issue notice to the 
respondents to file their replies/concise statements to the 
petition within a period of two  weeks. Copy of this order along 
with memo of the petition and its annex ures be supplied to the 
respondents during course of the day. On receipt of 
replies/concise statements from the respondents, office shall 
put up the matter in Court for hearing.     Const.P.39 & 90/11  14
3.  A perusal of the above order finds mentioned an 
earlier effort made by the overseas Pakistanis in the case of  
Miss Yasmin Khan and another v. Election Commission of 
Pakistan, Islamabad through Secretary an another  (1994 SCMR 
113) when the said Constitut ion Petition was admitted to regular 
hearing on 04.10.1993, and notices were issued to all 
concerned. Finally, by a Larger Bench of this Court, the above 
petition was disposed of on 15.11.1993. The relevant para 
therefrom finds mentioned in the order, repr oduced 
hereinabove.  
4.  Syed Sher Afgan, Director General (Elections), ECP, 
stated that according to his knowledge the observations of this 
Court in the case of Yasmin  Khan (ibid)  were considered by the 
Cabinet in 1996 -1997 but approval was not granted for  
extending the Right to Expatriate Pakistanis but refused to 
extend them Right of Franchise, to be exercised outside the 
country. However, he had not placed on record any such 
decision. If, same is available, he may place the same on record 
so we may incor porate the same in the reasons, which shall be 
recorded later.  
5.  It is to be noted that the ECP, following the 
background of the matter commencing from the judgment in the 
case of Yasmin Khan  (ibid), constituted a Committee in October, 
1997, to consider  these issues. Unfortunately, the final decision 
could not be taken, as it is reported that on the part of the 
Government, no progress could be made.  
6.  Again on 17.11.2009, a Special Committee was 
constituted to consider the following two questions:  
“i. Whether right of vote to overseas Pakistanis should be 
granted to them and if so, what method including 
personal voting and voting through fax, etc. should be 
adopted after examining threadbare the feasibility of the 
method so agreed upon by the Committee;  
ii. Whether granting representation to overseas Pakistanis 
in the National and Provincial Assemblies by reserving 
seats therein and electing the representatives of 
overseas Pakistanis on such seats through proportional 
representation system is a suitable option.”  
7.  This Committee, headed by the Secretary, ECP, 
had furnished its report on 20.01.2012, we are not aware Const.P.39 & 90/11  15
regarding the proceedings or implementation of the 
recommendations of the Committee subsequent thereto, thus, 
we asked the Director General (Elections), ECP, to place the 
same on record. In the meanwhile, from time to time, hearing 
continued and on 25.04.2013, CMA No.2389 of 2013, was 
presented under the signature of the learned Attorney General 
for Pakistan, wherein as many as 27 concerns wer e shown for 
consideration of this Court.  
8.  Notice of the above CMA was issued to the 
Chairman, NADRA, who had submitted reply. The relevant para 
therefrom is reproduced hereinbelow:  
“6. NADRA has already requested Election Commission of 
Pakistan through  its letter dated 1st April 2013 to convey its 
final decision of opting e -Voting solution or otherwise before 5th 
April 2013. With each passing day, smooth and seamless 
deployment of proposed solution is becoming an increasingly 
challenging task. From 1st April till date i.e. 26th April 2013, 
NADRA has yet to receive a green signal from ECP. Hence, the 
resultant loss of time which was the most precious commodity 
in our hands. However, holding the Honorable Supreme Court 
in highest esteem and considering it a privilege to be of 
assistance in enabling overseas Pakistanis to exercise their 
right of adult franchise, NADRA remains unwaivered in its 
resolve and wholeheartedness to comply with any direction 
passed by the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan.”  
9.  The Ministry of Foreign Affairs in its reply finally 
gave its reaction in respect of the concerns shown on behalf of 
the Government, which reads as under: - 
“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reassures the Honorable Court 
that it will use all of its available r esources to implement the 
decision of the Honourable Supreme Court and the Election 
Commission of Pakistan (ECP), on granting the right to vote to 
Overseas Pakistanis.  
The Ministry has previously also submitted to the Honourable 
Supreme Court its position on the subject in CMA No.1973/2013 
on 11 April, 2013.  
In this regard, in anticipation of the decision of the Honourable 
Supreme Court and the ECP, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has 
already taken practical steps which include, seeking the 
necessary permis sion from the governments of the nine short -
listed countries enumerated by the ECP.  
In this context, the following 07 countries have already 
conveyed their permission for conducting polling in their 
respective territories with the proviso that the date and  timing of 
the election should be conveyed to them in a timely manner in 
order to enable them to make the necessary 
security/administrative arrangements. The 07 countries which 
have conveyed their permission are:  
 (i) Australia;  Const.P.39 & 90/11  16
 (ii) Bahrain;  
 (iii) Canad a; 
 (iv) Kuwait;  
 (v) Oman;  
 (vi) Saudi Arabia; and  
 (vii) UK. 
The response of the remaining two countries – UAE and USA – is 
awaited. Our Heads of Mission in these two countries are in 
touch with the concerned host authorities.  
The Ministry of Foreign Aff airs being an integral part of the 
overall governmental machinery was consulted in drafting of the 
CMA No.2389/13. The apprehensions and reservations contained 
therein, relate to the capacity limitations of the Missions. It was 
therefore, deemed necessary to apprise the Court about the 
constraints, which may impede the smooth conduction of the 
polling process. Therefore, bringing these capacity issues to the 
attention of the Honourable Court was considered necessary and 
is in conformance with the duty of th e Foreign Ministry.  
Nonetheless, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterates its 
commitment and reassures the Honourable Court and the ECP 
that it stands ready with all its resources at its disposal to carry 
out any task assigned to it for the realization o f the right to vote 
to Overseas Pakistanis.”   
10.  The Ministry of the Overseas Pakistanis disclosed as 
under: -  
“10. It is again submitted that the Ministry of Overseas 
Pakistanis is in coordination with the relevant Ministries and 
would provide all possi ble assistance through its CWA Missions 
working under the respective Heads of Missions i.e. 
Ambassadors/High Commissioners in line with the directions of 
the Honourable Supreme Court.”  
11.  On behalf of Ministry of Finance, Mr. Sadaqat 
Ahmed, Section Offic er (Litigation) appeared and stated that the 
Finance Ministry is ready and willing to provide funding as per 
the direction of this Court or the ECP.  
12.  Syed Sher Afgan, Director General (Elections), ECP, 
stated that the issue under discussion had been c onsidered by 
the Chief Election Commissioner as well as by the Commission, 
which is reproduced hereunder:  
 “6. In view of the above, if the learned Members agree, we 
may respectfully inform the Supreme Court tomorrow that 
although we welcome their observa tions in relation to giving 
Overseas Pakistanis the right to vote, the ECP is of the 
considered view that this initiative should not be hurriedly 
implemented for the forthcoming elections.”  Const.P.39 & 90/11  17
13.   It is to be noted that on 26.04.2013, the Court 
started dict ating the order and meanwhile learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan so also Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, Sr. 
ASC, for the ECP sought time to seek instructions in this behalf 
from the Election Commission of Pakistan.  Now today (29th 
April) the learned Attor ney General for Pakistan appeared and 
has presented under his signatures a statement (CMA No.2454 
of 2013) which is the outcome of a meeting held by him with 
the ECP.  For convenience, the same is reproduced herein 
below: - 
“1. That the undersigned held a m eeting with the Chief 
Election Commissioner and all the members of the Election 
Commission of Pakistan (ECP).  The ECP has appreciated the 
role of the Supreme Court of Pakistan (SCP) keeping in view 
the utmost concern, desire and expectation which the apex  
Court has with the former qua enabling the Overseas Pakistanis 
to cast their votes outside their constituency and country.  On 
this premise the voters residing within their country but 
residing outside their constituency or province deserve at the 
least a  similar treatment.  Surely all this is possible depending 
on finances and time frame.  
2. That during the meeting, the ECP unanimously agreed 
to accomplish the desired task while requesting the 
Government of Pakistan to prepare requisite proposals for 
effecting the required legislation which may be made applicable 
to the aforesaid voters after the forthcoming General Elections 
in the country.  
3. That the ECP has also expressed its satisfaction with 
regard to the efforts made so far by various departments of  the 
federal government in carrying out the necessary steps in 
extending cooperation to achieve the desired results in the 
shortest possible time thereby enabling the ECP to agree to the 
applicability of the aforesaid legislative proposals in the above 
terms.” 
14.  A perusal of the statement reproduced hereinabove 
clarifies that the ECP recognizes the right to exercise franchise 
to expatriate Pakistanis on well known principle of law that they 
deserve at least a similar treatment and facilitation qua the 
voters residing within the country but outside their constituency 
or province.  
15.  However, reservations for extending the facility to 
expatriate as expressed is the non -availability of the requisite 
legislation in respect whereof the ECP has agreed to acco mplish 
the desired task by requesting the Government of Pakistan to do 
the needful but after the forthcoming General Elections in the 
country added with the reason of non -availability of finances 
and the paucity of time in view of the facts noted hereinabo ve.  Const.P.39 & 90/11  18
View point of the Ministry of Finance and other Ministries has 
categorically noted on the previous dates of hearing wherein 
they had expressed their desire to accomplish the task by 
providing finances as per the directions of this Court or the ECP 
and likewise Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Chairman NADRA and 
the Ministry of Overseas Pakistanis had also given positive 
response in this behalf.  It is equally important to note that the 
ECP has expressed its satisfaction with regard to the efforts 
made so f ar by various departments of the Federal Government 
in carrying out the necessary steps in extending co -operations 
to achieve the desired results in the shortest possible time 
thereby enabling the ECP to agree to the applicability of the 
aforesaid legislat ive proposals in the above terms.  
16.  We have heard the learned counsel for the 
petitioners, the Representatives of the Ministries of Foreign 
Affairs, Overseas Pakistanis, Finance as well as the ECP and the 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan. However,  the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan, questioned the maintainability of 
the petitions, as according to him, neither the Fundamental 
Right of the petitioners is involved nor the ECP being an 
independent institution is obliged to provide them the facil ity to 
exercise the Right of Franchise outside the territory of Pakistan 
and, if any Overseas Pakistani comes on the day of polling he 
can exercise the Right of Franchise. The jurisdiction of this Court 
has also been objected to by him in granting the reli ef.  He 
further argued that it is the job of the ECP to arrange the 
Elections, therefore, no direction can be issued to the ECP for 
providing the facilities to Expatriates to exercise their Right of 
Franchise outside the Pakistan. He further stated that as  the 
legislation has to be promulgated and it is not the job of this 
Court but of the National Assembly, which is presently stands 
resolved and until an Assembly is elected, no legislation is 
possible besides this Court cannot take upon itself to legislate  
the laws.  
17.  Thus, under the circumstances, we are of the 
opinion that once on having recognized that facility can be 
extended to the expatriates to exercise right of franchise, the 
ECP’s further efforts/input is required to achieve the object in 
the forthcoming General Elections can conveniently be achieved.  Const.P.39 & 90/11  19
“18.   Therefore, for the reasons to be recorded later, we 
dispose of both the petitions with the observations that let the 
ECP make all possible efforts to achieve the object, as has been 
noted h ereinabove so the expatriates may also participate in the 
forthcoming General Elections in exercise of their fundamental 
rights conferred under Article 17(2) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.”  
    
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge   
 
 
 
Judge  
 
Islamabad  the 
29th April, 2013  
 
   Approved For Reporting  
 