In the Supreme Court of Pakistan  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
    Present:  
    Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali  
    Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
    Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed C haudhry  
 
Criminal Original Petition No.92 of 2013  
(Contempt proceedings against Imran Khan  
Chairman, Pakistan Tehreek -i-Insaf)  
 
On behalf of Federation / Mr. Muneer A. Malik,  
On Court’s notice:   Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
For alleged contemnor:  Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
     Qazi M. Anwar, Sr. ASC  
     Mr. Ahmed Awais, ASC  
     Mr. Waq ar Rana, ASC  
     Mrs. Shamsha Ali, ASC  
a/w Imran Khan,  
alleged contemnor  
 
Date of hearing:    28.8.2013  
 
Judgment  
 
   Anwar Zaheer Jamali , J – Keeping in view the 
purported statement of Imran Khan, Chairman,  Pakistan 
Tehreek -i-Insaf (PTI), made in a press conference held by him 
on 26.7 .2013, which received wide publicity in print and 
electronic media, the Registrar , Supreme Court of Pakistan, 
submitted a detailed note, duly accompanied with some news 
clippi ngs of print media in this regard, for the kind perusal of 
the Honourable Chief Justice of Pakistan. This office no te 
received due consideration before  the Honourable Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, who  accordingly , on 31.7.2013 , passed  
following order in the matter: - 
“7. Office note perused. Prima facie, it seems that he (Imran 
Khan)  has sta rted a deliberate campaign  to scandalize the Court Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  2
and bring judges into hatred, ridicule or contempt. Thus, his 
above acts call for action for contempt of court under Article 204 
of the Constitution read with section 3 of  the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance, 2003. Therefore, Notice be issued to him to appear on 
2.8.2013  and explain as to why proceedings as envisaged by 
above provisions of the Constitution and law be not initiated 
against him. Notice be also issued to the learn ed Attorney General 
for Pakistan. ”.  
The present proceedings, thus, emanate d in the above noted 
circumstances.  
2.  On 2. 8.2013, when, in response to such notice, 
the alleged contemnor  Imran Khan appeared before the  Court 
alongwith his counsel , during the Court proceedings, h is 
counsel  submitted two written explanations, with reference 
to his purported remarks in the press conference held on 
26.7.2013, which read as under: - 
“EXPLANATION No. 1:    
1. That Imran Khan has neither committed contempt of 
court un der the law or the Constitution nor would even 
think of doing so.  
2. That Imran Khan has not started any campaign 
either to scandalize the Court or to bring judges into 
hatred, ridicule or contempt. On the contrary, he has 
always struggled to uphold dignit y and independence of the 
Supreme Court and the judiciary in general.  
3. That Imran Khan believes in the rule of law, 
supremacy of the Constitution and independence of 
judiciary and, for this reason, he and his party was in the 
forefront of the movement fo r rule of law and restoration of 
judiciary.  
4. That, after the general elections, Imran Khan has 
repeatedly requested and appealed to the Supreme Court to Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  3
redress the grievance of his party which has suffered 
massive electoral rigging at the hands of ECP and its 
officials. This clearly establishes that Imran Khan and his 
party have high expectations from the Supreme Court that 
justice would be done to them and that their grievance 
would be redressed.  
5. It is respectfully submitted that the notice may 
kindly be recalled.”  
 
“EXPLANATION No. 2:   
Respectfully Submitted  
1. That the press statement was made in good faith 
on 26th July, 2013 where in reference to the 
‘Judiciary’ was for the Returning Officers and/or 
District Returning Officers (belonging to the 
Subordinate Judiciary), assigned to the election 
process.  
2. That Mr. Imran Khan has high respect and 
esteem for the Supreme Court of Pakistan and 
has high expectations from this Honourable 
Court for redressal of the grievances of the PTI 
arising out of the gene ral elections.”  
These explanations were , however,  not found satisfactory in 
the wake  of word shameful “ك匈⻑” which,  as per Court opinion  
prima -facie,  tantamounts to ridicule and abuse the J udiciary. 
In these circumstances, the case was adjourned for today at 
the request of learned ASC for alleged contemnor  Imran Khan 
with directions to submit the written reply.  
3.     In response to such directions, on 27.8.2013, in 
the form of C.M.A. No.520 of 2013, the alleged contemnor  
Imran Khan filed his detailed reply, stretching over more than Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  4
twenty typed pages, which also accompanied some annexures 
giving coverage t o the news about the resignation of the Chief 
Elect ion Commissioner of Pakistan qua speculations as to the 
cause of his resignation , etc.  
4.       Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr . ASC for the alleged 
contemnor, at the very outset  of his submissions before us , 
strongly contended that the scandalous word shameful  “ك匈⻑” 
attributed to his client, is result of some misunderstanding, 
as Imran Khan has always counted the institution of 
Judiciary in very high esteem  and with utmost respect, which 
fact is fully demonstr ated from his past conduct , particularly,  
during the movement of restoration of Judges in Musharaf’s 
regime , when he and his party workers were  found in 
forefront  of this movement ; obviously  with the sole object of 
ensuring restoration of independen t, pros pering and strong 
judiciary in the c ountry, which is the backbone in every 
democratic country for functioning of various institutions 
accordi ng the Constitution and the law  and for protection of 
fundamental rights of every citizen of the country. He furthe r 
submitted that the word shameful ha s multiple dictionary 
and usage meaning s, therefore , this word, even if used by  
Imran Khan, should not be read in isolation to the context 
and purpose of his press conference, which was held solely  to 
voice the grievanc e of his political party (PTI) against large 
scale mismanagement and rigging in the general elections Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  5
held on 11.5.2013. He also argued that recently PTI has 
published a comprehensive white paper highlighting so many 
instances of mismanagement and rigging  in the said 
elections, whi ch had  materially tilted the elections results in 
favour of one political party. He  reiterated that  Imran Khan  
and his politica l party is serious in ensuring establishment of 
free and fair political practice s and strong institutio ns in the 
count ry, particularly, the Judiciary  as a whole , therefore, his 
single word in the press conference should  not be considered 
as scandalous or indecent remarks against the superior 
Judiciary. He further attempted to clarify that the grievance of 
Imran Khan and his political party was about the 
administrative conduct of District Returning Officers and 
Returning Officers  nominated from subordinate judiciary , 
who were responsible to hold free and fair elections in the 
country , but due to their ineffic iency and failure to check 
mal-practices, corruption  and mala -fide, they failed to deliver 
as pe r the spirit of elections laws. In this regard, he 
specifically referred to the contents of paragraph s twenty nine 
and thirty of his reply, which read  as follow s:- 
“29.  That, however, unfortunately at the time of the elections, 
the voters were disappointed to find that the R.Os were ineffective 
in checking the rigging and, in  fact, were often found to be 
complicit in the process of rigging. While it is true tha t these ROs 
were performing an administrative function as opposed to a 
judicial function, but since they belonged to the genre of judicial 
officers, they brou ght a bad name to the judiciary . Thus, by 
contributing to massive rigging of elections, the ROs ha ve not only Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  6
violated the fundamental rights of the people of Pakistan, they 
have also done great injustice to the judiciary as an institution.  
30.  That Mr. Imran Khan is totally committed to the 
independence of judiciary and upholding of its dignity. He h as 
struggled for these objectives in the past and shall continue to do 
so in the future. However, he is deeply disappointed and saddened 
because of the following events:  
(a)  That the National Judicial Polic y Making Committee 
(NJPMC), in its meeting held on 8th June 2013, expressed 
satisfaction with the performance of ROs and DROs during the 
election process. According to the press release issued by the 
Supreme Court, out of a total of 376 applications, 292 were found 
to be "baseless and frivolous". It was  mentioned in the press 
release that not a single application 'worth consideration' against 
ROs and DROs was received in Baluchistan and the Islamabad 
Capital Territory.  
It was indeed shocking to the PTI and its candidates. They felt that 
their cases have  already been prejudged by the NJPMC. It 
appeared that the acts of the DROs and ROs have been condoned 
and they were given a clean chit by a body of such high standing. 
After this, what could they expect from the ECP or the election 
tribunals? A large numb er of the aggrieved candidates of PTI did 
not file election petitions because of disappointment arising out of 
such a press release.  
(b) That this Honourable Court decided the petition of PML (N) 
to advance the date of the presidential election from 6 Aug ust to 
30 July without notice to PTI and its Presidential candidate. PT I 
feels that it was a necessary party to the proceedings and ought to 
have been heard before the decision. Though deeply hurt, PTI 
decided to participate in the presidential election in  order to 
uphold the Constitution and the democratic dispensation.  
(c)  That unfair election process has resulted in the unfortunate 
exit of the Chief Election Commissioner Mr. Fakhruddin 
G.Ebrahim, a person who enjoyed impeccable reputation for 
integrity . Yet the unethical, illegal and unjust election process 
finally took its toll. His body language since the general elections 
showed his helplessness in the face of powers that be, and the Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  7
Presidential Elections controversy was perhaps the proverbial ‘last  
straw’. The episode leading to the resignation of Mr. Ebrahim has 
brought to light serious differences and dissensions amongst the 
members of the ECP which are purportedly based on political 
leanings and interests. It lends substance to the overwhelming 
perception that there was no cohesion within the ECP and the 
conduct of general elections by the ECP was extremely flawed.  
(d)  That it is submitted with great respect and humility that it 
is not unusual for this Honourable Court to take suo moto of 
much l ess grave incidents of injustice where  only individuals are 
concerned , but it was disappointing that this honourable Court 
did not feel it proper to take suo motu notice of such grave 
injustice where rights of the people of Pakistan have been 
trampled.”  
5.      Making further submissions, Mr. Hamid Khan 
contended that the issue regard ing the purported remarks of  
Imran Khan against the judiciary as an institution have been 
blown out of proportion due to some irresponsible coverage of 
his Press Conference by the print and electronic media, 
otherwise there are many other political persons/party 
workers of other political parties, who have been using 
extremely insulting, derogatory and abusing language against 
the judiciary and openly throwing challenges to the superior 
judiciary, in particular to the Chief Justice of Pakistan, but 
such statements and remarks have either gone unnoticed or 
overlooked/ignored instead of some appropriate action 
against them under the provisions of Article 204 of the 
Constitution and  other provisions of Contempt of Court laws. 
He also contended that if the facts of the present case are 
kept in juxtaposition to such statements of other political Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  8
persons, it will be obvious that in violation of Article 25 of the 
Constitution, his client  has been unjustly discriminated for 
the purpose of proposed action against him, though he is 
entitled to equal treatment and non -discrimination in this 
regard.  In the end he also referred to certain news clipping 
annexed with written reply submitted on be half of alleged 
contemnor Imran Khan, which relate to the resignation of the 
Chief Election Commissioner of Pakistan  and his press 
conference to show that the stance of large scale malpractice 
and mismanagement in the general election held on 
11.5.2013  is fully endorsed with the remarks of the Chief 
Election Commissioner of Pakistan, which formed the basis of 
his resignation from the high office on the strength of 
principled sta nd taken by him in this regard . 
6.               In the end, r everting to the legal submissions in 
support of his arguments for discharg e of the notice issued to 
his client, he referred to the judgments in the cases of 
Masroor Ahsan versus Ardeshir Cowasjee  (PLD 1998 S.C. 
823) and Baz Muhammad Kakar versus Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2012 S.C. 923) , Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri 
versus Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2013 S.C. 413) , particularly, 
the following observations there from:- 
 (PLD 1998 S.C. 823)  
 75. ………………  
“(i) That since the freedom of speech under Article 66 of the 
Constituti on is subject to the Constitution, as a corollary, it Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  9
must follow that the freedom of speech of a Member of the 
Parliament is subject to  the contempt law under Article 204 of 
the Constitution and, therefore, the above privilege is not 
absolute.  
(ii)     …… … 
(iii)     …… … 
(iv)    That Article 204 of the Constitution relating to the 
contempt of Court is to be construed in conjunction with 
Articles 19 and 66 thereof keeping in view the modern trend 
about contempt law obtaining in the world to ` protect and 
project the freedom of speech and expression and the ' freedom 
of press subject to reasonable restrictions.  
(v)   That the power of contempt should be used sparingly and 
only in serious cases and that the Court should not be either 
unduly touchy or over -astut e in discovering new varieties of 
contempt for "its usefulness depends on the wisdom and 
restraint with which it is exercised".  
(vi)  That fair comments about the general  working of Courts 
made in good  faith in the public interest and in temperate 
langu age and fair comments  on the merits of a decision of a 
Court made, after the pendency of the proceedings in a case in 
good f aith and in temperate language  without impugning the 
integrity or impartiality of the Judge are protected under 
Exceptions (i) and ( ii) to section 3 of the Contempt of Court 
Act.”. 
(PLD 2012 S.C. 923)  
11.     The Attorney General in his submissions repeatedly urged 
the Court to adopt judicial restraint. He also cited a number of 
precedents and texts to emphasize the notion of judicial restraint 
in contempt cases. We repeatedly, requested him, and the other 
learned counsel to cite precedent from anywhere in the world 
where the courts exercised judicial restraint in the face of 
disobedience contempt. As stated earlier in the opinion, desp ite 
our repeated requests, no such precedent could be cited perhaps, 
because there is none. All the precedents which wax lyrical about 
the benefits of judicial restraint are, in reality, cases where .the Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  10
issue was that of scandalization. In cases of disobe dience 
contempt, the approach is altogether different. In such cases, 
courts do not show restraint because at stake is the people's 
right to the rule of law, not the ego of judges.  
12.       When Lord Denning, the well known British judge, made 
his oft -quoted speech in R v. Metropolitan  Police Commissioner 
(1968), he too was sitting in judgment on a case of scandalization 
contempt, not of disobedience contempt. The learned Attorney 
General emphatically relied on this speech without appreciating 
this d estina tion. Lord Denning said: "Let me say at once that we 
will never use this jurisdiction (contempt) as a means to uphold 
our own dignity. That must rest on surer foundations. Nor will we 
use it to suppress those who speak against us. We do not fear 
criticism,  nor do we resent it. For there is something far more 
important at stake. It is no less than freedom of speech itself ". (R 
v. Metropolitan  Police Commissioner, ex parte Blackburn  (No.2) 
[1968] 2 QB  150 AT 154) ” 
PLD 2013 S.C. 413  
“3. Before parting with t he short order, it is essential to note that 
at the time of concluding his arguments on the points noted 
hereinabove, he started making uncalled for aspersions against 
the member of the Bench, which are tantamount prima facie to 
undermine its authority cal ling for action against him for 
Contempt of Court under Article 204(3) of the Constitution read 
with section 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003. 
However we, while exercising restraint, have decided not to 
proceed against him following the principle  that such jurisdiction 
has to be exercised sparingly on case to case basis."  
7.            After the conclusion of arguments  of learned Sr. 
ASC, with the permission of Court,  alleged contemnor  Imran 
Khan, also came at the rostrum  and made his submissions  
on same lines . In unequivocal term s he made statement in 
open Court that he holds highest regard  and respect for the 
Judiciary as an important institution  and third pill ar of the Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  11
State , which fact is manifest from his past as well as present 
conduct and th at the use of word “ك匈⻑” attributed to him 
during the press conference held on 26.7.2013, w as never 
meant to abuse or show disrespect to anyone, even the 
District Returning Officers and the Returning Officers, but it 
was used in the sense of unbecoming, rather than shamefu l 
or disgraceful. He further assured that he is committed to the 
supremacy of the Judiciary as an independent and highly 
respected institution , therefore, in future too there will be no 
such occasion when this Court will find him attributing any 
derogatory  or scandalous remarks against  this institution. 
More so, as he understands well that in every democratic 
country it is extremely necessary that  judiciary as an  
institution should be allowed to function independently, in a 
most respectable and smooth manne r without being made 
controversial so that the public at large may have full 
confidence on this institution and that he himself has full 
faith and confidence on this institution, particularly, upon the 
present day Judiciary, who has demonstrated its courag e and 
independence  in number of important cases decided in the 
recent past.  
8.            Mr. Munir A. Malik, learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan, who has appeared in these proceedings on Court 
notice, in his submissions made distinction in the contempt  
proceedings initiated by the apex Court for disobedience of its Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  12
order and contempt arising out of scandalous remarks made 
by an individual. He contended that in the latter case this 
Court had been showing its magnanimity and restraint in 
taking any stern action against the alleged contemnor. He 
further contended that the present day judiciary at the level 
of Apex Court, is the most independent judiciary in the 
history of our Country, and it has reached a point where 
whosoever makes allegation against the j udiciary, people will 
never believe it and the judiciary will remain untainted. With 
these submissions, he suggested for a lenient view in the 
matter by discharging the show cause notice for initiating 
contempt proce edings against Chairman P.T.I . Mr. Imran  
Khan.  
9.            We have carefully considered all the submissi ons 
made by the learned ASC for  Mr. Imran Khan and also the 
view expressed by the learned Attorney General for Pakistan 
during his brief submissions with reference to these 
proceedings. The submissions made by the learned ASC, as 
noted above, have much force, particularly in line with the 
case law cited by him, as discussed above. The principle of 
showing judicial restraint, particularly in the cases relating to 
the purported scandalization o f the judiciary through oral 
remarks, is by now a well recognized principle in our judicial 
history, which has been time and again reiterated by the 
Court. In this regard,  reference may be made to the cases of Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  13
Masroor Ahsan  (supra) , Baz Muhammad Kakar  (supra), and 
Allam Tahir -ul-Qadri  (supra) , which amply cover this 
proposition .  
10.  Besides, viewing the present proceedings on the 
golden principles of [ﻋﻔﻮ] forgiveness /remission  and رzEدر[ ] 
pardon , enshrined in  Islam , which is one of the hallmark s of 
the Islam ic system of dispensation of justice, a prudent Qazi/ 
Judge entrusted with the onerous task of dispensation of 
justice is supposed to be more composed and cool minded so 
as to tactfully deal with such pity notions  and remarks , which 
might have been made in good faith or due to a slip of the 
tongue . Moreover , just and fair remarks, made unconsciously 
or under the tide of momentary emotions , in some what harsh 
language, are not to be readily taken in the negative sense , 
but as mean s for soul-searching and  improvement in the 
system. In such circumstances,  depending upon the peculiar 
facts and circumstances of each case,  for showing 
magnanimity, restraint and grace  in his conduct , a Qazi/ 
Judge  is not required to wait for an unconditional apology 
from the pe rson charged with the allegations of using 
indecent language against him or for scandalizing the 
judiciary as an institution.  
11.  In the present proceedings, grievance of the 
alleged contemnor regarding the questionable conduct of Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  14
District Returning Offic ers and the Returning Officers, who 
are otherwise judicial officers,  during the general elections 
2013 , prima facie,  gains support from the remarks given by 
some othe r independent we ll reputed sourc es regarding over 
all conduct of the Elections 2013, there fore, use of word 
“ك匈⻑” is to be looked into in the context of exercise of such 
administrative powers by the judicial officers in a weak and 
irresponsible manner qua the fact that the Press Conference 
dated 26.7.2013, was also held by the alleged contemnor in 
the context of charges of mismanagement and corruption in 
said General Elections, as well as the fact that subsequent 
grievances agitated by his party in the form of various 
proceedings before different forums were not attended to 
promptly, rather placed in cold stora ge to their prejudice.  
12.  In our opinion, t he s ubmission of an 
unconditional apology by the alleged contemnor in every case 
is neither a condition precedent , nor a point of ego or prestige 
for the Court s, which practice is to be adhered to in each case 
as a rule of thumb before discharg ing the  notice.  Similarly , 
mere submission of unconditional apology is also no ground 
for further inaction in the proceedings or discharge of such 
notice  without looking into the intent behind it . Rather, it 
would entirely depend upon the facts and circumstances of 
each case, particularly the stance taken by the alleged 
contemnor qua his over all conduct during such proceedings Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  15
before the Court, which will enable the Court seized of the 
matter to form an opinion about strict  adherence to such a 
practice or otherwise.  
13.           In the present proceedings, the alleged contemnor 
has promptly responded to the notice at the first instance and 
placed his appearance before the Court on both the dates of 
hearing fixed in this mat ter to show due respect, honour and 
regard for the Court. Besides, earlier also he has filed two 
statements before the Court for explaini ng the background of 
his remark , which has been misconstrued  and agitated this 
Court for issuing notice under considera tion. Subsequent to 
it, again he has filed a detailed reply to the said notice of 
contempt proceedings wherein, he has stated the relevant 
facts honestly and clarified his position  in so many words . 
14.           The facts noted above reasonably and fairly  
demonstrate that the word “ ك匈⻑” used by the alleged 
contemnor was, prima facie , uttered by him in different sense 
and context, which was viewed as a derogatory and insulting 
remark for the judiciary as an institution. There is no denial 
of the fact that during General Elections 2 013, held on 
11.5.2013, at the request of Election Commission of Pakistan, 
which was acceded to, a good number of judicial officers from 
the District Judiciary were entrusted with the task of 
holding/supervising the said general elections in their Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  16
capacity  as Returning and District Returning Officers , in a 
free, fair and transparent manner . In the wake of this 
position, the stance of alleged contemnor that his grievance 
regarding the malpractices in the said e lections and 
purported remark s were in the conte xt of such poor 
administrative performance shown  by the said judicial 
officers, seems to be a plausible explanation from his side. 
More so, when the contempt proceedings are in the nature of 
quasi criminal proceedings, the b enefit of any such doubt in 
favour of contemnor is to be extended to  him. Moreover , we 
have noticed the conduct of Mr. Imran Khan in Court and 
observed that throughout the proceedings it was evident from 
his body language t hat he holds full respect and regard for 
the court . Even, while addressing the Court, he has shown 
signs of encountering an unpleasant situation and remorse 
on his face with reference to the se proceedings , which have 
expanded from his one word objectionable remark, as 
discussed above.  
15.            Admitted ly, Mr. Imran Khan is a public figure and 
duly elec ted member  of National Assembly/Majlis -e-Shoora of 
Pakistan , who has not only been actively involved in politics 
for a considerable period, but is also the Chairman of a 
political party , P.T.I. In such cir cumstances, while 
considering  his conduct, we also cannot lose sight of the 
provision of Articles -19 and 66 of our Constitution, relating to Crl. Org. Petition No.92 of 2013  17
freedom of speech and the privileges of members of Majlis -e-
Shoora (Parliament).  Thus, at this juncture , as a note of 
caution, we may observe that politicians and other public 
figures having their say and a following amongst the public 
are expected to use more decent and guarded language and 
have to be more careful in the selection of words in public 
gatherings or pres s conferences so as to show their intellect, 
maturity of mind and wisdom qua respect to various national 
institutions , and to present themselves , as role model for the 
society at large.  
16.          As a sequel  of what has been discussed above, 
and looking  to the over all conduct of Mr. Imran Khan , we 
have no reason to doubt his bonafide or to disbelieve his 
statement , and  all these facts justify our conclusion to 
discharge the show cause notice , without further calling upon 
any unconditional/formal apology  from him in this regard . 
17.          Foregoing are the reasons for our short order 
dated 28.8.2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad the  
9th October, 2013  
Approved for reporting.  
Riaz                                   Judge  
 
 
 
                                 Judge  
 
 
 
                                 Judge  
 