IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
  
 
Criminal Petition Nos. 591 of 2020  
(Against the order dated 05.06.2020 in Cr.M . 
(BA) 229 -M/2020 passed by the Peshawar 
High Court, Minhora Bench (Dar -ul-Qaza), Swat  
 
 
Sheqab Muhammad  
 
.…Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
The State and others  
  
….Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner(s):  Mr. Abdul Latif Afridi, ASC  
 
For the  State:   Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, ASC  
    with Samiullah, SHO and Abdul Kamal, I.O.  
    
      
For the Complainant :     In person  
 
Date of hearing:              07.08.2020.  
    ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Petitioner is amongst the 
array of accused, blamed to have murderously assaulted the PWs  at  
9:10 a.m. on 10.4.2020 within the precincts of Police Station  Himmat 
Khan Shaheen Kalangi, District Malakand, in the backdrop of a dispute 
over immovable property ; fire shot attributed to the  petitioner is confirmed 
by a medico legal certificate.  
2.  Heard.   
3.  Arguments that ocular account stands contradicted by medical 
evidence and in the absence of an independent witness from the public, 
petitioner’s general pa rticipation , resulting into an injury on a non -vital part 
of the body, particularly in the absence of repeated fire shot , squarely  bring s 
his case within the remit of further probe , are not only beside the mark  but 
also cannot be attended without undertaking an in -depth analysis of the 
prosecution case, an exercise forbidden by law  at bail stage . In a daylight 
affair, tw o persons sustained firearm injuries besides the one having endured 
violence   through   blunt   means    and   as   such   require s   no   public  Criminal Petition Nos.591 of 2020  
  
  
 2
support to drive home the charge;  their statements supported by medical 
examinations of even date,  cumulatively bring petitioner’s  case prima facie  
within the mischief of section 324 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 , hit by 
statutory  prohib ition, in view whereof, he cannot be released on bail in the 
absence of any consideration  within the purview of subsection  
2 of section 497 of the Code ibid. Similarly, murderous assault as defined in 
the section ibid draws no  anatomical  distinction between vital or non -vital 
parts of human body . Once  the triggered is pressed and the victim is 
effectively targeted,  “intention or knowledge ” as contemplated by the section 
ibid is manifest ed; the course of a bullet is not controlled  or steered  by 
assailant ’s choice  nor can he claim any premium for a poor marksmanship. 
Exercise of discretion by the High Court being well within the bounds of law 
calls for no interference. Petition fails. Leave declined.    
  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the 
7th August, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 
 
 
 
 