IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI  
MR. JUSTICE AMIR HANI MUSLIM  
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013  
AND 
CIVIL PETITION NOs. 1148/2013 & 1348/2013  
AND 
C.M.A. NOs. 278 -L, 279-L, 285 -L, 287 -L, 288 -L, 289 -L, 5328 to 
5332, 5378, 5463, 5464, 5492, 5493, 5515 to 5522 & 5524/2013  
 
(On appeal from the orders dated 24.6.2013 & 9.7.2013 passed by Lahore High 
Court, Lahore in Writ Petition No. 7253/2013 and judgment dated 15.7.2013 
passed by Islamabad High Court, Islamabad in WP No. 2939/2013)  
 
Dossani Travels Pvt Ltd   (CA 800 -L/2013)  
 
City Travels (Pvt) Ltd    
(CA 801 -L/2013)  
 
Super Travels Pvt Ltd    
(CA 802 -L/2013)  
 
Usman Air Travels through its CEO    
(CP 1148/2013)  
 
M/s Golden Tr avel Services Pvt Ltd    
(CP 1348/2013)  
 
… Appellants/Petitioners  
VERSUS  
 
M/s Travels Shop (Pvt) Ltd and 
others   (CAs 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -
L/2013)  
 
Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary M/o Religions Affairs 
and others    
(CPs 1148/2013 & 1348/2013)  
 
… Respondents  
 
 
For the Appellants:  Mr. Afzal A. Haider, ASC  
    (In CAs 800 -L to 802 -L/2013)  
 
For the Petitioners:  Mr. Muhammad Ikram Ch, Sr. ASC  
    (In CPs 1148 & 1348/2013)  
 
For the Applicants:  Mr. Waseem Majid Malik, ASC  
    (In CMA 278 -L,5492 & 5524 /201 3)  
 
    Mr. A.K. Dogar, Sr. ASC  
    (In CMA 279 -L/2013)   
 CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  2
    Mr. Saeed Ullah Khan, ASC  
    (In CMA 285 -L/2013)   
 
    Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC  
(In CMAs 287-L, 288 -L, 5328 to 533 1, 5463, 5464, 
5493, 5521 & 5522 /2013)   
 
Mr. Muhammad Ikram Ch., Sr ASC  
    (In CMAs 289 -L & 5477/2013)  
     
Mr. Afzal A. Haider, ASC  
    (In CMA 5332/2013)  
 
Mr. Mir Adam Khan, AOR  
    Mr. Nek Nawaz Khan Awan, ASC  
    (In CMA 5378 /2013)   
 
    Qari Abdur Rasheed, ASC  
    (In CMAs 5515 to 5520/2013)  
 
 
 
For FBR:    Syed Arshad Hussain Sh ah, ASC  
    Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
      
For SECP:  Mr. Naveed Ihsan, Departmental 
Representative  
 
For CCP:  Mr. Muhammad Bilal, Sr. ASC  
 Mr. Babar Bilal, ASC  
 
For NADRA:  Mr. Saqib Jamal, Manager Legal  
 
On Court Call:  Mr. Abdul Hayee Gillani, Additional 
Attorney General  
Mr. Dil Muhammad Alizai, DAG  
Mr. Jahanzeb Wahla, Standing Counsel.  
Mr. Shahid Khan, Secretary,  
Ministry of Religious Affairs.  
Mr. Shahzad Ahmed, Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Religious Affairs  
Mr. Farid Khattak, Deputy Secretary, 
Ministry  of Religious Affairs  
Malik Saeed, Director Hajj, Lahore  
 
For the Respondents:  Mr. A.K. Dogar, Sr. ASC (for respondent No.1)  
 
Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC (for respondent No. 4, 
6, 10 -12, 14, 16, 18, 20 -22, 29, 30, 32 -34, 58 -60, 64, 
66, 68, 78, 79, 85, 87, 89, 92 & 94 ) 
 
    Qari Abdur Rasheed, ASC  
(for respondent No. 65)  
 
Date of Hearing:   12, 19, 26 & 27 of August, 2013  
 CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  3
JUDGMENT  
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013  
 Through these appeals, by leave of the Court, the 
appellants have challenged the order dated 24.6.2013 vide which a 
learned Judge of the Lahore High Court vide an interim order in 
pending writ petition s directed that Ministry of Religious Affairs, 
Government of Pakistan (hereinafter to be referred to as the 
“MORA”) should invite top 60  enrolled Hajj Group Operators 
(hereinafter to be referred to as the “H GO/HGOs”) and 04 other 
HGOs which were given Hujjaj quota in the Hajj of 2012 for 
specifying the details of their respective packages and the price for 
a Haji; that the name of th ose co mpanies should be displayed at 
the MORA (Ministry of Religious Affairs) website; that they be given 
seven days notice in writing as also by email for the bidding 
process; that the remaining quota for Hajj 2013 (which was 
retrieved from 19 HGOs on account o f poor performance during the 
preceding Hajj) be allocated through a bidding process; that the 
candidates who would offer packages satisfying the requirements 
laid down in the impugned order and lowest bids should be given 
quota license of 50 Hujjaj each at a time. It was further directed 
that 20% cut on the allocation of Hujjaj quota as directed by the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia authorities (hereinafter to be referred to 
as the “KSA”) would not apply  to those HGOs who have been given 
quota through such biddin g process.  
2. The appellants’ case is that they are well reputed 
companies owned and run by Pakistani citizens; that they are 
providing complete services to the pilgrims for Hajj and Umra for CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  4
many years and to  the entire satisfaction of MOR A; that they wer e 
granted Hajj quota in 2012 in accord with the Hajj Policy strictly 
on merit and in terms of the order passed by the learned High 
Court dated 4.10.2012 in W.P. No. 18155 of 2012; that they were 
allocated a quota of 48 Hujjaj the said  year and they organiz ed 
successful Haj j for clients in 2012 ; that on account of their good 
performance they were allocated quota for 48 Hujjaj as per  the Hajj 
Policy of 2013; that a “Hajj Recognition Letter 2013” was also 
issued to them whereafter they started booking Hujjaj p ilgrims who 
intended to perform Hajj 2013; that they gave passports, I.D. cards 
and other documents pursuant to which requisite number of 
accommodation was rented at Makkah and Madina; rent deeds 
were executed with Saudi citizens; that to their utter surpr ise, they 
were informed through letter No. F(1)/2013 HJO -14066 dated 
27.6.2013 that the impugned order has been passed directing the 
petitioners in the said writ petition to participate in the auction to 
be conducted by MORA for purposes of allocation of q uota of Hujjaj 
afresh; that the order passed by the learned High Court was 
arbitrary; against the law declared and cannot be sustained. Leave 
was granted by this Court vide order dated  30.7.2013 inter alia  to 
consider :- 
(i) whether the learned High Court sitti ng in 
Constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 
of the Constitution could interfere in the 
Policy Making Domain of the Executive?  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  5
(ii) whether the Hajj Policy announced by 
Ministry of Religious Affairs was violative 
of any law or rules to warrant interferen ce? 
(iii) whether the Hajj Policy announced for the 
year 2013 was reflective of lack of 
transparency or malice?  
(iv) whether the impugned order passed is 
violative of the law laid down by this Court 
in Al-Raham Travels and Tours (Pvt) Ltd Vs. 
Ministry of Religious Af fairs, Hajj, Zakat 
and Ushr  (PLD 2011 SC 1621)? And  
(v) whether the petitioners could be 
condemned unheard?  
 
3. Learned counsel for the appellants reiterated the 
submissions made at the leave granting stage.  
4. Learned counsel for the respondents Mr. A.K. Dogar, 
Sr. ASC submitted:  
(i) that the appellants had an alternate remedy of 
challenging the letter issued to them to participate 
in the bidding process vide letter dated 27.6.2013 
issued by the MORA and instead of offering the bid, 
they challenged the order of the High  Court before 
this Court which is not tenable in law;  
(ii) that vide the impugned order the bidding process 
was carried out transparently and 19 persons were 
allocated quota;  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  6
(iii) that the so -called third party evaluation in the 
selection process for Hujjaj carried out by the 
MORA cannot be sustained as the said selection 
had been set aside by the High Court  vide order 
dated 5.7.2013 (in C.M. No. 1837/2013 in W.P. No. 
7253/2013) , a copy of the order is at Page 37 6 of 
CMA 28 6-L of 2013;  
(iv) that if any policy framed by th e government is in 
conflict with any provision of law or is violative of 
fundamental rights, the same can be called in 
question before the High Court under Article 199 of 
the Constitution and the order passed does not 
reflect any jurisdictional defect to w arrant 
interference by this Court. In support of the 
submissions made, he relied on AL-RAHAM Travels 
and Tours (Pvt.) Ltd. versus Ministry of Religious Affairs, 
Hajj, Zakat and Ushr  (2011 SCMR 1621 at page 1642 ); 
(v) that every citizen has been granted freedom  of free 
business and profession under Article 18 of the 
Constitution and the Hajj Policy insofar as it limits 
the grant of quota to a class of citizens and 
exclude s the respondent -writ petitioners is violative 
of Article 18(b) of the Constitution. In supp ort of the 
submissions made, he relied on Arshad Mehmood 
versus Government of Punjab through Secretary, 
Transport Civil Secretariat, Lahore  PLD 2005 SC 
193 at 231 and 233. (Para 7 at Page 197);  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  7
(vi) that the selection process of HGOs through open 
auction as dir ected by the High Court vide the 
impugned order is in accord with the command of 
the Constitution in particular Article 18. Reference 
was made by learned counsel to a judgment of this 
Court in Shaukat Ali versus Government of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1997 SC 342 at 3 46); 
(vii) that the classification of HGOs in terms of the 
services/facilities provided to Hujjaj at Macca and 
Madina into blue, green and white accommodation 
is discriminatory and violative of Article 25 of the 
Constitution which has rightly been annulled by 
the High Court. The classification of this kind is in 
derogation to the  tenets of Islam. Reference was 
made to The State v. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  (PLD 1978 
Lahore 523, 663 ); 
(viii) that the appellants and petitioners were put on 
notice by MORA vide letter dated 27.6. 2013 and it 
is not open for them to contend that they have been 
condemned unheard. Reliance was placed by 
learned counsel on AL-RAHAM Travels and Tours 
(Pvt.) Ltd. versus Ministry of Religious Affairs, Hajj, 
Zakat and Ushr  (2011 SCMR 1621 and 1641, Paras 
44 and 45 ). 
5. M/s Nek Nawaz Khan Awan, learned counsel for 
applicants (in CMA No. 5378 of 2013), Waseem Majid Malik, 
learned counsel for applicants (in CMA 278 -L of 2013) and Saeed CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  8
Ullah Khan, learned counsel for applicants (in CMA 285 -L of 2013) 
adopted the arguments of Mr. A.K.Dogar, Sr. ASC.  
6. Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC who was representing 29 
respondents (in CMAs No. 5328 to 5333 of 2013) at the outset 
adopted the arguments of Mr. A.K.Dogar, Sr. ASC. In addition to 
this he submitted:  
i) that the appellants have no t approached this Court 
with clean hands;  
ii) that they were only allowed provisional quota in terms 
of order dated 4.10.2012 pursuant to the order passed 
in Writ Petition No. 18156 of 2012;  
iii) that some of the appellants went to the High Court 
and challenged the  impugned order (W.P. No. 2939 of 
2013) and they are not entitled to seek any relief by 
this Court;  
iv) that MORA overstepped its jurisdiction in appointing 
chartered accountants and it is violative of the order of 
the High Court which has been placed on recor d at 
Page 37 6 in C.M. No. 286-L of 2013);  
v) that the Hajj Policy insofar as it dedicates 60% of 
quota to government and remaining to private HGOs is 
bad in law and violative of Article 18 of the 
Constitution;  
vi) that Hajj being a sacred duty in Islam, the State  
should have arranged for Hajj at a more inexpensive 
rate and the impugned order has addressed the plight CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  9
of millions who could not afford to perform Hajj on 
account of the expenses involved.  
7. Mr. Abdul Hayee Gillani, learned Additional Attorney 
General for Pakistan submitted that allocation of Hajj quota to 19 
companies is in accord with the Hajj Policy 2013; that there were 
720 companies in all and the quota allotted to the above 
mentioned 19 companies  was retrieved from old companies on 
account of their p oor performance  in the preceding year ; that 
MORA registered 227 new companies in 2012 pursuant to the 
observation/direction made by this Court in  Messrs Al -Raham 
Travels and Tours (Pvt) Ltd v. Ministry of Religious Affairs, Hajj, 
Zakat and Ushr  (2011 SCMR 1621) ; that in 2013 it was decided by 
MORA not to register new companies (Hajj Policy Para 18(ii); that 
MORA carried out due scrutiny/evaluation of the existing H GOs in 
a transparent manner and the quota allotted is based after the 
said exercise has been c arried out and in the light of a third party 
evaluation i.e. by chartered accountant s. 
8. One of the arguments raised before the learned High 
Court which find s specific mention in the grounds urged in the 
body of the writ petition (bearing N o. 7253 of 2013) w as that in the 
earlier round of litigation (Writ Petition No. 18091 of 2012), the 
learned High Court vide order dated 1.10.2012 had called for 
comments from the Competition Commission and the Commission 
had made elaborate recommendations but the MORA has n ot 
complied with those recommendations. Mr. Shahzad Ahmed, Joint 
Secretary, Ministry of Religious Affairs was specifically confronted 
with the above recommendations. On Court query, he submitted CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  10
that some of the recommendations of the Competition Commissio n 
have already been complied with and in formulating the next Hajj 
Policy, the MORA would examine those recommendations with a 
view to comply with those as far as possible. Those 
recommendations were as follows:  
“F. RECOMMENDATIONS  
58. Keeping in view the background and the 
findings, MORA may consider the following two 
set of suggestions. These suggestions, if 
implemented, can address the competition and 
transparency issues that have been raised. The 
first set of suggestions assumes that the MORA 
continues with the quota system in place. The 
second set of suggestions allow for the possibility 
of free competition within the overall quota 
allocated for the HGO Scheme.  
 
59. In case MORA wants to continue with the 
quota allocation policy to HGO’s it is recommend ed 
as follows:  
 
(a) Currently MORA is allocating Hajj quota 
only based on Hajj operations performed. 
Such criteria provide undue advantage to 
the HGOs who have performed maximum 
number of Hajj operations, whereas it 
places the new entrants and the HGOs who 
have performed lesser number of hajj 
operations at a competitive disadvantage. 
The allocation of quota should be decided, in 
addition to experience, on various 
qualitative variables which inter alia 
includes: - 
(i) Past performance of Hajj or Umrah or 
Ziyarat Oper ations,  
(ii) Economy of financial packages 
offered,  
(iii) Quality of management and services 
provided, and  
(iv) The financial strength of the HGOs.  
Weight -age should be allocated to these 
variables i n a manner which does not give 
undue consideration to experience only.  
(b) MORA shall also allocate a specific 
percentage of hajj quotas to the new 
entrants to encourage entry of new players 
in the market and such quota may be 
allocated based on the separate criteria.  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  11
(c) MORA shall ensure that the HGOs to whom 
the quota is allocated,  should perform the 
Hajj operations on their own and this fact 
should also be verified from their financial 
statement. In case, any HGO continues with 
such practices, MORA should consider it for 
blacklisting for an appropriate period.  
(d) All the variables men tioned above should be 
evaluated by a third party, preferably a 
chartered accountancy firm approved by 
ICAP, to ensure transparency of the process.  
(e) MORA should consider forming a panel, 
whose responsibility will be to monitor all 
the HGOs. All the complain ts against the 
HGOs shall also be reviewed by that panel. 
The recommendations and the finding of 
that panel shall be taken into account when 
allocating the quota to the HGOs. The panel 
shall be completely independent to ensure 
transparency of the process.  
 
60. In the event that MORA would like to 
consider opening up the market for competition, as 
has been done in some other jurisdictions, here 
are some suggestions it should consider.  
(a) MORA could enlist/approve/license HGO’s 
that meet the criteria as reco mmended in the 
previous paragraph and then allow them to offer 
services to first come basis to intending pilgrims. 
Such a system would allow the market, most 
importantly the intending pilgrims, to decide which 
HGO they prefer. The enlistment/license could be 
reviewed based on the feedback received from the 
market.  
(b) In order to avoid multiple bookings for the 
same space, MORA should setup an electronic 
real-time system of booking spaces for the hajj. An 
appropriate comparison would be with the airline 
ticket booking system used by airlines and their 
agents. The intending pilgrims could be identified 
using their computerized identity card number.  
(c) Moreover, in order to discourage fake 
bookings and to discourage middlemen 
appropriate safeguards, includi ng meaningful 
penalties, time lines and ban on transferring of 
booking, should be implemented in the system.  
 
 61. The above recommendations are made in 
order to ensure that the competitiveness and 
transparency in the Hajj Sector is achieved by 
providing a  level playing field to all the concerned 
undertakings.”  
 
 CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  12
9. In the written statement filed by the Secretary MORA  
dated 30.7.2013 , it was submitted that: - 
i) That number of writ petitions are pending 
before different High Courts throughout 
Pakistan against the Ministry of Religious 
Affairs on different issues with regard to 
allocation of revised quota to private HGOs 
and redistribution of the quota of 19 
retrieved from different HGOs for their bad 
performance during the Hajj -2012. W.P.No. 
7253/13 titled Travel S hop Vs. FOP etc is 
pending in the Lahore High Court, Lahroe 
in which bidding process was initiated and 
19 companies were qualified by the Lahore 
High Court, Lahore through its order dated 
22.07.2013 and MORA was directed to 
issue quota to these qualified H GOs. The 
next date in the subject case has been fixed 
on 01.08.2013.  
ii) That aggrieved by the proceedings of the 
Lahore High Court, Lahore, certain 
qualified HGOs challenged the proceedings 
and actions of MORA done in compliance 
with order of the Lahore High Court, Lahore 
in W.P. No. 7253/13 before the Peshawar 
High Court in W.P. No. 1771 -P/13 and the 
Peshawar High Court was pleased to 
suspend the qualified list placed on the 
Website of MORA and the redistribution 
process started by the MORA as a result of 
20% cut imposed by the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia. The next date in the subject case 
has been fixed on 06.08.2013.  
iii) That Sindh High Court at Karachi was 
pleased to pass an order dated 25.07.13 in 
Suit No. 796/13 titled as Universal Travels 
Vs FOP. The order also addresses the 
distribution of quota amongst the HGOs 
after upholding the policy decision of the 
Federation to reallocate the revised quota 
in the ratio of 60:40 between the 
Government and Private scheme.  It 
however, laid operational restrictions on 
MORA su ch that the process in compliance 
with the orders of Sindh High Court would 
be completed by 4th September, 2013; 
whereas, first flight is scheduled on 
08.09.13 and leaves little to no room in 
organizing Hajj pilgrims both in Pakistan in 
KSA.  
iv) That the order  provides for MORA to seek 
clarification on the methodology imposed.  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  13
v) That if orders of Sindh High Court are 
complied with or implemented by MORA, 
then the orders passed by different High 
Courts cannot be complied with or 
implemented by MORA, hence all thes e writ 
petitions necessitate the intervention of this 
August Court to pass an order for 
consolidation of all the cases pending in the 
different High Courts.  
vi) That particularly, in the presence of the 
orders of Sindh High Court, timely Hajj 
operation cannot be ensured and, therefore, 
the restriction imposed in the aforesaid 
order may be relaxed and the said suit 
may also be consolidated and the record of 
the suit may be requisitioned for 
appropriate order giving a fair chance to 
MORA to operate smoothly for H ajj 
operation 2013 within the prescribed 
limitation of time which has already 
lapsed.  
It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that all 
the cases pending before the different High 
Courts throughout Pakistan be combined and 
consolidated for passing an app ropriate order 
such that the Hajj October, 2013 is organized 
timely and smoothly in the public interest.  
 
Dated: 30.07.2013  
 
 Sd/- 
 Shahid Khan  
 Secretary  
 M/o Religious Affairs  
 Government of Pakistan  
 Islamabad.  
 
10. Yet another report was submitted about th e 
arrangements made by the MORA on 19.8.2013 in connection with 
Hajj 2013 wherein it was averred as follows: - 
“The Ministry of Religious Affairs readjusted 
share of Government and Private Hajj Scheme in 
the ratio of 60:40 of reduced quota in June -2013, 
consequent upon reduction of 20% Hajj quota by 
Saudi Government across the board. Accordingly 
revised quota of enrolled HGOs was notified 
which was challenged by few HGOs in the High 
Court of Sindh, Karachi. The Honorable High 
Court of Sindh in its order date d 25.07.2013 & 
29.7.2013 in Suit No. 796/2013 & 895/2013 CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  14
respectively, upheld the decision of the 
Government regarding adjustment of Hajj quota 
in the ratio of 60:40% between Government and 
Private Hajj Scheme. However, honorable High 
Court issued directio ns vide above referred orders 
for receipt of applications and their uploading on 
the website within a specific time frame. The 
petitioners in Sindh High Court Suit No. referred 
to above also filed CMA in the Honorable 
Supreme Court, Lahore Registry, Lahore  which 
was fixed on 12.8.2013 and there after on 
19.8.2013.  
The Ministry of Religious Affairs fixed last date of 
Ramadan as cutoff date for receipt of applications 
from the enrolled HGOs in accordance with 
revised quota allocation. A meeting of petitioners  
companies in the Sindh High Court, thereafter, 
was convened in the Ministry on 14.8.2013 which 
was also attended by their representative body 
i.e. Hajj Organizer Association of Pakistan 
(HOAP). After marathon deliberations a 
consensus agreement was reache d and 
documented where in petitioners companies were 
allocated additional quota of 527 on pro rata 
basis  with the understanding that petitioners 
companies would withdraw all pending litigation 
against Ministry. Copy of the agreement is 
attached for kind pe rusal. Further in the light of 
this agreement the Ministry has revised quota 
allocation to enrolled HGOs including 19 new 
companies which were allocated quota in 
accordance with the provision of Hajj Policy -2013 
and as per directions of the Honorable Supre me 
Court interim orders dated 30.7.2013. The final 
list of 734 companies has been uploaded on the 
website of respondent Ministry on 17.8.2013.  
 
 
 Sd/- 
 On behalf of the respondent Ministry  
 Farid Islam Khattak  
 Deputy Secretary  
 Ministry of Religious Affai rs  
 Government of Pakistan  
 Islamabad.”  
 
11. We have given careful consideration to the facts and 
circumstances of these cases as also to the submissions made by 
learned counsel for the parties.  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  15
12. The stance of MORA before the High Court and this 
Court has been  that there was mismanagement during Hajj 2010 
which was taken note of by this Court  in (Corruption in Hajj 
Arrangements in 2010  PLD 2011 SC 963 ); that in the light of the 
directions/observations given  by this Court, structural changes 
were incorporated in  the Hajj Policy 2011 and the process for 
further improvement of  Hajj Policy continued up to framing of the 
current Hajj Policy, 2013. The salient features of the Hajj Policy 
appear to be as follows: - 
i) The applications were received on first cum first serve  
basis;  
ii) MORA  offered three categories of accommodation and 
the expense was worked out accordingly;  
iii) The share of Government and Private Scheme s was 
fixed initially as 50:50 i.e. 18605 for each scheme. 
However on account of reduction of Hajj quota by the 
Saudi Government, the share of Government and 
Private Scheme was readjusted to 60:40;  
iv) The Cabinet approved the scheme on 20.2.2013 and 
recognition letters were accordingly issue d;  
v) HGOs were selected and quota was allocated from 
amongst the companies already registered with MORA. 
Their past performance and evaluation report by 
Chartered Accountants were taken into account 
during selection; and  
vi) The quota retrieved from 19 companies on account of 
their poor performance in Hajj 2012 was allotted to CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  16
registered 19 HGOs under the Hajj Policy after due 
scrutiny of their credentials  by the Chartered 
Accountants.  
 
13. The respondent -writ petitioners had sought judicial 
review of Hajj Policy by invoking Article 199 of the Constitution, 
inter alia  on the ground that the said  policy was violative of the 
Fundamental Rights enshrined in Articles 18 and 25 of the 
Constitution.  
14. We judges are mere mortals but the functions we 
perform have divine attributes. By the nature of our calling, we 
dispense justice under the law and provide  relief. However, 
“justice”  in its generic sense is a relative concept and unless 
regulated by law, the dispensation , notwithstanding the noble 
intent would be rather subjective. While exer cising powers under 
Article 199(1)  of the Constitution , Courts  shou ld always keep in 
view the following three parameters of their jurisdiction: - 
(i) A High Court is the apex court in the province or 
in the case of Islamabad , of the capital territory , 
but they are the creatures of the Constitution 
and they have only that juris diction which has 
been conferred by the Constitution or under any 
law for the time being in force. Article 175(2) 
specifically mandates, “ no court shall have any 
jurisdiction save as is or may be conferred on it 
by the Constitution or by or under any law.”  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  17
(ii) The power of the High Court under Article 199 is 
“subject to the Constitution” and it can make 
any of the following orders, “if it is satisfied that 
no oth er adequate remedy is available,”  
(i) “directing a person performing, within the 
territorial jurisdictio n of the Court, functions 
in connection with the affairs of the 
Federation, a Province or a local authority, 
to refrain from doing anything he is not 
permitted by law to do, or to do anything 
he is required by law to do; or  
(ii) declaring that any act done or p roceeding 
taken within the territorial jurisdiction of 
the Court by a person performing functions 
in connection with the affairs of the 
Federation, a Province or a local authority 
has been done or taken without lawful 
authority and is of no legal effect; o r 
(b) on the application of any person, make an 
order ---- 
(i) directing that a person in custody within 
the territorial jurisdiction of the Court be 
brought before it so that the Court may 
satisfy itself that he is not being held in 
custody without lawful authority or in an 
unlawful manner; or  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  18
(ii) requiring a person within the territorial 
jurisdiction of the Court holding or 
purporting to hold a public office to show 
under what authority of law he claims to 
hold that office; or  
(c) on the application of an y aggrieved person, 
make an order giving such directions to any 
person or authority, including any 
Government exercising any power or 
performing any function in, or in relation to, 
any territory within the jurisdiction of that 
Court as may be appropriate f or the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II. ” 
(Fundamental Rights  as interpreted by the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan).  
(iii) The ambit and scope of the power of High Court 
under Article 199 of the Constitution is not as 
wide, as of the Supreme Court under Article 187 
of the Constitution to pass any order or issue 
any direction or decrees for doing “complete 
justice”.  
15. In the cases in hand,  the learned High Court had inter 
alia to address the basic question whether the relie f claimed was a 
Fundamental Right and whether the Hajj Policy was violative of the 
said right. A reference to those provisions/Fundamental Rights 
violation of which was alleged would be in order :- CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  19
18. Subject to such qualifications, if any, as may 
be presc ribed by law, every citizen shall have the 
right to enter upon any lawful profession or 
occupation, and to conduct any lawful trade or 
business:  
(a) the regulation of any trade or profession by a 
licensing system; or  
(b) the regulation of trade, commerce o r industry in 
the interest of free competition therein; or  
(c) the carrying on, by the Federal Government or a 
Provincial Government, or by a corporation 
controlled by any such Government, of any trade, 
business, industry or service, to the exclusion, 
comp lete or partial, of other persons.”  
25. (1) All citizens are equal before law and are entitled 
to equal protection of law.  
(2) There shall be no discrimination on the basis of 
sex. 
(3) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from 
making any special  provision for the protection of 
women and children.”  
 
16. A bare perusal of Article 18 would show that the right 
of freedom of trade, business or profession is not an absolute right 
rather it is qualified by the expression, “ subject to such 
qualifications, if  any, as may be prescribed by law”  and there are 
three exceptions which stipulate: (a) the regulation of any trade or 
profession by a licensing system ; (b) the regulation of trade, 
commerce or industry in the interest of free competition therein ; 
and (c) the carrying on, by the Federal Government or a Provincial 
Government, or by a corporation controlled by any such 
Government, of any trade, business, industry or service, to the 
exclusion, complete  or partial, of other persons”. These 
qualifications empower  the government to lay down a policy and 
the Hajj Policy has been framed in terms of the power of the 
government stipulated in the foregoing exceptions. In  Messrs 
Raham Travels and Tours (Pvt) Ltd v. Ministry of Religious Affaris, 
Hajj, Zakat and Ushr  (2011 SCMR 1621), this Court had repelled CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  20
such a contention with reference to Hajj Policy by relying on a 
judgment of the Indian Supreme Court in AIR 1963 SC 385 and a 
judgment of this Court in Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari versus 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1999 SC 57 ). 
17. The Constitution of a country is an organic whole and 
the import of a certain provision has to be construed in the context 
of the overall scheme of the Constitution. By qualifying the right to 
business and trade, the Constitution makers wanted to c reate a 
balance between the societal needs and the rights of an individual. 
In Pakistan Muslim League (N) through Khawaja Muhammad Asif 
M.N.A. and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of 
Interior and others  (PLD 2007 SC 642), this Court had oc casion to 
dilate upon this “balance”  and observed as follows: - 
“28. The Fundamental Rights can neither be 
treated lightly nor interpreted in a casual or 
cursory manner but while "interpreting 
Fundamental rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution, a cardinal pr inciple has always to 
be borne in mind that these guarantees to 
individuals are subject to the overriding necessity 
or interest of community. A balance has to be 
struck between these rights of individuals and 
the interests of the community. If in serving t he 
interests of the community, an individual or 
number of individuals have to be put to some 
inconvenience and loss by placing restrictions on 
some of their rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution, the restrictions can never be 
considered to be unreasonable. ” 
 
18. In Information Systems Associates Limited through 
(CEO) v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Information 
Technology and Telecommunication Division Ministry of 
Information Technology and another  (2012 CLC 958), a Division 
Bench of the High Court o f Sindh commented on the ambit and 
import of Article 18 of the Constitution and held as under: - CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  21
21. From the plain reading of the above Article, it 
consists of two parts. The first, which confers 
upon a citizen a right to choose his profession and 
business , etc. and is objected towards enabling 
the citizen to explore and adopt the best for his 
future and the means of his living and earning; 
and the best for his expression and recognition of 
his skill and the ability. However, this right is not 
absolute and unqualified, rather the Article itself 
permits the State through proper legal means to 
impose certain qualification for the exercise of the 
right, without possessing which, it cannot be so 
exercised. Such qualification may also be 
prescribed for a person w ho intends to conduct a 
particular business or trade, which may involve 
some special skill and the expertise. The second 
part of the Article, permits only such profession or 
the business, etc. which is "lawful". Meaning 
thereby that any unlawful profession , etc. shall 
not be protected under this Article. The expression 
"lawful" appearing in the Article has been used in 
contradistinction to the word "unlawful".  
 
 
19. The reliance of learned counsel for the respondents 
Mr. A.K. Dogar, ASC on a judgment of this Co urt in Arshad 
Mehmood v. Government of Punjab  (PLD 2005 SC 193) would not 
be tenable as in the said judgment, a monopoly was created in 
favour of one bus operator and all the rest bus operators were 
knocked out of business by insertion of section 69 -A in t he 
Provincial Motor Vehicles Ordinance, 1965 by Punjab Motor 
Vehicles (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999. While declaring the said 
provision of law to be ultra vires  of the Constitution, the Court held 
as follows: - 
“It may be noted that appellants and the respond ents both are similarly 
placed being owners of stage carriages and prior to the grant of franchise 
to the private respondents, appellants were in possession of valid route 
permits for plying their stage carriages on the specified routes but their 
route per mits stood cancelled due to grant of franchise to the respondents 
in view of the provisions of section 69 -A of the Ordinance.  
It means that section 69 -A of the Ordinance has created a classification 
between franchise holders and appellants -transporters. Su ch classification 
is not permissible under Article 25 of the Constitution, because the CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  22
differentia between both the classes must have rational nexus to the 
object, sought to be achieved by such classification. As such we are of the 
opinion that section 69 -A of the Ordinance is also violative of Article 25 of 
the Constitution.”  
20. It was also argued on behalf of the respondents that 
the Hajj Policy 2013 was violative of the law laid down by this 
Court in Messrs Al -Raham  Travels and Tours (Pvt) Ltd v. Ministry 
of Religious Affaris, Hajj, Zakat and Ushr  (2011 SCMR 1621). In 
the said case, the petitioners had challenged the judgment of the 
learned Division Bench of the Lahore High Court whereby the 
policy direction given in Hajj Policy 2011 limiting the selection o f 
HGOs of Hajj 2011 to the persons rendering services during last 
Hajj 2010 or preceding years was declared illegal, without lawful 
authority and of no legal effect. The said judgment of the learned 
Division Bench (dated 6.6.2011) was set aside by this Cou rt by 
holding that:  
“We may observe that every year such litigation 
is brought to the Court, however, we expect that 
in future the Government of Pakistan will 
announce the Hajj Policy well in time and process 
the applications submitted by the Tour Operator s, 
pending before the Ministry within a reasonable 
period of time, after providing proper opportunity, 
if need be, keeping in view of the guidelines given 
by the host country.”  
 
 
21. Thus even in the said judgment,  interference by the 
High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution in the Hajj Policy 
framed by the government was not sustained.  
22. In the case in hand, the Hajj Policy was framed by the 
MORA (Ministry of Religious Affairs) which was duly approved by 
the Cabinet. The ratio of Government and Private H ajj Scheme was 
readjusted from 50:50 to 60: 40 on account of the 20% decrease in CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  23
the Hajj quota by the Saudi Government. The quotas were 
allocated to registered companies on the basis of their performance 
in the preceding Hajj and evaluation by the Chartere d 
Accountants.  
23. The appellants, it is not denied, were duly registered 
HGOs. They were also given quota for the preceding year (2012) 
and had carried out the task without any complaint whatsoever. 
After due scrutiny they were allotted quota which was  retrieved 
from 19 HGOs as those  were not given quota for the current year 
on account of their poor performance during the preceding year. It 
is not denied that t he appellants had started booking Hujjaj 
pilgrims who intended to perform Hajj 2013 and had even arr anged 
their accommodation by executing rent deeds with Saudi citizens. 
It was at that stage that the respondent -writ petitioners challenged 
the Hajj Policy, inter alia , on the ground that the same was 
discriminatory and based on mala fide. However, neither  in the 
entire body of the constitution petition filed before the learned High 
Court nor in the arguments addressed before this Court, any 
specific incidence of mala fid e was pointed out; there was no  
allegation that appellants were given quota on account of any 
connection with some individual of political influence or any official 
in the MORA; or that any individual in the said Ministry had 
allotted the quota for personal gain. Mala fide  is a question of fact 
and has to be specific and not vague in absence  of which an order 
passed or policy framed by the competent authority cannot be 
annulled on this ground alone. In Dr. Akhtar Hassan Khan v. CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  24
Federation of Pakistan  (2012 SCMR 455), dilating on mala fide  as a 
ground for judicial review, this Court at page 48 6 held as follows: - 
“The allegations of mala fides and of the impugned 
exercise being collusive are questions of fact 
requiring factual inquiry. It is by now a well 
established principle of judicial review of 
administrative action that in absence of some u n-
rebuttable material on record qua mala fides, the 
Court would not annul the order of Executive 
Authority which otherwise does not reflect any 
illegality or jurisdictional defect. In Federation of 
Pakistan v. Saeed Ahmed Khan (PLD 1974 SC 
151), this Court  was called upon to dilate upon the 
mala fides as a ground for exercise of power of 
judicial review of administrative action and the 
Court observed as follows: -- 
"Mala fides is one of the most difficult things 
to prove and the onus  is  entirely  upon  the   
person  alleging  mala  fides  to  establish  
it,  because,  there  is,  to  start  with,  a  
presumption of regularity with regard to all 
official acts, and until that presumption  is  
rebutted,  the  action  cannot  be  challenged  
merely  upon  a  vag ue  allegation  of  mala  
fides.  As has been pointed out by this 
Court in the case of the Government of West 
Pakistan  v.  Begum  Agha  Abdul  Karim  
Shorish  Kashmiri (PLD 1969 SC 14), mala 
fides must be pleaded with particularity, 
and once one kind of m ala fides is alleged, 
no one should be allowed to adduce proof of 
any other kind of mala fides  nor  should  
any  enquiry  be  launched  upon  merely  
on  the  basis of vague and indefinite 
allegations, nor should the person alleging 
mala fides be allowed a roving enquiry into 
the files of the Government for the purposes 
of fishing out some kind of a case.  
"Mala fides" literally means "in bad faith". 
Action taken in bad faith is usually action 
taken maliciously in fact, that is to say, in 
which the person t aking the action does so out 
of personal motives either to hurt the person 
against whom the action is taken or to benefit 
oneself."  
24. We are conscious that the impugned order of the 
learned High Court is an interim order  and ordinarily this Court 
does not in terfere  at that stage . However, t his Court granted leave CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  25
to appeal because the learned High Court, we may observe with 
respect, with the noble object of making the Hajj cheaper by 
directing allocation of quota through bidding process, not only 
modified/sub stituted the Cabinet ’s decision with its own but also 
practically decided the writ petitions. The Court directed the MORA 
that the quota retrieved from 19 HGOs who had not performed well 
in terms of the scrutiny carried out by the MORA should be 
allocated through bidding process. This order was passed even 
without hearing the appellants who had already been allotted 
Hujjaj quota for Hajj 2013; had booked the intending Hujjaj and 
even had arranged for their accommodation in KSA. The order also 
partly disturb ed the Hajj arrangements. This set a precedent and 
other HGOs also started filing petitions . Writ petitions were filed in 
Sindh, Peshawar and Islamabad High Courts . The arrangements 
made by MORA and private HGOs for Haj j which is a time bound 
operation were adversely affected . This required a prompt 
intervention and adjudication at the Supreme Court level so that 
divergent opinions of various High Courts may not further disturb 
the Haj j arrangements . Pursuant to direction of this Court, 
Secretary MORA, Mr. Shahid Khan appeared on 30.7.2013, the 
day the leave granting order was passed, and explained through 
concise written statement as to how the MORA was facing difficulty 
in giving effect to the Hajj Policy 2013 on account of various 
interim orders passed by  the learned High Court of Sindh, 
Peshawar High Court and the Lahore High Court, Lahore. 
According to him, “ as per the Hajj Policy, 2013 revised on account 
of 20% cut by the Saudi Government, the Ministry has to allocate the CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  26
quota in the ratio of 60:40 bet ween the Government and private 
sector; that a major part of the quota available has already been 
allocated; that the HGOs who were granted licenses have already 
made elaborate arrangements for Hujjaj and that the first flight for 
Hujjaj is scheduled for 8 .9.2013; that if the Ministry is to comply 
with the various interim orders passed by the High Court of Sindh or 
Peshawar High Court and Lahore High Court it would not be 
possible for it to organize the Hajj Policy in terms of its settled 
schedule.”  The quo ta available to Government of Pakistan for 
Hujjaj is regulated by the government of KSA (Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia) and within the given quota, it fixe s a certain ratio between 
the government sponsored category and the private scheme. It is 
not denied that t he HGOs were allocated  quota after scrutiny 
which inter alia  includes evaluation carried out by registered firms 
of Chartered Accountants . The allocation of Hajj quota through 
bidding process was neither suggested by the MORA at any stage 
nor there is anyt hing on record that it was ever suggested by the 
Hajj Organizers Association of Pakistan (HOAP) which is a 
representative body of the HGOs. Besides the task of allocating 
such quotas and making arrangements for Hajj fell within the 
policy making domain of MORA and in absence of any illegality, 
arbitrariness or established mala fides, it was not open for the 
learned High Court to annul the policy fra med by the competent 
authority.  
25. There is yet another aspect. The HGOs are not driven 
by charitable considerati ons. It is the profit motive which creates 
the interest. Through bidding process, the lowest bidder who is CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  27
awarded the Haj quota, would not bear the Haj expenses of Hujjaj 
from his pocket. To ensure his profit, he will rent cheapest possible 
accommodation and other services and thereby compromise with 
the quality to the utter inconvenience and discomfort of Hujjaj . 
There is no effective mechanism whereby Hajis would be  able to 
voice their grievance. Most of them would have suffered the agony 
and discomfort in a stoic manner as if this too was part of the 
spiritual exercise ordained by Allah Almighty.  
26. One of the seminal principles of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan is the concept of trichotomy of powers 
between the Legislature, Executive and  the Judiciary. This 
principle underpins the rationale that framing of a government 
policy is to be undertaken by the Executive which is in a better 
position to decide on account of its mandate, experience, wisdom 
and sagacity which are acquired through di verse skills. The 
Legislature which represents the people enacts the law and the law 
so enacted acquires legitimacy. The judiciary on the other hand, is 
entrusted with the task of interpreting the law and to play the role 
of an arbiter  in cases of disputes  between the individuals inter se  
and between individual and the State. We may remind ourselves 
that judiciary neither has sword  nor purse. The legitimacy and 
respect of its judgments is dependent on peoples’ confidence in its 
strict adherence to the Const itution, its integrity, impartiality and 
independence.  In changing times and judicialization of political 
issues, a certain degree of judicial activism by fearless and 
impartial judiciary is also essential for maintaining its integrity 
and people’s trust. In most of the modern democracies, judiciaries CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  28
have been called upon to provide wider meanings to various 
provisions of the Constitution so as to meet the challenges of 
modern times and to fill the gap between the law and the 
requirements of substantive ju stice.  Every institution has to play 
its role in enforcing the Constitution and the law. It is a multi -
disciplinary exercise. However, implementation of rule of law is the 
primary function of judiciary. This role is multi -dimensional and 
the most challengi ng facet of this role is to keep various 
institutions and the judiciary itself within the limits of their 
respective  powers laid down in the Constitution and the law. The 
legitimacy of its judgments does not arise from the beauty of the 
language or the use  of populist rhetoric. Rather it radiates from the 
dynamism reflected in interpreting the Constitution and in 
particular its Fundamental Rights provisions, in judicial restraint 
displayed in deference to the principle of trichotomy of powers, and 
in an imp ersonal and impartial application of law.  
27. In contemporary age, there has been a significant 
growth in the judicial review of administrative actions and the 
grounds on which the Courts interfere have been expanded. This 
expansion, however, “has taken place  in the shadow of competing 
concerns of ‘vigilance’ and ‘restraint’  …..and it is faithfulness to 
these dual concerns of vigilance and restraint which produces the 
unique supervisory jurisdiction which is the hallmark of judicial 
review.”1. If the Courts fa il to maintain this delicate balance, none 
                                                
1 See generally Fordham, Judicial Review Handbook (2nd ed., 1997) pp.148 -177. See also 
Fordham, ‘Surveying the grounds: Key themes in judicial intervention’ in Leyland and Woods 
(eds.), Administrative Law Facing the Future (1997) p.195.  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  29
else but people’s confidence in the judiciary would be the worst 
victim. As aptly observed by Radford:  
“One of the principal aims of a system of judicial 
review must be to maintain a high level of public 
confidenc e in the administrative decision making 
process and this must also be borne in mind in 
assessing the level of judicial intervention which 
is desirable. It can be argued that the courts’ 
desire to achieve a fair and just result in an 
individual case must be  tempered with a 
commitment not to interfere unduly with the 
achievement of policy objectives. However, public 
confidence in the administrative system may also 
be undermined if blatantly unfair or illegal 
decision are permitted to go unchecked.”2 
 
 
28. A compa rative analysis of the constitutional law from 
various jurisdictions would indicate that the Courts have deferred 
to the decisions of the administrative bodies and those entrusted 
with the policy making functions of the Executive if there was no 
violation of law. In his seminal book “Judicial Review of 
Administrative Action: A Comparative Analysis”, Hilary Delany 
gives a brief survey of the precedent case law of the Canadian 
Supreme Court reflective of this deference. He writes:  
“The judiciary in this juris diction have also 
increasingly been developing a doctrine of curial 
deference, although they have not examined the 
rationale behind it to the same extent as their 
Canadian counterparts. There were signs of a 
movement in this direction in decisions such as 
O’Keeffe v. An Board Pleanala3 where Finlay C.J. 
stated that planning questions have been firmly placed 
within the jurisdiction of planning authorities and An 
Board Pleanala which are expected to have special 
                                                
2 As Radford has commented in “Mitigating the democratic deficit? Judicial review and 
ministerial accountability’ in Leyland and Woods (eds.), Administrative Law Facing the Future 
(1997) at p.57 ‘it is altogether appropriate that the judiciary should be aler t to the dangers of 
straying into areas of policy, but their caution also serves, despite its far -reaching impact, to 
highlight significant limitations on the legitimate scope of judicial review.’  
3 [1993] 1 IR 39, 71 -72. See also O’Reilly v. O’Sullivan Hi gh Court (Laffoy J.) 25 July 1996; Ni 
Eili v. Environmental Protection Agency High Court (Lavan J.) 2 February 1998.  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  30
skill, competence and experience in such matter s. 
Similarly, in ACT Shipping (PTE) Ltd v. Minister for 
the Marine4 Barr J. stressed that the court should be 
loathe to interfere with intra vires administrative 
decisions, ‘particularly where the decision maker is 
acting within his own area of professiona l expertise.’  
 
 
29. A similar deference has been shown by this Court in several 
cases. In Watan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2013 SC 167), 
a public interest petition was filed wherein a direction was sought 
to the Federal Government regarding the Thal Coal Reserves 
Development Project and the argument raised was that the 
government policy with regard to the said project was neither 
pragmatic nor bona fide. This Court while dismissing the petition 
observed as under: - 
“7. We are afraid that at the instanc e of 
petitioners, in order to expedite the progress of the 
Project, we cannot assume the functions of policy 
making or determining the priorities of various 
development projects in the country, which are the 
exclusive domain and functions of the Federal an d 
Provincial Government, as the case may be, who 
have their own ministries, departments, 
commissions and consultants, etc. for policy 
making, determining the priorities of various 
development projects and its implementation. It is 
pertinent to mention here  that under the scheme of 
the Constitution having its structure based on 
trichotomy of power amongst its different organs 
i.e. legislature, executive and judiciary, each of its 
organ has to work and exercise its authority 
strictly within its mandate, witho ut encroaching 
upon or usurping the jurisdiction/functions of any 
other organ of the State.  
8. From the bare reading of the Constitution, 
particularly, Articles 29 and 38 of Chapter 2, Part -
II, relating to principles of policy, it is evident that 
policies are to be made by the respective Federal 
and Provincial Governments and all decisions 
regarding their implementation are also to be taken 
by them on the basis of determined priorities of 
different projects and availability of financial 
                                                
4 [1995] 3 IR 406, 431. See also the dicta  of O’Flaherty J. in Faulkner v. Minister for Industry and 
Commerce [1997] ELR 107 that ‘[w]e do no service to the public in general, or to particular 
individuals, if we subject every decision of every administrative tribunal to minute analysis.’  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  31
resources at their d isposal. Obviously, this 
exercise cannot be ordinarily interfered with by 
this Court by invoking its jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution, unless shown to be 
mala fide or in violation of the fundamental rights 
guaranteed under the Constitu tion to every citizen 
of this Country, thereby affecting the interest of 
public at large.”  (Emphasis is supplied)  
30. In Dr. Akhtar Hassan Khan v. Federation of Pakistan  
(2012 SCMR 455), the privatization of the HBL was challenged 
inter alia on the ground that  the same lacked transparency; that it 
was being done on the advice of the International Monetary Fund 
and it was not economically a sound move on the part of the 
government. This Court dismissed the petition and held as 
follows: - 
“Though its policies some times may be open to criticism but that 
is for the concerned economists in the government or academics 
to examine and opine but once the Competent Authority in the 
government has taken a decision backed by law, it would not be 
in consonance with the well e stablished norms of judicial review 
to interfere in policy making domain of the executive authority.”  
 
 
31. Again in Dr. Akhtar Hassan Khan supra , this Court at 
page 484 reiterated the parameters of judicial review as follows:  
23. In Tata Cellular v. Union of India (36(1994) 6 SCC 651), the 
Court  while  dilating  on  the  parameters  of  judicial  review  
in  matters  of  awarding  of  contract  by  the  Government  
candidly  laid down as follows: -- 
"77. The duty of the court is to confine itself to the questi on of 
legality. Its concern should be:  
(1) whether a decision -making authority exceeded its powers?  
(2) committed an error of law,  
(3) committed a breach of the rules of natural justice,  
(4) reached a decision which no reasonable tribunal would 
have reache d or, 
(5) abused its powers.  
Therefore, it is not for the court to determine whether a 
particular policy o r particular decision taken in the fulfillment of 
that policy is fair. It is only concerned with the manner in which CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  32
those decisions have been taken. The extent of the duty to act 
fairly will vary from case to case. Shortly put, the grounds upon 
which an administrative action is subject to control by judicial 
review can be classified as under: -- 
(i) Illegality: This means the decision -maker must underst and 
correctly the law that regulates his decision -making power and 
must give effect to it.  
(ii) Irrationality, namely, Wednesbury unreasonableness.  
(iii) Procedural impropriety.  
The above are only the broad grounds but it does not rule out 
addition of furt her grounds in course of time."  
32. In Imtiaz Rasheed Qureshi v. Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary, Ministry of Power, Islamabad and 4 others  
(2009 CLC 1391), the load shedding was challenged before the 
Lahore High Court on the ground that it was discri minatory and 
violative of Article 25 of the Constitution. The Court while 
dismissing the petition held that: - 
“9. As regard the plea of load -shedding is concerned, 
suffice it to say that when questioned, learned counsel for 
the petitioner has admitted that  the country is facing with 
acute energy crises. This is also a publicly known fact. It is 
also generally known to the whole nation that no new 
power generation has been established in the country for 
the last many years and particularly, during the previo us 
regime; the present Government has acquired the legacy of 
this calamity and seemingly has been endeavouring to coup 
with the crises by coordinating the supply and demand 
through the process of load management, awaiting the 
installation of new generation  projects, and till then 
obviously if the demand is high and the supply inadequate, 
that has to be done by bridging up the gap and load 
sharing. To plan and regulate the load management, which 
is dependent on so many factors and is a constantly 
fluctuating  phenomenon as mentioned, that the job can be 
accomplished only by the relevant authorities; it is to be 
decided by such authorities, as to which sector, 
organization, institution, establishment, area (geographical 
or industrial, agricultural or otherwise) , should be 
subjected to what quantum of and the schedule of load -
shedding. And when the above process is not shown to be 
irrational, unreasonable or tainted with dishonesty of 
purpose, such action cannot be questioned on the 
touchstone of Article 25 of th e Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan. I have examined chart/graphs, which CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  33
have been placed on the record and find that both the 
decisions including the daylight saving and the load 
management are not arbitrary or whimsical in any manner, 
rather t hose have been done under the compelling 
circumstances of acute energy shortage.  
10. Besides, the issue of load -shedding has a political 
fallout and repercussions; the present is a political 
Government and if the load -shedding is being conducted 
for an ext raneous, irrational or, arbitrary reasons or a bad 
policy, it shall vex the public -at-large and no political 
Government can afford to face the anger of the public now 
or when it goes for the next election. "  
11. As regard the question of discriminating, fr om the data 
provided by the respondents' side on the record, I am 
convinced of the plea raised, rather it is only the essential 
institutions, organizations and the offices, to which the 
electricity is being, continuously supplied and this cannot 
be termed discriminatory. ” 
 
33. The question of limits of judicial review in dealing with 
the policy making domain of the Executive has also been a moot 
point before the Indian Supreme Court. In M.P. Oil Extraction and 
Anr. v. State of M.P. and Ors  (1997 7 SCC 592), the  renewal of 
allotment of 10,000 MT of sal seeds in favour of M/s M.P. Glychem 
Industries was challenged in writ petition which was dismissed by 
a Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh. This judgment was 
challenged before the Indian Supreme Court inter alia on the 
grounds that renewal was arbitrary; that needs of other industrial 
units operating in the State had not been kept in view and that the 
State government had given sal seeds to the respondents without 
inviting any tenders and excluding the appellants.  In dismissing 
the appeal  and upholding the High Court’s judgment , the Court 
observed as follows: - 
“After giving our careful consideration to the facts and 
circumstances of the case and to the submissions made by 
the learned Counsel for the parties, it app ears to us that the 
industrial policy of 1979 which was subsequently revised CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  34
from time to time cannot be held arbitrary and based on no 
reason whatsoever but founded on mere ipse dixit of the 
State Government of M.P. The executive authority of the 
State mu st be held to be within its competence to frame 
policy for the administration of the State. Unless the policy 
framed is absolutely capricious and, not being informed by 
any reason whatsoever, can be clearly held to be arbitrary 
and founded on mere ipse dix it of the executive 
functionaries thereby offending Article 14 of the 
Constitution or such policy offends other constitutional 
provisions or comes in conflict with any statutory provision, 
the Court cannot and should not outstep its limit and tinker 
with t he policy decision of the executive functionary of the 
State. This Court, in no uncertain term, has sounded a note 
of caution by indicating that policy decision is in the domain 
of the executive authority of the State and the Court should 
not embark on the  unchartered ocean of public policy and 
should not question the efficacy or otherwise of such policy 
so long the same does not offend any provision of the 
statute or the Constitution of India. The supremacy of each 
of three organs of the State i.e. legisla ture, executive and 
judiciary in their respective field of operation needs to be 
emphasized. The power of judicial review of the executive 
and legislative action must be kept within the bounds of 
constitutional scheme so that there may not be any 
occasion to entertain misgivings about the role of judiciary 
in out stepping its limit by unwarranted judicial activism 
being very often talked of in these days.  The democratic set 
up to which the polity is so deeply committed cannot 
function properly unless each o f the three organs appreciate 
the need for mutual respect and supremacy in their 
respective field.”  (Emphasis is supplied).  
 
 
34. In Premium Granites and another v. State of Tamil 
Nadu and others  (1994 1 SCR 579), the High Court had cancelled 
the leases grante d to Premium Granites in terms of Rule 39 of the 
Tamil Nadu Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1959. Annulling the 
judgment of the High Court, the Indian Supreme Court held that 
the Government had the power under the Rules to grant the lease 
and the exercise of discretion not being arbitrary or reflective of 
mala fides, the High Court could not have interfere d in the order.  
35. While commenting on the parameters of judicial review 
of an administrative action in constitutional jurisdiction, the 
Indian Supreme Court  in Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of 
India and others  (AIR 2000 SC 3751), held:  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  35
“228. While protecting the rights of the people 
from being violated in any manner utmost care 
has to be taken that the Court does not 
transgress its jurisdiction. There is in  our 
Constitutional frame -work a fairly clear 
demarcation of powers. The Court has come 
down heavily whenever the executive has 
sought to impinge upon the Court’s 
jurisdiction.  
229. At the same time, in exercise of its 
enormous power the Court should not b e called 
upon or undertake governmental duties or 
functions. The Courts cannot run the 
Government nor the administration indulge in 
abuse or non -use of power and get away with 
it. The essence of judicial review is a 
constitutional fundamental. The role of the 
higher judiciary under the Constitution casts on 
it a great obligation as the sentinel to defend 
the values of the Constitution and rights of 
Indians. The courts must, therefore, act within 
their judicially permissible limitations to uphold 
the rule of  law and harness their power in 
public interest. It is precisely for this reason 
that it has been consistently held by this Court 
that in matters of policy the Court will not 
interfere. When there is a valid law requiring 
the Government to act in a particu lar manner 
the Court ought not to, without striking down 
the law, give any direction which is not in 
accordance with law. In other words the Court 
itself is not above the law.”  
 
36. The jurisdictional limits of the powers of the High 
Court under Article 199 of  the Constitution, however, do not apply 
to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 187 of the Constitution. 
This Court on account of general institutional dysfunction and to 
render “complete justice ” has expanded the scope of judicial review 
in exercise of its powers under Articles 184(3) and 187 o f the 
Constitution. But while doing so, it has also be en conscious of the 
principle of separation of powers in terms of which the functions of 
various organs of the State have been delineate d in the 
Constitution.  It interven es to ensure enforcement of Fundamental CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  36
Rights , to address  the menace of corruption when laws are 
blatantly violated and to fill the gap in law with a view to render 
“complete justice”. The object has also been to ensure that State 
institutions p erform their functions with integrity in accord with 
law and the oath of their calling.  
37. The Supreme Court in Pakistan initiated suo moto 
proceedings in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) read 
with Article 187 on questions of “public importan ce with reference 
to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by 
Chapter I of Part II” . Some of the issues taken up  were complete 
breakdown of law & order (Karachi & Balochistan),  cases of bonded 
labour, missing persons, kite flying, unpr ecedented load shedding, 
multi billion scam in EOBI, irregularities and illegalities in PIA, 
OGRA case, murder of five women in Kohistan Division, corruption 
in Pakistan Steel Mills, NICL scam, Riko Diq case, etc. The Court’s 
style and opinions rendered be came subject of public debate. A 
great majority of people may not understand the intricate 
provisions of the Constitution, their import and the transformative 
role they have . However, t he Court in its opinions with an object to 
enforce those  provisions created in the public a better 
understanding of the Constitution and how it affects their lives.  
The Court in these cases exhorted the State institutions to perform 
their functions strictly in accordance with the Constitution and the 
law. In Watan Party v. Fe deration of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 997), 
this Court speaking through the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, while commenting on 
Court’s role observed as under: - CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  37
“The lesson to be learnt from this is simple. 
Initiation of Suo Motu proceedings by the Court 
sent one straight and simple message to an 
administration working under political pressures: 
"Take no political pressure from any quarter 
whatsoever". This was an unstated message, but 
it was loud and clear. The adminis tration 
remained, and remains, under the political 
Government of the Province of Sindh but the 
administrators immediately understood that they 
would not be called upon to obey any illegal 
orders nor to discriminate between adversaries. 
They would be fair a nd impartial and the results 
have been dramatic so far. A depoliticized 
administration suddenly came to life in fighting 
crimes, criminals and Mafias, political and 
otherwise. That is what the intervention of the 
Court achieved.’  
 
 
38. In the Sindh High Court Bar Association through 
Secretary and another v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary 
Ministry of Law and Justice  (PLD 2009 SC 879), this Court held as 
follows: - 
“…..It is so also because of the other provisions of the 
Constitution, the rules of this C ourt and the principles and 
Rules comprising the Constitutional set up of Pakistan. For 
instance, "according to Article 187 (1) this Court some times 
has to satisfy the dictates of "Complete Justice". What goes 
with it, is the subject or ample authority as well as of future 
application in given cases. When this power is exercised the 
Court will have the necessary additional power to "issue such 
directions, orders or decrees as may be necessary." Besides 
the binding effect of the judgment/order of this Court on all 
other "Courts" when it "decides" a question of law or it is 
based upon or enunciates a principle of law under Article 189; 
another provision Art. 190, gives a similar command to all 
executive and judicial "authorities" throughout Pakistan": This 
is, so as to act "in aid of Supreme Court". When Art. 199(1) (c) 
is read together with Articles, 187, 189 and 190, as stated 
above, it becomes clear that in a fit case of enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights, the Supreme Court has jurisdiction, 
power and compete nce to pass all proper/ necessary orders 
as the facts justify.”  
39. In Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010 (PLD 2011 
SC 963), while taking notice of massive corruption and the CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  38
resultant agony to the Hajis, the Court nevertheless did not 
interfere with the Hajj Policy and reiterated its resolve to guard the 
principle of trichotomy of powers. It held:  
“This Court acknowledges and respects the mandate 
given by the sovereign authority i.e. the ‘electorate to 
the democratically, elected government on 18th 
Februa ry, 2008 and would continue to jealously guard 
the principle of trichotomy of powers enshrined in the 
Constitution, which is the essence of the rule of law.”  
 
 
40. In the Hajj Policy supra , the Court took note of the 
widening horizons of the judicial review by  the Apex Court in 
public interest litigation in India and held: - 
“By now, the parameters of the Court's power of 
judicial review of administrative or executive action or 
decision and the grounds on which the Court can 
interfere with the same are well sett led. Indisputably, if 
the action or decision is perverse or is such that no 
reasonable body of persons, properly informed; could 
come to or has been arrived at by the authority 
misdirecting itself by adopting a wrong approach or 
has been influenced by irre levant or extraneous 
matters the Court would be justified in interfering with 
the same. [Commissioner of Income Tax v. Mahindra 
(AIR 1984 SC 1182)]. The exercise of constitutional 
powers by the High Court and the Supreme Court is 
categorized as power of ju dicial review. Every 
executive or administrative action of the State or other 
statutory or public bodies is open to judicial scrutiny 
and the High Court or the Supreme Court can, in 
exercise of the power of judicial review under the 
Constitution, quash the  executive action or decision 
which is contrary to law or is violative of Fundamental 
Rights guaranteed by the Constitution. With the 
expanding horizon of Articles dealing with 
Fundamental Rights, every executive action of the 
Government or other public bo dies, if arbitrary, 
unreasonable or contrary to law, is now amenable to 
the writ jurisdiction of the Superior Courts and can be 
validly scrutinized on the touchstone of the 
Constitutional mandates. [Common Cause, A Regd. 
Society v. Union of India (AIR 1999  SC 2979)]. In the 
case of Union Carbide Corporation v. Union of India 
[AIR 1992 SC 248 = 1991 SCR (1) Supl. 251], the CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  39
Court while taking up the issues of healthcare and 
compensation to the victims, supervised the 
distribution of the money among the victim s of Bhopal 
gas tragedy and monitored the hospitals set up to treat 
the victims. In Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan [AIR 1997 
SC 3011] = [(1997) 6 SCC 241], the Court laid down 
guidelines to make the workplace safer for women 
making a grievance redressal mec hanism in all private 
and public offices mandatory. In the case of Vineet 
Narain v. Union of India (AIR 1998 SC 889), 
commonly known as Hawala case, the Supreme Court 
of India had taken over the charge of CBI to ensure 
transparent investigation into corrup tion and corrupt 
practices under its own supervision. In the case of 
Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v. State of Gujarat [(2006) 3 
SCC 374], the Court reopened several cases and set 
up a special investigation team where the police 
deliberately botched up the prob e to help perpetrators 
of the post Godhra mob violence against Muslims in 
2002, including overseas investigations into the 
Sohrabuddin fake encounter case of 2005 whereby 
several senior police officers and key politicians were 
put in the dock. In the Case of Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. 
State of Gujarat [(2010) 2 SCC 200] petitioner wrote a 
letter to the Chief Justice of India complaining about 
the killing of his brother in a fake encounter and 
disappearance of his sister -in-law at the hands of the 
Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) Police (Gujarat) and 
Rajasthan Special Task Force (STF). Taking notice of 
this letter, the Court forwarded it to the Director 
General of Police, Gujarat to take further action. The 
CID (Crime) conducted an enquiry and the statements 
of a number  of witnesses, including the petitioner, 
were recorded. The learned Attorney General for -
India submitted that in view of the serious nature of 
the offence in which some highly placed police 
officials of the State of Gujarat were alleged to be 
involved, or ders may be immediately passed directing 
the CBI to take charge of the investigation and report 
to this Court. The CBI Authorities were directed to 
investigate all aspects of the case relating to the killing 
of the deceased including the alleged possibilit y of a 
larger conspiracy.' The report of the CBI Authorities 
was directed to be filed in the Court when the Court 
would pass further necessary orders in accordance 
with the said report, if necessary. Ultimately, it was 
held that accusations were directed a gainst the local 
police personnel in which high police officials of the 
State were involved. Therefore, it was directed that if 
investigation was allowed to be carried out by the 
local police authorities, all concerned including the CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  40
relatives of the deceas ed may feel that investigation 
was not proper and in the circumstances it would be fit 
and proper that the petitioner and the relatives of the 
deceased should be assured that an independent 
agency should look into the matter and that would lend 
the final o utcome of the investigation credibility. In the 
case of Center for Pil v. Union of India [Appeal 
arising out of SLP (C) No. 24873 of 2010 decided on 
16-12-2010], the Court ordered probe into a mega 
crore scam against the sitting Telecom Minister. In the 
case of Center for Pil v. Union of India [Writ Petition 
(C ) No. 348 of 2010, decided on 3 -3-2011], the Court 
quashed the illegal appointment of P J Thomas as 
Central Vigilance Commissioner because of a charge -
sheet pending against him in Kerala. The Court a lso 
laid do wn guidelines for future appointments to this 
post. In the case of Radhy Shyarn v. State of UP (Civil 
Appeal No.3261 of 2011, decided on 15 -4-2011), the 
Supreme Court quashed Government's notification to 
acquire land for the planned industrial d evelopment in 
District Gautam Budh Nagar through Greater Noida 
Industrial Development Authority, which appeared to 
be a device to grab the land of the poor farmers. In the 
case of Nandini Sundar v. State of Chattisgarh [Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 250 of 200 7 decided on 5 -7-2011], 
the Court disbanded and disarmed Special Police 
Officers involved in anti -Naxal operations in many 
states. Thus, the Supreme Court of India has been 
monitoring public distribution system, treatment at 
hospitals and conservation of f orests for more than 
two decades. It also set up a judicial commission to 
examine the public distribution system and directed the 
Government to provide more facilities in the poorer 
districts. ” 
 
 
41. While seized of petitions under Article 199 of the 
Constitut ion, the High Courts at times are faced with prayers to 
pass order and provide relief for “doing complete justice”. But  such 
powers in constitutional jurisdiction are vested in the Supreme 
Court under Article 187 of the Constitution . These powers are 
distinct both in scope and the manner of their exercise. The Apex 
Courts in most of the democratic countries enjoy such powers. The 
powers of this Court  to pass any order or give any direction “for CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  41
doing complete justice” are similar to those  which the Supreme 
Court of India enjoys under Article 142 of the Constitution of India 
and such power s cannot be exercised by the High Court s in India  
in exercise of their constitutional jurisdiction. For a better 
understanding of the comparative constitutional law emerging  
under these  provision s, a reference to these Articles would be in 
order which are as under: - 
Constitution of Pakistan  
187.(1)  [Subject to clause (2) of 
Article 175, the] Supreme Court 
shall have power to issue such 
directions, orders or decrees as 
may be necessary for doing 
complete justice in any case or 
matter pending before it, 
including an order for the 
purpose of securing the 
attendance of any person or the 
discovery or production of any 
document.  
(2) Any such direction, order or 
decree shall be enfo rceable 
throughout Pakistan and shall, 
where it is to be executed in a 
Province, or a territory or an area 
not forming part of a Province 
but within the jurisdiction of the 
High Court of the Province, be 
executed as if it had been issued 
by the High Court of that 
Province.  
(3) If a question arises as to 
which High Court shall give 
effect to a direction, order or 
decree of the Supreme Court, the 
decision of the Supreme Court 
on the question shall be final.  Constitution of India  
142. Enforcement of decrees 
and orders of Supreme Court 
and orders as to discovery, 
etc.----(1) The Supreme Court 
in the exercise of its 
jurisdiction may pass such 
decree or make such order as 
is necessary for doing complete 
justice in any cause or matter 
pending before it, and any 
decree so passed or order so 
made shall be enforceable 
throughout the territory of 
India in such manner as may 
be prescribed by or under any 
law made by Parliament and, 
until provision in that behalf is 
so made, in such manner as 
the President may be order 
prescribe.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of 
any law made in this behalf by 
Parliament, the Supreme 
Court shall, as respects the 
whole of the territory of India, 
have all and every power to 
make any order for the 
purpose of securing the 
attendance of any pers on, the 
discovery or production of any 
documents, or the 
investigation or punishment of 
any contempt of itself.  
 
42. In both the above quoted  provisions, the paramount 
consideration and the constitutional intent is common  i.e. “for CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  42
doing complete justice”. These powers being  inherent are 
complementary to those which are specifically conferred on the 
Court by the Constitution s of these two countries. These powers 
remain undefined so that the Court can cater to any situation and 
could even mould the relief. (D.D .A. v. Skipper Construction AIR 
1996 SC 2005). For instance, if an individual acquires property by 
defrauding people, the Supreme Court can restore the possession. 
[(1996) 4 SCC 622].  However, t his power should not be 
misconstrued to mean to pass any order  which is against the letter 
of law or against specific constitutional provisions. The rationale  
appears to be that in situations which cannot be resolved by 
existing provisions of law and warrant an intervention by the 
Court, it may pass an order to ensur e “complete justice”.  This can 
also be used where the Court finds a gap in legislation and a 
solution is required till the Legislature acts and covers the field. 
[Vineet Narain v. Union of India (1998)1 SCC 226]. “The phrase 
“complete justice” in Art. 142( 1) is the word of width couched with 
elasticity to meet myriad situations created by human ingenuity or 
cause or result of operation of statute law or law declared under 
Arts. 32, 136 and 141 ---Ashok Kumar Gupta v. State of U.P. (1997)5 
SCC 201; see R.C. Patuck v. Fatima (1997)5 SCC 334: AIR 1997 SC 
2320.”  (Case Book on Indian Constitutional Law by Durga Das 
Basu).   
43. The very fact that this power is conferred on the Apex 
Court alone has to be used sparingly and with an element of 
judicial restraint [Chandra  Kant Patil v. State (1998)3 SCC 38] so 
as not to contravene any other constitutional provision or statute.  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  43
44. In S.A.M. Wahidi v. Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary Finance and another  (1999 SCMR 1904), this Court 
granted “special additional pension” where it found that a 
pensioner was being discriminated against and observed , “It may 
be stated here that this Court, in terms of clause (1) of Article 187 of 
the Constitution is competent to issue such directions, orders or 
decrees as may be necessary for  doing complete justice in any case 
or matter pending before it. ” 
45. The constitution makers conferred powers “ to issue 
such directions, orders, or decrees as may be necessary for doing 
complete justice”  (Article 187) only to the Supreme Court and not to 
the High Courts. This constitutional intent is significant and has to 
be kept in view by the learned High Courts. In Hitachi Limited and 
another v. Rupali Polyester and others  (1998 SCMR 1618), the 
Court highlighted this distinction between the powers of the H igh 
Court and the Supreme Court with reference to Articles 175 and 
187 of the Constitution . It was observed that the power to render 
“complete justice ” vests with the Supreme Court alone, whereas 
the High Court is a creature of the Constitution and can onl y 
exercise that power which is vested in it under the law: - 
“The principles of common law or equity and good 
conscience cannot confer jurisdiction on the 
Courts in Pakistan which has not been vested in 
them by law. In this regard reference may be 
made to c lause (2) of Article 175 of the 
Constitution of Pakistan, which provides that no 
Court shall have any jurisdiction save as is or 
may be conferred on it by the Constitution or by 
or under any law. The High Courts derive their 
jurisdiction under the Constitu tion and the 
statutes.  In view of the above Constitutional 
provision and the case -law the principles of 
English common law or equity or good conscience 
cannot be pressed into service in Pakistan as CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  44
having statutory force. But a Court may adopt a 
procedure,  which is not prohibited by any law if 
the dictates of justice so demand.  
We may observe that under Article 187(1) of the 
Constitution of Pakistan this Court has been 
empowered to issue such directions, orders or 
decrees as may be necessary for doing compl ete 
justice in any case or matter pending before it, 
including an order for the purpose of securing the 
attendance of any person or the discovery or 
production of any document. It may be pointed 
out that the above provision is an enabling 
provision, which can be invoked in aid in a matter 
which is competently filed before this Court. While 
granting a relief the Court can dispense with the 
technicalities and may mould the relief according 
to the requirement, if the dictates of justice so 
demand. In this beha lf reference may be made to 
the case of Zulfiquar Ali Babu v. Government of 
Punjab (PLD 1997 SC 11). ” (Emphasis is 
supplied).  
 
 
46. In Mehr Zulfiqar Ali Babu and others v. Government of 
the Punjab and others  (PLD 1997 SC 11), this Court observed that 
for passi ng an order under Article 187 of the Constitution, no 
independent proceeding before the Court is required and once the 
Court is seized of a lis competently, it can pass orders, decrees for 
doing “complete justice”.  
47. In Pir Sabir Shah v. Shad Muhammad Khan, Member 
Provincial Assembly, NWFP and another  (PLD 1995 SC 66), the 
Court adverted to the parameters of its jurisdiction under Article 
187 and the question whether Article 175(2) restricts the power of 
the Supreme Court given under Article 187 of the Consti tution and 
held that: - 
“10. …..The term "complete justice" is not capable 
of definition with exactitude. It is a term covering 
variety of cases and reliefs which this Court can 
mould and grant depending upon the facts and 
circumstances of the case. While d oing complete 
justice formalities and technicalities should not 
fetter its power. It can grant ancillary relief, CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  45
mould the relief within its jurisdiction depending 
on the facts and circumstances of the case, take 
additional evidence and in appropriate case s 
even subsequent events may be taken into 
consideration. Ronald Rotunda in his book 
"Treatise on Constitutional Case Substance" 
(Second -Edition), Volume 2 at page 90 has stated 
that "The Supreme Court is an essence of a 
continual Constitutional convention ". The 
jurisdiction and the power conferred on the 
Supreme Court does empower it to do complete 
justice by looking to the facts, circumstances and 
the law governing a particular case.. Article 187 
does not confer any jurisdiction. It recognizes 
inherent po wer of an apex Court to do complete 
justice and issue orders 'and directions to achieve 
that end. Inherent justification is vested in the 
High Court and subordinate Courts while dealing 
with civil - and criminal cases by virtue of 
provisions of law. The in herent jurisdiction of this 
Court to do complete justice cannot be curtailed 
by law as it may adversely affect the 
independence of judiciary and the fundamental 
right of person to have free access to the Court for 
achieving complete justice. This enunciati on may 
evoke a controversy that as Article 175(2) 
restricts Article 187 it will create conflict between 
the two. There is no conflict and both the Articles 
can be read together. The conflict in the 
provisions of the Constitution should not be 
assumed and i f apparently there seems to be 
any, it has to be interpreted in a harmonious 
manner by which both the provisions may co -
exist. One provision of the Constitution cannot be 
struck down being in conflict with the other 
provision of the Constitution. They have  to live 
together, exist together anti operate together. 
Therefore, while interpreting jurisdiction and 
power of the superior Courts one should look to 
the fundamental rights conferred and the duty 
cast upon them under the Constitution. A 
provision like Ar ticle 187 cannot be read in 
isolation but has to be interpreted and read 
harmoniously with other provisions of the 
Constitution. In my humble view this Court while 
hearing appeal under a statute has the 
jurisdiction and power to decide the question of 
vires of the statute under which the appeal has 
arisen X and can even invoke Article 184(3) in 
appropriate cases. ” 
 
 CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  46
48. In Sheikh Rashid Ahmad v. the State  (PLD 1996 SC 
168), reiterating the mandate of this provision, the Court held as 
under: - 
“This Court is comp etent and has power to issue 
such directions orders or decrees as may be 
necessary for doing complete justice in any case 
of matter pending before it as contemplated under 
Article 187 of the Constitution and under Article 
191, this Court has power to make rules 
regulating its practice and procedure and in 
consequence of which the Supreme. Court Rules, 
1980 have been framed; of which Order XXXIII 
relates to inherent powers of the Court and Rule 6 
thereof further envisages that nothing in these 
Rules shall be  deemed to limit or otherwise effect 
the inherent powers of the Court to make such 
orders as may be necessary for the ends of 
justice or to E prevent abuse of the process of the 
Court.”  
 
 
49. In Sandeep Subhash Parate v. State of Maharashtra & 
Ors. (AIR 2006 S C 3102), the Indian Supreme Court was seized of 
a case in which admission to Bachelor of Engineering course on 
the basis of Koshti Halba caste was granted by the High Court vide 
an interim order. During the currency of litigation, the student 
completed the  studies and appeared in the examination. In the 
meanwhile, the question as to whether Koshti Halba caste came  
under the category of Scheduled Tribe was authoritatively decided 
by the Supreme Court in the case Maharashtra v. Milind  (2000 AIR 
SCW 4303) hold ing that Koshti Halbas were not members of the 
Scheduled Tribe. The Court invoking its powers to do “complete 
justice” under Article 142 of the Constitution directed that the 
student be allowed to obtain degree subject to payment of Rs. 
100,000/ - in favour  of the State of Maharashtra so as to 
recompense the State to some extent the amount spent on him for CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  47
imparting education as a reserved category candidate in view of the 
fact that there was lack of mala fides on the part of the appellant. 
The Court observe d as under: - 
“The Court, while exercising its discretionary 
jurisdiction and to do complete justice between 
the parties in terms of Article 142, must consider 
all relevant aspect of the matter, including the 
decisions of the Court. The doctrine of 
proporti onality emerging from the recent trend of 
decisions in preference to the doctrine of 
Wednesbury unreasonableness is also a factor 
which weighs with the Court.”  
 
 
50. The foregoing analysis of the comparative 
constitutional law from Pakistan and India would sho w that while 
the Supreme Courts in India and Pakistan have the power to issue 
any direction or pass a decr ee “for doing complete justice” , the 
High Court s cannot pass any order in derogation to Article 199 of 
the Constitution or any law for the time being in force because “the 
principles of common law or equity and good conscience cannot 
confer jurisdiction on the Courts in Pakistan which has not been 
vested in them by law.” ( Hitachi Limited supra ). 
51. Before we part with the judgment, we may add that the 
performance of Hajj is a sacred duty for Muslims. But the quota 
allocated to Government of Pakistan by the Saudi Government is 
limited and within that limited quota, it allocates a certain portion 
to private HGOs. Since several hundred HGOs apply  for allocatio n 
of quota from the Private  Hajj Scheme share as worked out by the 
MORA, all applicant HGOs cannot be accommodated and the 
dismay of those who are left out is understandable. We are 
conscious that the MORA has to take several steps to ensure that 
travel, a ccommodation and other arrangements are made to the CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  48
satisfaction of Hujjaj . It requires a couple of weeks to complete the 
exercise. However since Hajj operation is a time bound exercise , 
arrangements have to be made within that limited time. It is 
therefor e, imperative that the Hajj Policy be framed well in time in 
such a manner which is fair, just, inspires confidence and evokes 
minimum criticism. It is also imperative  that the Hajj Policy for the 
next year should be announced at the earliest after the con clusion 
of Hajj. In these circumstances, we are persuaded to direct as 
under: - 
(i) The Hajj Policy should be framed, announced 
and placed on the website of MORA preferably 
within six weeks of the arrival of last flight of 
Hajis from KSA under intimation to the  Registrar 
of this Court. This of course  would be subject to 
any policy decision of the Saudi Government 
regarding allocation of Hajj quota for Pakistan;  
(ii) The Hajj Policy should be framed by a 
Committee headed by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Religious Affair s (MORA); a nominee of the 
Competition Commission of Pakistan; a nominee 
of the Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
Government of Pakistan; a nominee of the 
Secretary Ministry of Law and Justice Division & 
Parliamentary Affairs; and a nominee of the 
Attorney General for Pakistan;  
(iii) The credentials of each applicant/HGO should 
be examined and decision taken on merit;  CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  49
(iv) While framing the Hajj Policy, the MORA should 
be guided, inter alia , by the recommendations 
made by the Competition Commission of 
Pakistan t o which reference has been made in 
Para 8 above; and  
(v) The MORA should constantly monitor the 
working and performance of each HGO during 
Hajj and this assessment should form basis for 
further improvements in Hajj Policy for next 
year’s Hajj.  
52. For what has bee n discussed and observed  above, we 
allow these petitions and set aside the impugned order. These are 
the reasons for our short order dated 27.8.2013 which is 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
For reasons to be recorded later in the detailed 
judgment , Civil Appeal N os. 800 -L to 802 -
L/2013 are allowed, Civil Petition Nos. 1148 & 
1348 of 2013 are converted into appeals and 
allowed and C.M.A. N os. 278 -L, 279 -L/2013, 
285-L/2013, 289 -L/2013, 5328 to 5333/2013, 
5378/2013, 5463/2013, 5464/2013 & 
5477/2013  are disposed of  and we hold and 
declare as under: - 
 
(i) that the order of the learned High Court 
dated 24.6.2013 passed in Writ Petition 
No. 7253/2013 is violative of the principle 
of trichotomy of powers, which is one of 
the foundational principles of the 
Constitution of Islam ic Republic of 
Pakistan;  
 
(ii) that it is not the function of the High 
Court exercising jurisdiction under Article 
199 of the Constitution to interfere in the 
Policy Making Domain of the Executive;  
 
(iii) that the learned High Court in the exercise 
of its Constitutio nal jurisdiction directed 
selection of Hajj Group Organizers CIVIL APPEAL No s. 800 -L, 801 -L & 802 -L OF 2013 etc  50
through bidding process and thereby 
substituted the criterion laid down in the 
Hajj Policy framed by the Ministry of 
Religious Affairs without hearing the 
appellants / Hajj Group Organizers and 
others who had already been allocated 
quota and had made arrangements for 
intending Hujjaj , which is not tenable in 
law; 
 
(iv) that the High Court can under Article 199 
of the Constitution annul an order or a 
Policy framed by the Executive, if it is 
violative of  the Constitution, law or is 
product of mala fides . However, nothing 
has been placed before this Court to 
indicate that the Hajj Policy challenged 
before this Court seriously suffered from 
any of these infirmities; and  
 
(v) that Ministry of Religious Affairs s hall 
continue to regulate the operation of Hajj 
i.e. enrollment, registration and allocation 
of quota every year in the light of a fair 
and transparent policy and the guidelines 
to be laid down by this Court in the 
detailed judgment.  
 
 
53. Copies of this j udgment shall be sent to the Registrars 
of the Lahore High Court, High Court of Sindh, Peshawar High 
Court, Balochistan High Court and Islamabad High Court for 
placing the same before the Hon’ble Chief Justices of the respective 
High Courts with particular  reference to the pending petitions on 
Hajj Policy. A copy of this judgment shall also be sent to Secretary, 
Ministry of Religious Affairs for information and necessary 
compliance.   
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
27th of August, 2013  
Approved For Reportin g  
Khurram Anees  