IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
Civil Petition No.  304/22 and CMA Nos. 891 and 1251/22  
 
The Monal Group of Companies, Islamabad.   … Petitioner  
     Versus  
Capital Development Authority through its  
Chairman and others.       … Respondent s 
 
AND  
 
Civil Petition No. 305 of 2022 and CMA No. 892 of 2022  
 
The Monal Group of Companies, Islamabad.   … Petitioner  
     Versus  
Capital Development A uthority through its  
Chairman and others.       … Respondent s 
 
AND 
 
Civil Misc. Application Nos. 887 and 888/22 in CP NIL/22  
 
Federation of Pakistan though Secretary, M/o  
Defence, Govt. of Pakistan and others.    … Applicants  
     Versus  
M/s The Monal  Group of Companies,  
Islamabad and others.       … Respondent s 
 
AND 
 
Constitution Petition No. 3 of 2024  
 
Islamabad Wildlife Management Board through  
its Chairperson, Islamabad.      … Petitioner s 
     Versus  
Capital Development Authority through its  
Chairman and others.       … Respondent s 
 
For the Petitioner s:  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC.  
     (in CP.304/22)  
      
     Mr. M. Makhdom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC.  
     Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC.  
     (in CP.30 5/22) 
       
Mr. Umar Ijaz Gilani, ASC.  
Ms. Rina Saeed, Chairperson.  
     (in Const.P.3/24)     
 Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 2
For the Applicants:   Mr. Hassan Irfan Khan, ASC.  
     Mr. Hamad Naqi, DG NWFP  
      
     Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
     Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR . 
     Mr. Asif Hayat, Dy. MEO.  
     (in CMAs. 887 & 888/22)   
 
For CDA:     Hafiz  Arfat Ahmed Ch., ASC.  
     Mr. Irfan Azeem, Dy . DG (Environment ) 
For MCI:     Mrs. Misbah Gulnar Sharif, ASC  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR   
For Federation:    Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, AG P. 
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, AAGP.  
Mr. Zafar Mehmood, Military Estate Officer,  
Iftikhar Ahmed Dy. MEO.  
For M/o Defence:    Col. Faran Tariq, Dy. Director Military Forms  
     Lt. Col. Irfan, Asstt. Director (legal)  
For M/o Comate Change:  Ms. Parveen Ejaz, Dy. D irector.  
 
Date of Hearing:    21.03.2024. 
 
ORDER  
The learned Attorney General for Pakistan (‘AG’) has (pursuant to the 
last order ) filed CMA No. 2236 of 2024 . However, copy of the relevant file 
pertaining to the purported Lease A greement dated 30 September 2019 
entered into between the Monal Group of Companies  (‘Monal ’) and the 
Remount, Veterinary and F arms (‘ RV&F ’) Directorate  (‘the Directorate ’) 
has not been filed nor brought  to the Court . Therefore, we kept this case 
aside and took it up again after the break , when  learned AG  stated that it 
could not be traced but if one week’s time is granted it will be produce d. Let 
the copy of the entire file pertaining to the said Lease Agreement,  including  
all internal and external correspondence, payments received in respect 
thereof and proof of their deposit be file d within one week , and the original 
thereof be brought on the next date of hearing .  
2. We were surprise d to note that the Lease Agreement wit h Monal was 
executed by the Directorate, a component of the Pakistan Army, which is 
part of the Ministry of Defence, and forms part of the Federal Government .  
Since the Directorate  is clearly not a legal entity, we asked for the opinion 
of the learned AG who candidly stated that the Lease Agreement could not 
have been executed by the Directorate, resultantly it was void. He further 
stated that if at all , the Lease Agreement could have been entered into by 
the Federal Government itself.  Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 3
3. The learned AG has referred to the Islamabad Wildlife (Protection, 
Preservation, Conservation and Management) Ordinance, 1979 
(‘Ordinance ’) and its section 21 , which does not permit setting up and 
running restaurants in the area of Margalla Hill s National Park (‘ National 
Park’). He has also referred to Regulation 4(3)(b) of the Islamabad Capital 
Territory (Zoning) Regulation s, 1992  (‘Regulations ’) and states that no  
change in land -use is permissible in the National Park except for projects 
which relate to conservation, preservation, afforestation and recreation . 
4. Learned senior counsel Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan represent s       
Monal and states that earlier Monal had entered into a  Lease A greement on 
10 March 2006 with the Capital Development Authority (‘ CDA’), which was 
for a period of fifteen years and was renewable for a further period of fifteen 
years , but since the Directorate started demanding and compelling Monal  
to enter into a lease agreement with it Monal was constrained to do so . 
Learned counsel further states th at Monal has been singled out whereas 
there are a number of other restaurants running in the National Park with 
the permission of CDA which has issued them leases.  
5. CDA is directed to file a list of all those to whom leases have been 
issued including restaurants and other commercial projects in the National 
Park detailing : (1) the name and address of the party,  (2) the date of 
agreement , (3) duration of the agreement  and copies of the lease 
agreement s, (4) the monthly/annual rent payable . The same be f iled 
through concise statement within one week . Upon receipt of the said list 
the office  to issue notice s to the tenants/lessees  mentioned therein , as any 
order passed herein may affect them.  
6. Learned Mr. Umar Ijaz Gillani, represent s the Islamabad Wildl ife 
Management Board (‘ the Board ’). He and Ms. Rina Saeed, Chairperson  of 
the Board , state that restaurants and other commercial activit ies being 
undertaken in the National Park violat e section 21 of the Ordinance and 
that over the years deforestation has taken place, its lands ha ve been  
encroached upon and the National Park’s status degraded. He further 
states that the CDA has assumed all regulatory powers with regard to the 
National Park despite the fact that section 4 of the Ordinance stipulates 
that it is to be managed by the Board. He further states that any amount 
generated from the use of the National Park should be spent on the 
National Park and not for the general development works of CDA  in 
Islamabad City.   Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 4
7. The World Wildlife F oundation  Pakistan (‘WWF ’) has moved an 
application (CMA No. 1251 of 2022 ) seeking to join as a party  to these 
cases . Learned counsel Mr. Hasan Irfan Khan represent s WWF, and he and 
WWF’s Director General , Mr. Hamad Naqi Khan , state that the only interest 
of WWF in  becoming a party is to ensure that the Ordinance is strictly 
complied with , to stop the further degradation of the National Park and also 
to help restore it to its original position.  The representative of WWF has 
produced  aerial photographs  and images showing  the encroachments and 
deforestation in the National Park over a twenty year  period , showing its 
position in 2005, 2010, 2015 and 2020 . Since WWF wants to prevent 
encroachments , degradation and deforestation of the National Park  and 
wants to help restore it, it would be appropriate to array it as a party, 
therefore, CMA No.1251 of 2022 is granted .  
8. Learned counsel Hafiz Arfat Ahmed  represent s CDA and states that 
CDA spends far more on the National Park then it receives in revenue  from 
it. Therefor e, let CDA file a concise statement showing receipts and 
disbursements  with regard to the National Park and the number of CDA 
employees employed in the National Park  and the amount spent on them.   
9. During the hearing i t was pointed out that the boundari es of the 
National Park have not been proper ly earmarked and that a survey is being 
conducted by the Survey of Pakistan for some time. CDA is directed to file a 
copy of survey report, and if the survey has not been completed to file it 
when the survey is completed. CDA should also state if it has earmark ed 
the boundaries of the National Park.  
10. The Ordinance stipulates that the National Park has to be protected, 
preserved, conserved and managed and can be made accessible to  the 
public only for recr eation, education and research  purposes . This Court has 
interpreted the Fundamental Right to life (Article 9)  to living a meaningful 
life, including having access to parks and to avail of benefit s deriving 
there from. If the National Park  is not preserved  it will have a number of 
adverse environmental consequences, including increasing greenhouses 
gases, exacerbating climate change , reducing the natural habitat  of 
animals , birds and biodiversity . This Court is also concerned with the 
encroachments being made , the degradation  and the deforestation of the 
National Park , its pollution and the  pollution of streams running through it. 
The National Park can only be used as mandated in the Ordinance . But in 
violation of the law commercial activities are taking place  in the National Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 5
Park which have been increasing and if this trajectory continues it will not 
be long until this blessing and gift of nature will be lost forever. There can 
be no compromise on the necessity to preserve the National Park . However, 
we are not  unmindful of the fact that running business es are operating in 
the National Park  which may need to be dismantled and relocated . 
Therefore, we look to all parties to propose solutions for restoring the 
integrity of the National Park in a systematic manner and that it be used 
only as is permissible under the Ordinance ; proposals may be submitted in 
writing.  
11. In view of the urgency and importance of this matter no request for 
adjournment will be entertained, and if any counsel is not available, 
alternative  arrangements be made. To come up on Monday 29 April 2024.
  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
21.03.2024 
(M. Saeed )  