IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, HCJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.13316 -P OF 2018  
 
(In the matter regarding Colossal Losses  
incurred by Pakistan Railways)  
 
 
On Court Notice  :  
For Federation of 
Pakistan  : Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. Attorney General  
   
For M/o Railways  : Mr. Habib -ur-Rehman Gillani, Secretary  
Mr. Dost Muhammad Leghari, CEO/SR/GM  
Mr. M. Liaqat Memon, Member Finance  
Mr. Farrukh Tamur, Secy., Railway Board  
Mr. M . Saleem Khan, Joint Director  
Mr. Mazhar Ali Shah, D.G. (Planning)  
Mr. Zubair Shafi Ghori, AGM -I 
Mr. Shoaib Adil, DS, Multan  
Mr. Nisar Ahmed, AGM -I 
Mr. Suffain Dogar, CPO/HQ  
Mr. Sajjad Butt, ASC/D.G. (Legal)  
Syed Rifaqat Ali Shah, AOR  
Mr. Khurram Shahzad, Legal Advisor  
Mr. Imran Hayat, Dy. Legal Advisor  
   
For M/o Planning, 
Development and 
Special Initiatives  : Syed Waqar -ul-Hassan, Additional Secretary  
Mr. Zohair Fazil,  
Chief (Transport & Communication)  
   
For Auditor General 
of Pakistan  : Mr. Moeed A li, D.G. (RA)  
Mr. Kashif Farooq Ch., A.O.  
   
For Government of 
Sindh  : Mr. Muhammad Qasim Mirjat, ASC/AOR  
   
Date of Hearing  : 09.07.2020  
 
ORDER  
  A report has been submitted by the Secretary/Chairman, 
Ministry of Railways, Islamabad , wherein , referen ce has been made to 
the up-gradation of Railways trough ML-I, under the China Pakistan 
Economic Corridor ( CPEC ) and also to the Karachi Circular Railway  
(KCR).  HRC No.13316 -P of 2018     2 
 
2.  As regards ML -I, it is informed that PC -I is now pending 
with ECNIC for approval and as soo n as the said approval is received , 
work will be started . We expect that ECNIC shall consider and have 
PC-I approved , as per rule s within a period of one month.  
3.  As regards KCR , it has been stated that considerable work 
on the ground has been done and that there are bottleneck s because 
of a Nala near Urdu University and Green Line near Nazimabad. The 
Secretary Railways states that if the Government of Sindh take s 
immediate action and ma kes way for the Railways at these two 
bottleneck s, the remaining wor k of KCR will be completed and it will 
be made operational.  
4.  The Secretary Railways also states that there are railway 
crossing s at which the Government of Sindh has undertaken to 
provide for construction of either overhead or underground 
roads /paths , so that there is no eventual ity of any one crossing the 
railway line.  
5.  We direct the Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh to 
ensure that the  above  three items of work are expeditiously completed 
to enable KCR to run in Karachi . Let a r eport, in this re gard, be 
submitted by the Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh within a 
period of two weeks. The Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh so also 
the Commissioner , Karachi  shall be present on the next date of 
hearing . 
6.  We have noted that the overall Railway s in Paki stan is not 
being operated in a way it should be operated ; more  so, in accordance 
with the Rules and Manuals of Railways , on account of which 
accidents are tak ing place frequently , in which precious lives are being HRC No.13316 -P of 2018     3 
 
lost and great damage to the Rai lways is caused . There seems to be 
nothing in sight  by which the operation of the Railways in Paki stan 
could be improved , as not only is the infrastructure of the Railways 
altogether bad and non -workable but also its employees are apparently 
not fit to ope rate the Railways. There need s to be serious thinking on 
the part of the Government of Pakistan regarding the operation of the 
Pakistan R ailways and over hauling the Secretariat from top to bottom 
to ensure that the Railways operate in Pakistan safely. We e xpect that 
such measures will be taken by the Government of Pakistan 
immediately to ensure that the Railway s do not play with the lives of 
the people and its properties are not lost. A report, in this regard , may 
be made available to the Court by the Gover nment of Pakistan  through 
the Planning Commission with in one month.  
7.  Adjourned. To be fixed after one month . 
 
  
Chief Justice         
 
 
 
Islamabad, the , 
9th July, 2020   
Mahtab/*   
                                              ‘NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’
   
 
 Judge  
 