IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Justice Yahya Afridi  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Justice Syed Hasan  Azhar  Rizvi 
Justice Musarrat  Hilali  
 
REFERENCE NO. 1 OF 2011  
[Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan under Article 186 
of the Constitution]  
 
In Attendance : 
 
On behalf of President  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan  with 
Mr. Javed  Iqbal  Wains,  
Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
Raja M. Shafqat Abbasi,  
Deputy Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
  
On Court Notice   : Mr. Khalid Ishaq, Advocate -General, Punjab  
Mr. Hassan Akbar, Advocate -General, Sindh.  
Mr. Khalid Javed, Advocate -General, KP.  
Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl . AG, Balochistan.  
For LRs of  
late Zulfiqar  Ali Bhutto  : Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC  
Assisted by Mr. Iftikhar Shah, Advocate.  
     a/w Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari.  
     (on behalf of Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari)  
 
    : Main Raza Rabbani, ASC.  
     Assisted by Mr. Zeeshan Abdullah, ASC.  
     a/w Ms. Sanam Bhutto and Ms. Aseefa Bhutto.  
(on behalf of Ms. Sanam Bhutto, Ms. Bakhtawar Bhutto 
and Ms. Aseefa Bhutto)  
 
    : Mr. Za hid F. Ibrahim, ASC.  
     (on behalf of Ms. Fatima Bhutto and Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto)  
 
Amicus Curi ae  : Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC.  
Assisted by Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC.  
Khawaja Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC.  
Assisted by Dr. Yaser Ahmed, ASC.  
Mr. Khalid Javed Khan, ASC.  
Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC.  
Mr. Assadullah Khan Chamkani, ASC.  
  
For Complainant   : Sahibzada  Ahmed Raza  Khan Kasuri.  
 
For SCBA    : Syed Ali Imran, ASC.  
 Reference No. 1 of 2011  
 
 2
On behalf of Geo News  : Miss Marium Nawaz, Reporter.  
 
Date of Hearing   : 08.01.2024 . 
 
ORDER  
 The learned Mr. Raza Rabbani state s that he represents Ms. Sanam 
Bhutto, Ms. Bakhtawar Bhutto Zardari and Ms. Aseefa Bhutto Zardari 
respectively, the daughter and maternal granddaughters of the late Mr. 
Bhutto. Mr. Zahid. F. Ebrahim was appointed as amicus but states that he 
had already been approached by Ms. Fatima Bhutto and Mr. Zulfiqar Ali 
Bhutto, the paternal grandchildren of the late Mr. Bhutto. We enquired 
from the learned counsel and others presen t whether anyone has any 
objection to Mr. Zahid F. Ebrahim being counsel instead of amicus and 
none object. Learned Khawaja Haris Ahmed was appointed as amicus but 
he has disclose d that his father was counsel in a contempt case of Masood 
Mahmood, who was c o-accused/approver in the case , therefore, his name 
may be withdrawn as amicus. Order accordingly. Learned Mr. Salahuddin  
Ahmed was appointed as amicus  and discloses that he is married to the 
granddaughter of the murdered Nawab Ahmed Khan , therefore, if an yone 
objects to him being amicus he will withdraw.  However, n one present object 
to learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed  appearing as amicus.   
 
2. We commenced by hearing learned amicus Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan . 
He has also filed material contained in two voluminous bound sets.  
 
3. If any amicus or counsel wants a copy of the report of Mr. Justice 
Shafi ur Rehman or of the recording provided by Geo office to provide the 
same.  
 
4. In view of the forthcom ing elections and as important matters are 
coming before this Court , and as this Court wants to hear this Reference in 
detail , it be fixed for hearing in the third week of February 2024 , which will 
also enable us to examine the material filed before us.   
 
 Qazi Faez Isa , CJ. 
   
 
Sardar Tariq Masood, J.  
 
 
Syed Mansoor  Ali Shah J.  
 Reference No. 1 of 2011  
 
 3
 
Yahya Afridi, J.  
 
 
Amin -ud-Din Khan, J.  
 
 
       Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J.  
 
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar, J.                    
   
 
Syed Hasan  Azhar  Rizvi, J.  
 
 
Musarrat  Hilali, J.  
Islamabad:  
08.01.2024  
(M. Tauseef ) 