IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
Constitution Petition No.5 of 20 24  
(under Article 184(3) Systematic De -Forestation 
Taking Place at the Fa tima Jinnah Park,  
F-9,Islamabad ) 
 
  
Public at Large  …Petitioner  
                                        Versus  
Capital Development Authority and another  …Respondents  
  
In attendance : 
 
 
On Court’s call:   
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, Addl. AGP  
 
Mr. Imran W aseem, General Secretary 
Press Association Supreme Court  
  
Date of Hearing:  27.02.2024 
 
ORDER  
 
 The Registrar of the Supreme Court had put up a note before the 
Committee c onstituted under section 2 of the Supreme Court (Practice 
and Procedure) Act, 2023  to consider whether proceedings may be 
commenced under Article 184(3) of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973 ( respectively the ‘ Committee ’ and ‘Constitution ’). The note 
stated that ‘It has been reported that a larger number of trees have 
been cut and t here is a systematic deforestation taking place at the 
Fatima Jinnah Park, F -9, Islamabad. Citizens are complaining that the 
trees which have been cut and the ongoing deforestation is on the 
directions of the Capital Development Authority and that the Supr eme 
Court should intervene to prevent this valuable resource of the citizens 
from being destroyed. ’ 
 
2. The Committee directed that this matter be numbered as a 
constitution petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution and the 
Capital Development Auth ority (‘ CDA’) and the Government of 
Pakistan be arrayed as respondents and the Public at large be 
designated as the petitioner.  
 Const.P.5/24   2 
 
3. Given the public importance of this matter and its impact on  the 
fundamental rights of citizens of Pakistan, including righ ts in respect 
of access to public places  under Article 26, which may  have been 
undermined and as  it involves deforestation and the cutting of trees 
which degrades the right to life under Article 9 of the Constitution as 
interpreted by this Court, the two p reconditions stipulated in  Article 
184(3) of the Constitution  are met . We have been informed that this 
Court had earlier also taken notice under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution with regard to illegal activities in the Fatima Jinnah Park 
Islamabad (‘ the Park’) in a case ( Human Rights Cases No.4668 of 
2006, 1111 of 2007 and 15283 -G of 2010, PLD 2010 SC 759) . Let 
notice be issued to CDA and the Government of Pakistan through the 
Ministry of Climate  Change  and Environmental Coordination. Notice 
be also issue d to the Pakistan  Environmental Protection Agency  (‘EPA’) 
and to the Islamabad  Wildlife Management Board.  
 
4. Learned Additional -Attorney General for Pakistan (‘ AAG’) is in 
attendance and waives notice on beha lf of Government of Pakistan. H e 
has drawn our attention to  the Islamabad  (Preservation of Lands cape) 
Ordinance, 1966  (‘Ordinance ’) and referred to  the definition of 
‘landscape’  in its section 2(a) and that such landscape  has to be 
preserved as stipulated in section 4 of the Ordinance. Learned AAG  
informs us that the Park compris es of the entire F -9 Sector of 
Islamabad , and the Park  is under the control and management of 
CDA. Therefore, l et CDA submit a report with regard to the following 
matters:  
(1) The number of  trees recently cut and  the area which  has 
been defores ted;  
(2) Under whose supervision the above was done;  
(3) On whose direction the aforesaid  action was taken ; 
(4) Whether tree -cutting and deforestation were done by the 
CDA personnel themselves or through a contractor, and if 
the latter, t o produce a copy of the contract/agreement;  
(5) What became of the cut trees and are they to be sold;  
(6) Was approval required to be obtained from the EPA before 
tree-cutting/deforestation and if so, whether such 
approval was obtained; and  
(7) A copy of the entire  file on the above and any other 
document which pertains thereto be submitted.  
 Const.P.5/24   3 
 
5. Mr. Imran Waseem,  the General Secretary of the Press 
Association of Supreme Court  (‘PASC ’), is present and  he together with 
Mian Aqeel Afzal , the President of PASC , are appointed as joint 
commissioners under Order XXXII of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 
to visit the Park and take photographs/record videos  showing the area  
where trees have been cut  and area deforest ed. CDA and the security 
guard s at the Park are d irected to co -operate with the c ommissioners . 
The commissioners to submit  their report with  photographs and 
recordings  on the next date of hearing. The fee of the c ommissioners 
will be determined later.  
 
6. We appoint Messrs  Saad Mumtaz Hashmi and Syed Hassan  Ali 
Raza, subject to them agreeing , to represent the P ublic. To better 
assist the Court they may personally  visit the Park with the 
commissioners or by themselves.  
 
7. Till the next date of hearing, CDA shall not cut any tree or 
proceed with further deforestation . Learned AAG shall inform the CDA 
immediately about this  order dictated in Court  today.  
 
8. To come up on 4 March 2024.  
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD  
27 February 2024 
Mudassar /Hassan K.W.                                          
 