SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Review Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT: 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial 
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar 
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik 
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel 
Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah 
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi 
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed 
Mr. Justice Amin-ud-Din Khan  
 
 
C.M.A No.1243 of 2021 in Civil Review Petition No.296 of 2020. 
(For livestreaming and broadcasting the court-proceedings) 
 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa    
…Petitioner  
  
    VERSUS 
 
The President of Pakistan and others   
…Respondents  
  
  
For the petitioner(s)  : Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa (in -person) 
Assisted by Barrister Kabir Hashmi. 
(in CRP.296/2020)  
Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa (in-person) 
(in connected CRP.298/2020) 
Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
(in connected CRP.299, 300, 301 & 308/2020) 
Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
(through Video Link from Karachi). 
(in connected CRP.297 & 309/2020) 
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
(in connected CRP.509/2020)  
   
For Federation of Pak.  : Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP.  
   
For President, PM & 
AGP.  : Mr. Sohail Mahmood, Addl. AGP.  
   
Dates of hearing  : 02, 03, 08,  17 & 18 March 2021.  CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 2 
 
Table of Contents 
Preface ........................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Prayer of the petitioner  ............................................................................................................................ 3 
Factual background  .................................................................................................................................. 4 
Assertions of the petitioner  .................................................................................................................... 4 
Stance of the other parties  ..................................................................................................................... 5 
Short order  .................................................................................................................................................. 5 
Questions for determination  .................................................................................................................. 6 
Objection as to maintainability of prayer through a miscellaneous application  .................. 7 
(i) Fundamental right of the public to have access to information of the court-
proceedings of cases heard under Article 184(3)  .................................................................... 9 
 (a) Reliance on Article 19A of the Constitution ....................................................... 9 
 (b) Overview of the previous opinions of Constitutional Courts on Article 19A of the 
Constitution  ...................................................................................................................................... 10 
 (c) Right conferred by Article 19A is operative and justiciable ............................... 12 
 (d) Meaning of the expression “matters of public importance” ............................... 13 
 (e) Cases heard under Article 184(3) are “matters of public importance” ............... 15 
(ii) Obligation of the Court to provide access to information of the court-proceedings of 
cases heard under Article 184(3) through livestreaming  ................................................... 17 
 (a) Article 19A creates a positive obligation .......................................................... 17 
 (b) Progressive and dynamic approach to interpret fundamental rights ................. 19 
 (c) Right of Access to Information Act, 2017 and Article 19A of the Constitution ... 20 
 (d) Live-streaming of court-proceedings on the Court’s website ............................. 22 
 (e) Practice in other major common law jurisdictions ............................................ 23 
 (f) Question of livestreaming court-proceedings is a matter of law, not of policy .... 25 
 (g)Live-streaming court-proceedings would reflect a responsive image of the Court
 .......................................................................................................................... 26 
Access of public to the court-proceedings of cases of public importance and the 
democracy  .................................................................................................................................................. 27 
Conclusion  ................................................................................................................................................. 28 
Signing or recording the detailed reasons by a retired Judge of this Court  ......................... 30 
 
ORDER 
Maqbool Baqar, Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel and Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, JJ.-   
Preface  
 This application raises the questions, whether the time has 
come to open our court-room and allow public access to judicial 
proceedings through live audio-video streaming.  “Sunshine is said to be 
the best of disinfectants”1; we need to ask ourselves whether the 
traditional closed architecture of our court-room needs to be redesigned 
to allow sunshine of public access through live audio-video streaming ? 
Should we embrace technology and align ourselves with the modern 
                                                           
1 Justice Brandeis famously remarked in a 1913 Harper’s Weekly  article titled “What Publicity Can Do”, to 
bring transparency in bankers’ commissions and profits, specifically to avoid corrupt practices that were 
prevalent at the time. His quote was later applied to all government actions in general, in the U.S., by the 
judges believing that a transparent and accountable government better serves the people.  CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 3 
 
judiciaries of the world by giving online access to the public to our court 
proceedings? And do we wish to make our justice system more 
transparent by holding judicial proceedings in public gaze ?   
2.    This Court being at the apex of the judicial hierarchy of the 
country is often the final arbiter of the constitutional questions having a 
profound effect on all and sundry. The cases involving questions of 
public importance with reference to the enforcement of fundamental 
rights of the citizens, which are heard by this Court in its original 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, have a distinct 
characteristic: the Court, in these cases, acts as the first and the final 
arbiter. The uniqueness of this jurisdiction exercised by the Court at 
times invites criticism of judicial overreach.2 Would not the openness of 
the Court to public through live streaming be an effective restraint on the 
possible misuse of judicial power under this jurisdiction ?  
3.  “Democracies die behind closed doors…When government 
begins closing doors, it selectively controls information rightfully 
belonging to the people. Selective information is misinformation.”3 
Openness serves to ensure the durability of democracy. No organ of the 
State, however, has remained a greater mystery to people than the 
Judiciary. Live-streaming of the court proceedings could demystify the 
Judiciary and make it truly a public institution.  Would it not give the 
people a better understanding of the working of the Court, and reassure 
them that their fundamental rights are being protected and enforced by 
the Court in its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution?  
Prayer of the petitioner 
4.  The petitioner, Justice Qazi Faez Isa, has prayed that this 
Court may order live-streaming of the court proceedings of his case 
(review petitions), and direct the State-owned Pakistan Television 
Corporation (PTV) to broadcast live proceedings of his case and the 
Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) to issue written 
instructions to all private television channels that they cannot be 
restrained in any manner whatsoever from broadcasting the proceedings. 
                                                           
2 See Maryam S. Khan, Genesis and Evolution of Public Interest Litigation in the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan: Toward A Dynamic Theory of Judicialization (2015), and Asher Asif Qazi, A Government of 
Judges: A Story of The Pakistani Supreme Court's Strategic Expansion (2018). 
3 Judge Damon Keith, writing for a unanimous panel of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, remarked in the 
famous case of Detroit Free Press v. Ashcroft 303 F.3d 681. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 4 
 
Factual background 
5.  Before describing the assertions of the petitioner made in the 
present application, it would be proper to give a brief background of the 
case, to comprehend the context of the prayer of the petitioner. A 
Reference under Article 209 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”)  was filed by the President of Pakistan 
on the advice of the Prime Minister of Pakistan against the petitioner in 
the Supreme Judicial Council of Pakistan (“Council”) , alleging 
commission of misconduct mainly on the basis of his non-disclosure of 
certain foreign properties of his family members in the declaration of his 
assets filed with the annual income tax returns. The Council commenced 
proceedings against the petitioner on the said Reference. The petitioner, 
and many Bar Councils and Bar Associations of the country, challenged 
the action of the President, of filing the said Reference and also the 
proceedings of the Council commenced on the basis thereof, in this Court 
invoking its original jurisdiction by filing constitution petitions under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Those constitution petitions were 
allowed by this Court: the Reference filed against the petitioner was 
quashed and the proceedings before the Council were declared abated. 
However, the Court also made certain directions to the officers of the 
Federal Board of Revenue, Pakistan to initiate proceedings against the 
petitioner’s family members under the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 and 
to submit a report regarding determination made in those proceedings to 
the Council, and the Council was asked to consider the matter in 
exercise of its suo motu  powers, for such proceedings in relation to the 
petitioner as it may deem appropriate. It is against these directions of the 
Court that the petitioner, his spouse, and some Bar Councils and Bar 
Associations have filed the review petitions. And before arguing on his 
review petition, the petitioner has filed the present application. 
Assertions of the petitioner  
6.  The petitioner has asserted in the application that 
immediately after the President of Pakistan sent the Reference against 
him to the Council, the contents of the Reference were leaked to the 
media, and the same were broadcast on television channels and 
published in newspapers. An unrelenting false propaganda campaign 
was launched against him. He, as a Judge of the Supreme Court, was CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 5 
 
handicapped to hold a press conference to rebut or respond to the 
allegations, while the official respondents with their iron grip on the 
media ensured that the contents of his reply filed in the Reference were 
neither broadcast nor published. The Law Minister sensationalized the 
matter by making false statements to the media, and the President of 
Pakistan, in his three television interviews, elaborated upon the 
Reference when the matter was pending adjudication before this Court in 
the constitution petitions. The tactics of the official respondents formed a 
negative public opinion about the petitioner and his family, and whether 
he survives as a Judge or not, his reputation has been tarnished by the 
negative propaganda. Although the irreparable harm already caused to 
him cannot be undone; however, to restore a semblance and to correct 
the public perception, all future proceedings in his case may be directed 
to be broadcast live and/or live-streamed. Broadcasting and/or live-
streaming of the court proceedings would be an affirmation of the 
Fundamental Rights of the petitioner and of the public, and would also 
be a testament to accountability and transparency. 
Stance of the other parties 
7.  Learned counsel for the petitioners in the other connected 
review petitions supported the prayer of the petitioner, while the learned 
Additional Attorneys-General who appeared before the Court on behalf of 
the some of the respondents, i.e., Federal Government, President of 
Pakistan, Prime Minister and the Attorney-General for Pakistan 
(“contesting respondents”) , opposed it mainly on the ground that the 
prayer of the petitioner made through a miscellaneous application, and 
that too, filed in a review petition is not maintainable, besides there is no 
fundamental right of the public to have access to information of the 
court-proceedings through livestreaming or broadcasting of the same. 
They contended that the Court could take up and decide the questions 
involved in the present application only on a separate and independent 
petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. 
8.  After hearing the arguments of the petitioner and the 
contesting respondents at length, we disposed of the application of the 
petitioner, for the reasons to be recorded later, vide our short order dated 
13.04.2021 in the following terms: 
Short order CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 6 
 
(i) Article 19-A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”) creates an obligation on State 
institutions, including the Judiciary, to take the necessary 
measures to ensure realization of the fundamental right of 
citizens to have access to information in matters of public 
importance. Cases under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, 
including review petitions and other matters arising therein, are 
matters of public importance, and the public has a right to 
know and see how proceedings in these cases are conducted 
and concluded by the Court. We, therefore, hold that Live 
Streaming (audio and video) of court hearings of these cases 
should be made available for information of the public through 
a link on the official website of this Court, and for this purpose 
the Registrar of this Court should take steps to provide for the 
requisite technological infrastructure and make arrangements 
for necessary amendments in the Rules under Article 191 of the 
Constitution to regulate its practice and procedure in this 
regard;  
(ii) Keeping in view the current state of technological infrastructure 
available in this Court and the fact that the review petitions 
filed in the case are fixed for hearing, we direct the audio 
recording of the proceedings of the court hearings of the said 
review petitions to be made available to the public through a 
link on the official website of this Court. The Registrar of this 
Court shall ensure that the un-edited audio recording of the 
proceedings of the court hearing of the review petitions is made 
available to the public on the official website of the Court on the 
same day soon after the hearing and before the close of the 
working hours.  
In this discourse, we undertake to describe our reasons for the above 
order. 
Questions for determination 
9.  At the outset, we want to make it clear that although the pro 
and contra arguments were advanced as to the broader concepts of ‘open 
trial’ and ‘open justice’ and ‘live-streaming’ of all cases in all courts of the 
country, we being cognizant of the procedural aspect of the principle of 
judicial restraint that requires “if it is not necessary to decide more, it is 
necessary not to decide more”4, restrict ourselves only to the 
determination of the questions that are necessary for decision on the 
prayer made in the present application, viz:  
(i) Whether it is the fundamental right of the public to have 
access to information as to the court-proceedings of the 
cases heard by this Court in its original jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, including review petitions 
and other matters arising therein.  
                                                           
4 PDK Labs. v. Drug Enforcement Admin. 362 F. 3d 786 (CADC 2004) per John Roberts, J. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 7 
 
(ii) If so, whether there is any obligation of this Court to 
provide the public the access to information of the court-
proceedings of such cases through livestreaming.  
There is a serious “risk of error or misconception which inevitably 
attends judicial efforts to declare the law at large and in general terms 
outside of the points really raised by the facts of the case.”5 It would, 
therefore, be appropriate to examine the broader question of live-
streaming of all cases heard by this Court or of all cases heard by all 
courts of the country, in some case where this matter is agitated as a 
main question, and not as an ancillary one raised in a miscellaneous 
application. We, therefore, leave this broader question to be examined 
and decided in some other appropriate case. 
Objection as to maintainability of prayer through a miscellaneous 
application 
10.  Before embarking upon the discussion on the above 
questions, we would like to deal with the preliminary objection of the 
contesting respondents. We find that the objection of the contesting 
respondents as to the maintainability of the prayer made through a 
miscellaneous application filed in a review petition is misconceived. The 
misconception, we think, has partly occurred due to the submissions 
made by the parties during arguments on the application, which were 
not restricted to the prayer made in the application rather were expanded 
to the broader questions of ‘open trial’ and ‘open justice’ and ‘live-
streaming’ of all cases in all courts of the country, which we have decided 
to not take up in the present case. These questions can only be taken up 
and decided on an independent petition under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution filed only for this purpose, and not on a miscellaneous 
application like the present one, filed as an ancillary matter to the main 
case agitating some other grievance.  
11.  But the prayer made in the present application for 
livestreaming and broadcasting on PTV and other television channels, 
the court-proceedings of this case can be decided only by this Bench in 
this case, and cannot be agitated through filing a separate constitution 
petition under Article 184(3); for such a petition, if filed, may then be 
entrusted to and heard by any other Bench of this Court. Needless to say 
that each Bench of this Court, whether small or large, exercises the 
                                                           
5 Scott v. Scott 1913 AC 417 per Earl Loreburn. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 8 
 
judicial powers vested in the Court, and a decision rendered by it, 
irrespective of its numeric strength, is considered the decision of the 
Court. Thus, one Bench of this Court cannot deal with an ancillary or 
incidental matter pertaining to a case being heard by another Bench. 
This legal position may be elucidated by a presumptive question: If this 
Bench decides to either allow or disallow the prayer made in the present 
application, whether any other Bench of this Court can reverse such 
order of this Bench, on a separate petition under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, and can direct this Bench to livestream, or restrain it from 
livestreaming, the court-proceedings of this case. The answer is a clear-
cut “No”, and for reaching this answer, one does not need to do any 
intense brainstorming. There is no such jurisdiction conferred on this 
Court by the Constitution, or by or under any law, in terms of Article 
175(2) of the Constitution. Even, this Bench also cannot review its order 
made on the present application, on a separate petition filed under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution. For the original jurisdiction of this 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, as authoritatively held by 
a 7-member Bench of this Court by a unanimous decision in  Shabbar 
Raza v. Federation6, “cannot be exercised as a parallel review 
jurisdiction”, and a judgment or an order of this Court “can never be 
challenged by virtue of filing independent proceedings under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution”; such course is “absolutely impermissible”. It 
is thus only this Bench, and no other, that can decide on the prayer 
made in the present application, that too only on a miscellaneous 
application as the present one, and not on a separate and independent 
petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. The objection of the 
contesting respondent is found meritless and is therefore rejected. 
12.  Now, we proceed to deal with the substantive question (i), 
above cited, as to the claimed fundamental right of the public to have 
access to information of the court-proceedings of the cases heard by this 
Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution and of the review proceedings in such cases. However, 
before commencing the discussion thereon, we would like to clarify that 
we have specifically included the “review proceedings” in the question, as 
when a Court sits to review its judgment it does not sit in appeal over its 
own judgment but proceeds to have a fresh look at it within the limits of 
the review jurisdiction and for this purpose, it invokes the very same 
                                                           
6 2018 SCMR 514. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 9 
 
jurisdiction which it exercised earlier, whether it be appellate or original, 
and can modify its judgment in the exercise of that very jurisdiction. The 
review jurisdiction only provides a mode to re-invoke the jurisdiction 
earlier exercised, and thus takes colour from the nature of the 
jurisdiction exercised by the Court in passing the judgment under 
review; it cannot be said to be some independent jurisdiction other than 
the jurisdiction exercised by the Court when the judgment under review 
was passed.7 
(i) Fundamental right of the public to have access to information of the 
court-proceedings of cases heard under Article 184(3)  
(a) Reliance on Article 19A of the Constitution 
13.  To establish that the public has a fundamental right to have 
access to information as to the court proceedings of the cases heard by 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, the petitioner has 
referred to the right to access to justice comprised in the fundamental 
right to life and liberty guaranteed under Article 9, the right to a fair trial 
guaranteed under Article 10A, the right to freedom of expression and 
freedom of the press guaranteed under Article 19 and the right to 
information guaranteed under Article 19A of the Constitution. We find 
that rights guaranteed under Articles 9, 10A and 19 of the Constitution 
may be relevant for determination of the broader question of live-
streaming of all cases heard by this Court or of cases heard by all courts 
of the country, which we have left to be determined in some other 
appropriate case, but for the questions being considered for the decision 
of the prayer made in the present application, the provisions of Article 
19A of the Constitution that guarantees right to information, appear to 
us, to be the most significant, which are reproduced hereunder for ready 
reference: 
19A. Right to information:  Every citizen shall have the right to 
have access to information in all matters of public importance 
subject to regulation and reasonable restrictions imposed by law. 
(Emphasis added) 
Article 19A was added to the Constitution by the Constitution (18th 
Amendment) Act, 2010. Since then, it has been a subject of discussion 
and interpretation by the constitutional courts of the country in several 
                                                           
7 Reliance Industries v. Pravinbhai Patel AIR 1997 SC 3892. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 10 
 
cases. Observations made in some of those cases, which are relevant for 
the present case, are briefly cited here. 
(b) Overview of the previous opinions of Constitutional Courts on 
Article 19A of the Constitution  
13.1  Probably for the first time, the addition of this Article in the 
Constitution was noted by a division bench of the Lahore High Court in 
the case of Atta Ullah v. Federation8, in the year 2010; one of us (Syed 
Mansoor Ali Shah, J.) speaking for the bench observed that “Article 19A 
of the Constitution is a recent and welcome addition to the chapter of 
fundamental rights under the Constitution…Right to information is 
another corrective tool, which allows public access to the working and 
decision making of the public authorities. It opens the working of public 
administration to public scrutiny…Article 19A empowers the civil society 
of this country to seek information from public institutions and hold 
them answerable.”  
13.2  In the same year, i.e., the year 2010, this Court also noticed 
the then-recent addition of Article 19A in the Constitution in the case of 
Shahid Masood v. Federation ,9 hearing two constitution petitions filed 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, that had agitated the grievance 
as to the breach of the fundamental rights alleging closure and 
suspension of broadcasting and transmission of some T.V. Channels by 
the licensed T.V. Cable Operators. The Court observed that the 
importance and weight attached to the obligations of the Cable T.V. 
Network Operators to offer undisturbed distribution of service “is not far 
to find as the same stems out of the fundamental rights of freedom of 
speech, expression and of press as guaranteed by Article 19 of the 
Constitution and equally importantly, if not more, the right of every 
citizen to have access to information in all matters of public importance 
as guaranteed by the recently inserted provisions of Article 19-A of the 
Constitution.” Ensuring accountability, transparency and good 
governance by optimizing the free flow of information was highlighted by 
the Court as one of the objects of the promulgation of the Pakistan 
Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) Ordinance, 2002. 
                                                           
8 PLD 2010 Lah. 605 decided on 10.06.2010. 
9 2010 SCMR 1849 decided on 13.08.2010. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 11 
 
13.3  In the case of Muhammad Masood v. S.M. Corporation ,10 very 
important observations were made by a division bench of the Sindh High 
Court as to the scope and extent of the right conferred by Article 19A of 
the Constitution. The division bench observed: “A perusal of the Article 
[19A] indicates that every citizen has been conferred a right to have 
access to information in all matters of public importance, however, 
subject firstly to regulations and secondly to reasonable restrictions by 
law. There is no disagreement that no such regulations have been 
framed. Non-framing of the regulations cannot have effect of rendering 
the right guaranteed by Article 19-A as nugatory. Therefore, even if no 
regulations are framed this right is available to all the citizens. In the 
absence of regulations and in the absence of restrictions task will be 
thrown to the Court to determine whether request for information in a 
particular case or denial of information in a particular case is 
reasonable.”11  
13.4  The significance of the insertion of Article 19A in the 
Constitution was underlined by Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja, the then 
Judge of this Court, in the case of Watan Party v. Federation12 by 
describing it to be a “major constitutional change”. His lordship observed 
that “the people of Pakistan have been, at times, disserved by a non-
inclusive governance paradigm where information critical to them has 
been withheld from them. Pakistan has faced many crises of public 
importance…but the  citizens  of Pakistan, the most direct affectees, have 
remained clueless and uninformed as to the causes or the progenitors of 
the multiple crises in our history…The  people  in quest  of  the  truth 
have mostly been left  with  conjectures, rumours and half-truths. 
Concealment of information has, in turn, led to a distorted history of the 
country and to a destabilizing division in the polity.” He noted: “This 
paradigm has shifted through the recent incorporation of Article 19A in 
the Constitution. By virtue of the said Article the right of a citizen to have 
information ‘in all matters of public importance’ is made a fundamental 
right which is guaranteed by the Constitution…Article 184 (3) read in 
conjunction with Article 19A has empowered the citizens of Pakistan by 
making access to information a justiciable right of the People rather than 
being largesse bestowed by the State at its whim. Article 19A has thus, 
                                                           
10 PLD 2011 Kar. 177. 
11 Emphasis added. 
12 PLD 2012 SC 292. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 12 
 
enabled every citizen to become independent of power centres which, 
heretofore, have been in control of information on matters of public 
importance…This provides for and makes good a crucial missing element 
of responsible State governance in our Constitutional scheme.”13 
13.5  A full bench of the Lahore High Court made an exhaustive 
discussion in the case of Province of Punjab v. Qaisar Iqbal ,14 on the 
scope of Article 19A of the Constitution by referring to the previous cases 
of our jurisdiction as well as of foreign jurisdictions. The full bench, in 
that case, was hearing intra court appeals against the judgment passed 
by a single bench of that court, whereby the single bench had directed 
the Government of Punjab to provide a copy of the report of the Inquiry 
Tribunal appointed under the Punjab Tribunal of Inquiry Ordinance 
1969, to the petitioners. The full bench not only maintained the 
judgment of the single bench, rather made further direction that the 
inquiry report of the Tribunal should also be published by the concerned 
authorities for public information. The full bench observed: “Under 
clause [ sic: Article] 19-A of the Constitution, every citizen shall have the 
right to have access to information in matter of ‘public importance’. The 
word ‘public importance’ used in Article 19-A of the Constitution is not 
defined term. However, term public importance according to dictionary 
meaning could be defined that ‘question which affects and has its 
repercussions on the public at large and it also includes the purpose and 
aim in which the general interest of the community…is directly or widely 
concerned’….The reasons recorded by Government itself in its letter 
dated 17.06.2017 for holding inquiry, when [is] juxtapose[d] with the 
definition of ‘public importance’ narrated above, it can safely be 
concluded that the inquiry report of a Tribunal is a matter of public 
importance and every citizen has right under Article 19-A to have excess 
to this inquiry report, indeed subject to reasonable restrictions imposed 
by law. Even otherwise under section 3 of the Ordinance 1969, inquiry 
could only take place in [a] definite matter of public importance.”15 
(c) Right conferred by Article 19A is operative and justiciable  
14.  Survey of the above cases shows that the constitutional 
courts of the country have appreciated the addition of Article 19A in the 
                                                           
13 Internal double quotation mark converted into single. 
14 PLD 2018 Lah. 198. 
15 Internal double quotation mark converted into single. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 13 
 
Constitution, as its addition in the Constitution has embedded and 
guaranteed responsible State governance in the Constitutional scheme. 
The provisions of Article 19A do not contain an abstract guiding 
principle, rather confer a justiciable right. The right to have access to 
information in all matters of public importance conferred by this Article 
is a corrective apparatus, which allows public scrutiny to the working of 
the public authorities and institutions, and makes them answerable to 
the public. It, thus, ensures transparency and accountability in the 
functioning of all public authorities and institutions. The right conferred 
by Article 19A is effective in operation and extensive in scope: it is 
though subject to, but is not dependent for its effectiveness upon 
enactment of, a law that may provide for the regulation of, and 
reasonable restrictions on, such right and it comprehends all matters of 
public importance undertaken by all State institutions.  
(d) Meaning of the expression “matters of public importance” 
15.  The expression, “public importance”, though has been used 
in Article 19A, but the same has not been defined therein. Earlier to the 
addition of Article 19A, the expression, “public importance” was already 
there in the provisions of Article 184(3), 186(1) and Article 212(3) of the 
Constitution. The provisions of Article 184(3), being the most relevant for 
the present matter, are reproduced hereunder for ease of reference: 
 
Article 184(3) 
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 199, the Supreme 
Court shall, if it considers that a question of public importance 
with reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II is involved have the power 
to make an order of the nature mentioned in the said Article. 
(Emphasis added)  
The Constitution did not define the expression “public importance” used 
in Article 184(3) also; this expression had, therefore, been a subject of 
judicial interpretation since the very promulgation of the Constitution in 
the year 1973, and this Court had defined it in several cases heard under 
Article 184(3). A judicial definition of this expression was, thus, in field 
when the new Article 19A was added in the Constitution, in the year 
2010. It appears that the Legislature being content with the judicial 
definition did not feel the need to provide the definition of the said 
expression while enacting the new Article 19A. Therefore, the judicial 
definition of the expression “public importance” which was in field till the 
year 2010 is relevant for determining what the Legislature intended to CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 14 
 
mean by using the said expression in Article 19A, as it is a well-settled 
principle of interpretation of statutes that ordinarily the same meaning is 
attached to an expression used in different parts of a statute unless the 
context in which the expression appears suggests otherwise.16  
16.  The expression, “public importance” used in Article 184(3) 
came up for interpretation before this Court, for the first time, in the case 
of Manzoor Elahi v. Federation17. Anwarul Haq, J., explained it thus: 
Now, what is meant by a question of public importance. The term 
"public" is invariably employed in contradistinction to the terms 
private or individual, and connotes, as an adjective, something 
pertaining to, or belonging to, the people; relating to a nation, 
state, or community. In other words, it refers to something which 
is to be shared or participated in or enjoyed by the public at large, 
and is not limited or restricted to any particular class of the 
community. As observed by the Judicial Committee of the Privy 
Council in Hamabai Framjee Petit v. Secretary of State for 
India-in-Council I L R 39 Bom. 279 while construing the words 
public purpose such a phrase, whatever else it may mean must 
include a purpose, that is an object or aim, in which the general 
interest of the community, as opposed to the particular interest of 
individuals, is directly and vitally concerned". This definition 
appears to me to be equally applicable to the phrase "public 
importance."…… In order to acquire public importance, the case 
must obviously raise a question which is of interest to, or affects, 
the whole body of people or an entire community. In other words, 
the case must be such as gives rise to questions affecting the legal 
rights or liabilities of the public or the community at large, even 
though the individual, who is the subject-matter of the case, may 
be of no particular consequence. 
 
This interpretation of the expression was approvingly referred to by the 
full court bench of this Court in the case of Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation ,18 and it was further explained thus: 
 
Lastly is the consideration of the connotation of the expression 
"public importance" which is tagged to the enforcement of the 
Fundamental Rights as a pre-condition of the exercise of the 
power. This should not be understood in a limited sense, but in 
the gamut of the constitutional rights of freedoms and liberties, 
their protection and invasion of such freedoms in a manner which 
raises a serious question regarding their enforcement. Such 
matters can be viewed as of public importance, whether they arise 
from an individual's case touching his human rights of liberty and 
freedom, or of a class or a group of persons as they would also be 
legitimately covered by this expression.  
  
                                                           
16 See Muhammad Rashid v. State PLD 1960 SC 168; Muhammad Nazeef v. Gulbat Khan 2012 SCMR 
235. 
17 PLD 1975 SC 66 per Anwarul Haq, J. 
18 PLD 1988 SC 416 (11-MB). CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 15 
 
This interpretation made of the expression “public importance” in the 
cases of Manzur Ilahi  and Benazir Bhutto was later-on followed by this 
Court in several cases.19 Therefore, as per the said judicial definition, the 
expression “matters of public importance” used in Article 19A means the 
matters that pertain to and affect the public at large, a whole 
community, and not an individual or a small group of individuals; in 
other words, it includes the matters in which the general interest of a 
whole community, as opposed to the particular interest of individuals, is 
directly and vitally concerned. The adjective "public" necessarily implies a 
matter relating to the people at large, the nation, the State or a 
community as a whole; if a matter in which only a particular individual 
or group of individuals is interested and the people at large or an entire 
community have no interest, that cannot be treated as a matter of public 
importance.  
(e) Cases heard under Article 184(3) are “matters of public 
importance”  
17.  Section 3 of the Punjab Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 
1969 empowers the Government of Punjab to appoint a Tribunal for the 
purpose of making an inquiry into any definite matter of public 
importance. For making direction that the inquiry report of the Tribunal 
should be published for public information, the full bench of the Lahore 
High Court reasoned, in Qaisar Iqbal case,20 inter alia that the inquiry 
report of the Tribunal is a matter of public importance because under 
Section 3 of the Ordinance 1969 inquiry can only take place in a definite 
matter of public importance. We approve this reasoning of the Lahore 
High Court and adopt it for holding that the cases heard by this Court in 
its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution are 
matters of public importance, as for invoking the original jurisdiction of 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution two conditions are 
necessary to be fulfilled: (i) the matter should be for the enforcement of 
any of the fundamental rights; and (ii) with reference to the enforcement 
of such fundamental right, the question involved should be of public 
                                                           
19 See Shahida Zahir v. President of Pakistan PLD 1996 SC 632 (3-MB); Zulfiqar Mehdi v. PIA 
Corporation 1998 SCMR 793 (2-MB); Asad Ali v. Federation PLD 1998 SC 161(10-MB); Watan 
Party v. Chief Executive/President of Pakistan PLD 2003 SC 74 (5-MB); Javed Jabbar v. Federation PLD 
2003 SC 955 (5-MB); Shahbaz Sharif v. Federation PLD 2004 SC 583 (3-MB); APNS v. Federation PLD 
2004 SC 600 (3-MB); Muhammad Siddique v. Govt. of Pakistan PLD 2005 SC 1 (3-MB); PML(N) v. 
Federation PLD 2007 SC 642 (7-MB); Watan Party v. Federation PLD 2012 SC 292 (9-MB); Tahir-Ul-
Qadri v. Federation PLD 2013 SC 413 (3-MB); Abdul Wahab v. HBL 2013 SCMR 1383 (6-MB). 
20 Province of Punjab v. Qaisar Iqbal PLD 2018 Lah. 198. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 16 
 
importance.21 These are the essential conditions for the exercise of the 
jurisdiction vested in this Court under Article 184(3).  
18.  In the present case also, this Court held in the judgment22 
under review that “examination of the jurisprudence of this Court makes 
it clear that in order to invoke its original jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution, the impugned action must be shown to 
involve a matter of public importance arising from the breach of a 
fundamental right which affects the public at large.”23 The Court referred 
to and quoted the following observations made in the case of Al-Jehad 
Trust v. Lahore High Court24:  
“11: …unless the matter is of public importance relating to the 
enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part II, 
Chapter 1 of the Constitution (Articles 8 to 28), the jurisdiction of 
the Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, cannot be 
invoked. The mere importance of a matter, without enforcement of 
any fundamental right or reference to a fundamental right without 
any public importance, will not attract the jurisdiction of this 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution.”25 
The Court concluded that the “fundamental right of the general public 
which is claimed by the petitioner to be under threat is the derivative 
right of the independence of the judiciary. This right is an essential 
prerequisite for the enjoyment of, inter alia , the principal fundamental 
right to access justice which is guaranteed to the people of Pakistan by 
Articles 4, 9 and 10-A of the Constitution”26 and further held that “the 
petitioner has alleged that there have been serious violations of Article 
209(5) of the Constitution in the preparation of the Reference against 
him…[I]nfringements of Article 209 erode the independence of the 
judiciary which is directly connected with the right to access justice. 
Therefore, the present petition satisfies the two-fold requirement of 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution.”27  
19.  Thus, there remains no difficulty to conclude that the cases 
heard by this Court in its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, including review petitions and other matters arising 
therein, are matters of public importance within the meaning and scope 
                                                           
21 See cases mentioned at FN 17, 18 and 19. 
22 Majority judgment, para 13 (Reported in PLD 2021 SC 1). 
23 Emphasis added. 
24 2011 SCMR 1688. 
25 Emphasis added. 
26 Majority judgment, para 14.  
27 Majority judgment, para 16.  CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 17 
 
of that expression used in Article 19A of the Constitution, as it is only 
when the “question of public importance" is involved that this Court can 
exercise its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) to make an order for the 
enforcement of any of the fundamental rights. The public, therefore, has 
a fundamental right under Article 19A of the Constitution to have access 
to information as to the court proceedings of the cases heard by this 
Court in its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, 
including to know and see how the court-proceedings in these cases are 
conducted and concluded by the Court.  
(ii) Obligation of the Court to provide access to information of the court-
proceedings of cases heard under Article 184(3) through 
livestreaming  
20.  Now we turn to question (ii). Opposing the prayer for 
livestreaming the court-proceedings of this case on behalf of the 
contesting respondents, the learned Additional Attorney-General 
submitted that the right of the public to have access to information as to 
the proceedings of cases heard by this Court under Article 184(3) is 
fulfilled as the doors of the Court are open for everyone, and anyone from 
the public can come in the Court and see the court-proceedings, and can 
also obtain the certified copy of the final decision made by the Court in 
such cases. The questions arise: whether this is sufficient enforcement of 
the fundamental right to have access to information so far as the 
proceedings of the cases heard under Article 184(3) are concerned, or 
whether there is any obligation on this Court to do something more for 
making enforcement of the said right. 
(a) Article 19A creates a positive obligation 
21.  The Constitution has conferred fundamental rights in 
positive as well as in negative language. Article 19A has been couched in 
positive language: it guarantees to all citizens as a fundamental right 
that they shall have the right to have access to information in all matters 
of public importance. The negative language of a fundamental right 
imposes a limitation on the power of the State and declares the 
corresponding guarantee as to the entitlement of the people to that right. 
The positive language of a fundamental right not only operates as a 
limitation on the power of the State but it also requires affirmative State 
action to protect and fulfill the right conferred. In view of this difference 
of language, the fundamental rights are sometimes classified into CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 18 
 
negative and positive rights28: a negative right generally obliges inaction, 
a positive right requires action. The holder of a negative right is entitled 
to non-interference, while the holder of a positive right is entitled to the 
provision of some service. A negative right places a duty on the State not 
to interfere in certain areas where the citizens have the right to act in a 
certain way or the other and have their freedom of choice within the 
existing right; the State cannot encroach upon such freedom. A positive 
right, on the other hand, places an obligation on the State to take certain 
actions and measures to give effect to that right.  
22.  The positive language in which the right to information has 
been conferred by Article 19A makes it fall in the category of positive 
rights. This right, therefore, not only operates as a limitation on the 
power of the State to act in a manner that would negate the right of the 
citizens to have access to information in all matters of public importance, 
but it also requires the State to take some affirmative action to fulfill this 
right. The State is an abstract entity, which acts through its organs: the 
Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary. The State's obligation with 
regard to the fundamental right conferred by Article 19A of the 
Constitution is, therefore, to be fulfilled by all its organs within the 
sphere of their authority and competence as prescribed under the 
Constitution and law. We, thus, find that Article 19A of the Constitution 
creates a positive obligation on all State organs, authorities and 
institutions, including the Judiciary, to take the necessary measures to 
ensure the realization of the fundamental right of citizens to have access 
to information in matters of public importance.  
23.  The contention of the learned Additional Attorney-General, 
as aforesaid, is that the right of the public to have access to information 
guaranteed by Article 19A is fulfilled, for the doors of the Court are open 
for everyone, and anyone from the public can come in the Court and see 
the court-proceedings. Pakistan’s current population is estimated as 
more than 200 million people as per the provisional summary results of 
the 6th population census of 2017.29 The obligation of this Court, under 
Article 19A, to give access to the public (people of Pakistan) to 
information of the court proceedings in the cases heard by it under 
Article 184(3) cannot be said to be fulfilled by allowing permission to 
                                                           
28 See Province of Sindh v. M.Q.M. PLD 2014 SC 531 per Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, C.J. 
29 Available online at https://www.pbs.gov.pk/content/provisional-summary-results-6th-population-and-
housing-census-2017-0.    CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 19 
 
come to the court-room and see the court-proceedings, as this facility 
may be availed of only by a few of the public who can afford travelling to 
the courthouse and are lucky enough to have a seat in the court-room, 
there being a very limited space. We are, therefore, not impressed by the 
said contention of the learned Additional Attorney-General; it appears to 
us to be misconceived and amounts to taking a very restrictive approach 
to the import, extent and scope of the provisions of Article 19A.  
(b) Progressive and dynamic approach to interpret fundamental 
rights 
24.  The approach of this Court to the interpretation of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution has been progressive, 
liberal and dynamic since its very establishment and promulgation of the 
first Constitution of Pakistan, in 1956. As back as in 1957, Chief Justice 
Muhammad Munir made the observation that it is a fundamental canon 
of construction that a Constitution should receive a liberal interpretation 
in favour of the citizen.30 Chief Justice Muhammad Haleem said in the 
year 1988 that “the Constitution is not an imprisonment of the past but 
is also alive to the unfolding of the future.”31 Chief Justice Nasim Hasan 
Shah held in 1993 that “[w]ith the passage of time and the evolution of 
civil society great changes occur in the political, social and economic 
conditions of society. There is, therefore, the corresponding need to re-
evaluate the essence and soul of the fundamental rights as originally 
provided in the Constitution. They require to be construed in consonance 
with the changed conditions of the society and must be viewed and 
interpreted with a vision to the future.”32 Justice Shafi-ur-Rahman said 
that “[t]he Fundamental Rights guaranteed in any Constitution, an 
organic instrument, are not capable of precise or permanent definition. 
They cannot be charted on a piece of paper delineating their boundaries 
for all times to come.”33 And Justice Ajmal Mian held that “[a] 
Constitutional provision containing Fundamental Right is a permanent 
provision intended to cater for all time to come and, therefore, while 
interpreting such a provision the approach of the Court should be 
dynamic, progressive and liberal keeping in view ideals of the people, 
socio-economic and politico-cultural values (which in Pakistan are 
                                                           
30 Jabendra Kishore v. East Pakistan PLD 1957 SC 9. 
31 Benazir Bhutto v. Federation PLD 1988 SC 416. 
32 Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan, PLD 1993 SC 473. 
33 Ibid. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 20 
 
enshrined in the Objectives Resolution) so as to extend the benefit of the 
same to the maximum possible.”34 
25.  With the said progressive and dynamic approach this Court, 
earlier to the insertion of Article 19A in the Constitution, had interpreted 
the provisions of Article 19 of the Constitution that guarantees the right 
to freedom of expression to include the right to receive information.35 The 
right to receive information which was thus interpreted as a penumbra to 
the right to freedom of expression has now been recognized as a separate 
and independent fundamental right by the addition of Article 19A in the 
Constitution. We are, therefore, to interpret the provisions of Article 19A 
of the Constitution with the progressive, liberal and dynamic approach 
with which this Court has been interpreting the other fundamental 
rights36 and to explore the modern means of enforcement of the right 
guaranteed by this Article, which have been made available by the latest 
technology of the day.  
(c) Right of Access to Information Act, 2017 and Article 19A of the 
Constitution 
26.  The Right of Access to Information Act, 2017 (“Act”) has been 
enacted by the Federal Legislature37 in pursuance of the provisions of 
Article 19A of the Constitution. It appears that the Act is not applicable 
to this Court as Section 2(ix)(e) thereof has included only “any court, 
tribunal, commission or board under the Federal law” in the definition of 
“public body” for the purposes of that Act while this Court is established 
under the Constitution and not under any Federal law. While this 
question may be decided authoritatively in some other appropriate case, 
it prima facie  appears that the Legislature has left to this Court the 
matter of regulating and imposing reasonable restrictions as to the right 
to have access to information in matters of public importance dealt with 
by, and relating to, it by making rules under Article 191 of the 
Constitution, which empowers this Court to make rules for regulating its 
practice and procedure. Such rules when made would, no doubt, be a 
“law” within the scope of this expression used in Article 19A but, as we 
                                                           
34 Ibid. 
35 See Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan PLD 1993 SC 473, per Muhammad Afzal Lone, J.; 
Independent Newspapers Corporation v.  Chairman, Fourth Wage Board 1993 SCMR 1533. 
36 See Shehla Zia v. WAPDA PLD  1994 SC 693; General Secretary v. Director Industries 1994 SCMR 
2061; Arshad Mehmood v. Govt. of Punjab PLD  2005 SC 193; Watan Party v. Federation PLD  2012  SC  
292; Re Contempt Proceedings Against Chief Secretary, Sindh 2013  SCMR  1752; Re Petition Regarding 
Miserable Condition of The Schools 2014  SCMR  396. 
37 Provinces have also enacted their separate laws on the subject. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 21 
 
have already observed, the right conferred by Article 19A is operative and 
justiciable even without making of the law envisaged therein for 
regulating and imposing reasonable restrictions on this right. 
Nevertheless, the general and broader principles, as to the enforcement 
of the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19A of the 
Constitution, contained in the Act being the expression of the legislative 
wisdom of the Parliament of Pakistan, deserve due consideration and 
weight while determining the scope of the provisions of Article 19A and 
assessing the obligation of this Court thereunder until this Court makes 
the rules under Article 191 of the Constitution, in this regard. 
27.  Section 3(2) of the Act states that the Act is to be interpreted 
so as to advance its purposes as set out in the preamble, and (a) to 
promote the right of access to information and (b) facilitate and 
encourage promptly the disclosure of the information at the lowest and 
reasonable cost38. The preamble of the Act containing purposes of its 
enactment is cited below, for ready reference: 
WHEREAS Government believes in transparency and the right to 
have access to information to ensure that the people of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan have improved access to records held by 
public authorities and promote the purposes of making the 
Government more accountable to its people, of improving 
participation by the people in public affairs, of reducing corruption 
and inefficiency in Government, of promoting sound economic 
growth, of promoting good governance and respect for human 
rights;  
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for a law which gives 
effect to the fundamental right of access to information, as 
guaranteed under Article 19A of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan and international law, whereby everyone 
shall have the right to have access to all information held by 
public bodies subject only to reasonable restrictions imposed by 
law, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;39 
To promote the right of access to information, and to facilitate and 
encourage promptly the disclosure of the information at the lowest and 
reasonable cost, the Act has prescribed, in its Sections 5 and 8, the use 
of the latest information technology. Section 5 of the Act provides for 
uploading of the specified categories of information on the internet in a 
manner which best ensures its accessibility, and Section 8 thereof 
mandates each public body to ensure that all the record accessible under 
                                                           
38 Underlined for emphasis. 
39 Emphasis added. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 22 
 
the Act is computerized and made available online for facilitation of the 
public’s access to such records. 
(d) Live-streaming of court-proceedings on the Court’s website 
28.  This Court, even before the promulgation of the Act, has set 
up its official website and commenced sharing data on several matters of 
its working, including the information as to the roster of benches, cause 
lists, judgments approved for reporting and reports regarding pendency, 
institution and disposal of cases, on the website for public information. 
In view of this already functioning website of the Court, the disturbing 
issues are: why can the Court not live-stream on its official website the 
court-proceedings of cases heard under Article 184(3) which, we have 
hereinbefore held, are matters of public importance and the public has a 
right to know and see how the proceedings in these cases are conducted 
and concluded by the Court. If anyone from the public, who can afford it, 
can come to the Court and see the proceedings of such case, then what 
is the impediment in live-streaming these proceedings on the official 
website of the Court for information of all public including those who 
cannot meet the expense of travelling to Court. The facility of entry to the 
Court and seeing the court proceedings, in this context, appears rather 
discriminatory, available only to the affluent and thus, offending Article 
25 of the Constitution.  
29.  A very few of the public, as afore-observed, can afford to 
reach the Court and see the court-proceedings while a large section of 
the people of Pakistan, who are more than 200 million, cannot avail their 
right to see the court-proceedings due to time, distance and financial 
constraints. They, thus, depend on the information reported in print and 
electronic media. When the reporting is accurate and comprehensive, it 
fulfills their right to information; but when it is inaccurate or incomplete, 
it thwarts the right. The gavel-to-gavel live-streaming of the court-
proceedings would give the public a more direct sense of what occurs in 
these proceedings than second-hand information given to them by the 
media through reporting the event in a summarized form. The latest 
technology and internet facility have made it possible to reach out to the 
masses, in the language of the Legislature used in the Act, “to promote 
the right of access to information, and to facilitate and encourage 
promptly the disclosure of the information at the lowest and reasonable 
cost.”  CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 23 
 
30.  Live-streaming is the fastest method of communication and 
is the most suited for directly connecting to geographically dispersed 
people of the country. We firmly believe that the time has come to let 
some sunshine in our courts and, for this purpose, this Court being at 
the apex of the judicial hierarchy of the country should take a leading 
step. This Court has often held for other organs of the State that their 
functioning should be open and transparent; it is, therefore, all the more 
necessary for the Court itself to abide by that principle and take 
progressive steps to demystify its own functioning. Law develops 
gradually, and technology is often far ahead of both the legislature and 
the judiciary. However, both these institutions are not etched in stone 
and they should recognize the technological advances, in developing law. 
Live-streaming of the court proceedings, in the present age, can easily be 
made through the latest technology, and that too, at the lowest and 
reasonable cost. It would make the public to be virtually present in the 
courtroom and enable them to see, in real-time, how the court-
proceedings are conducted and concluded.  
(e) Practice in other major common law jurisdictions  
31.  We have also explored the practice around the globe in other 
jurisdictions to satisfy ourselves whether live-streaming of court-
proceedings by this Court would be a strange or novel thing in the 
judicial system. We find it otherwise: we are lagging behind the world on 
this matter. Almost all major common law jurisdictions of the world 
broadcast their court-proceedings in some way or the other, for public 
information. The Supreme Court of Canada has allowed broadcast and 
live-streaming of its proceedings since 1994, and has also started 
broadcasting/webcasting live video streams of court hearings on its 
website since 2009.40 The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom has 
allowed for hearings to be live-streamed on its website since 2010.41 The 
High Court of Australia has made available on its website audio-visual 
recordings of all full-court hearings since 2013.42 The Supreme Court of 
the United States has been posting written transcripts of oral arguments 
since 200043 and the audio recording of oral arguments since 2010,44 at 
                                                           
40 https://www.scc-csc.ca/case-dossier/info/webcasts-webdiffusions-eng.aspx 
41 https://www.supremecourt.uk/live/   
42https://www.hcourt.gov.au/index.php?option=com_acymailing&ctrl=archive&task=view&listid=%206-
judgment-delivery-notification&mailid=28-media-release 
43 https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcript/2020 
44 https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_audio/2020 CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 24 
 
its website and has also allowed live broadcast, on media, of oral 
arguments heard by telephone conference during COVID-19 pandemic 
since 2020.45 The International Courts and Tribunals, namely, the 
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR),46 the International Criminal 
Court (ICC),47 and the International Criminal Tribunal for the former 
Yugoslavia (ICTY)48 also broadcast court proceedings on their official 
websites. 
32.  The contesting respondents argued that the Indian Supreme 
Court while deciding a similar matter,  in Swapnil Tripathi v. Supreme 
Court of India,49 though recognized that the court-proceedings ought to 
be live-streamed but did not make any order or direction in this regard 
and left the matter to be regulated on administrative side by making 
amendments in the Supreme Court Rules. We have carefully gone 
through the Indian case referred to. In that case, the petitioners had 
agitated the matter of live-streaming proceedings of all those cases heard 
by the Indian Supreme Court that have constitutional importance and 
impact on the public at large and had not prayed for the live-streaming of 
a particular case. The Court, therefore, examined the prayer in the 
broader perspective of the right of access to justice, right to open justice 
and public trial, right to justice at the doorstep and right to know the 
developments of law. The Court generally agreed with the live-streaming 
of court proceedings but observed that the project of live streaming of the 
court proceedings on the internet, radio and/or TV through live audio-
visual broadcasting/telecasting universally by an official agency having 
exclusive telecasting rights and/or official website/mobile application of 
the Court, should be implemented in a progressive, structured and 
phased manner, and before the commencement of the project, formal 
Rules should be framed by the Court.  
33.  It appears that the Indian Supreme Court did so as there is 
not a specific fundamental right to have access to information in matters 
of public importance in their Constitution, like Article 19A of our 
Constitution, nor is there any class of cases of public importance 
specifically so mentioned in their Constitution, like Article 184(3) of our 
                                                           
45 https://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/press/pressreleases/pr_04-30-20 
46 https://www.echr.coe.int/Pages/home.aspx?p=hearings&c 
47 https://www.icc-cpi.int  
48 http://icr.icty.org 
49 AIR 2018 SC 4806 = (2018) 10 SCC 639 
 CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 25 
 
Constitution. Therefore, the Indian Supreme Court took up the matter of 
‘live-streaming’ of all cases heard by it and by other courts of the country 
in the context of concepts of ‘open trial’ and ‘open justice’ and other 
constitutional rights stated above, which we have left to be decided in 
some other appropriate case. Against this backdrop, the Indian Supreme 
Court disposed of the case and left the matter of live-streaming of all 
cases heard by it, including the cases of constitutional importance 
having an impact on the public at large, to be regulated by making 
amendments in their Rules. The position under our Constitution is 
different: Article 19A, as above held, confers an operative and justiciable 
right which is not dependent upon the promulgation of any law or 
making of any Rules by this Court. In view of this difference of provisions 
in the Constitutions of both the countries, the reference to the said 
Indian case for determination of the questions under consideration in the 
present case, is not apt or relevant.  
34.  We may observe that any transplant of a rule from a foreign 
jurisdiction to ours should be made after considering closely and 
thoroughly the difference of the constitutional scheme. The similarities 
and differences between the constitutional dispensation in that foreign 
jurisdiction and our Constitution are to be deeply evaluated. Any 
doctrine, principle, rule and precedent in the foreign jurisdiction must be 
viewed through the prism of fundamental rights guaranteed by our 
Constitution and other constitutional values. 
(f) Question of livestreaming court-proceedings is a matter of law, 
not of policy 
35.  The contesting respondents argued it also that question of 
live-streaming of the court-proceedings is a policy matter and should be 
decided by the Court on the administrative side. We are afraid the 
argument is not well-founded, especially in the context of court-
proceedings of cases heard under Article 184(3) which is under 
consideration, before us, in the present matter. We have found, as afore-
mentioned, that proceedings in such cases are “matters of public 
importance” within the meaning of that expression used in Article 19A 
and the public has a fundamental right to know how these proceedings 
are conducted; the question of enforcement of this right is a legal matter 
to be decided judicially and is not a policy matter for decision on the 
administrative side. In the context of the rule that justice should be CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 26 
 
administered in open court and power of a court to direct a case to be 
heard with closed doors in exceptional circumstances, Earl Loreburn 
remarked in Scott v. Scott ,50 that it “is not to be considered…as a matter 
of policy, but as a matter of law”. We respectfully subscribe to his 
lordship’s view and adopt it for the matter under consideration. 
(g) Live-streaming court-proceedings would reflect a responsive 
image of the Court 
36.  “People in an open society do not demand infallibility from 
their institutions, but it is difficult for them to accept what they are 
prohibited from observing.”51 The foundational constitutional value of 
accountability, responsibility and openness applicable to other organs of 
the State, the Legislature and the Executive, is attracted to the 
functioning of the third organ, the Judiciary, also. The cases involving 
questions of public importance with reference to the enforcement of 
fundamental rights of the citizens, which are heard by this Court in its 
original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, have a 
unique characteristic: the Court, in these cases, acts as the first and the 
final arbiter. The uniqueness of this jurisdiction sometimes invites 
criticism of judicial overreach, on the Court. Foundations of the judicial 
institution stand on, and its real strength lies in, the public trust which 
gives to its decisions legitimacy and public acceptance. A court cannot 
buy support for its decisions by spending money or using force. A court’s 
power lies in its legitimacy, a product of substance and perception, that 
shows itself in the people’s acceptance of the court as the best forum to 
determine what the law means and decide their disputes accordingly. 
Without such public trust and public acceptance, the judiciary loses the 
legitimacy and independence it requires to perform its functions. To 
maintain and boost up the public trust in the Court’s working, it is 
essential to make the public aware of how the Court deals with cases 
under Article 184(3) and to be reassured that it always functions within 
the terms of the Constitution and law independently, impartiality and 
fairly. Live-streaming of the court-proceedings would reflect a responsive 
image of the Court acknowledging that it is accountable to the public for 
whom it functions, and promote the public confidence in its functioning. 
                                                           
50 1913 AC 417. 
51 Richmond Newspaper v. Virginia 448 US 555 (1980) per Chief Justice Burger. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 27 
 
37.  This Court, being the guardian of the fundamental rights of 
the people of Pakistan against encroachments made by other public 
authorities and institutions, is to enforce the fundamental right of the 
public relating to its own proceedings with more fervor and commitment 
than others. We are enlightened in this respect by the remarks of 
Fletcher Moulton, L.J., and quoted by Earl Loreburn in Scott v. Scott ,52 
that “courts of justice, who are the guardian of public liberties, ought to 
be doubly vigilant against encroachments by themselves.” After profound 
and thorough deliberations, we are unable to see any legal impediment in 
live-streaming the court-proceedings of cases heard under Article 184(3) 
on the official website of this Court and find it a positive obligation of this 
Court, under Article 19A, to do this for enforcement of the right of the 
public to have access to information of these proceedings.  
Access of public to the court-proceedings of cases of public importance and 
the democracy  
38.  At the heart of democracy lie the rights to freedom of 
expression and to have access to information in matters of public 
importance. These mutually supporting rights ensure transparency and 
accountability in public institutions, which results in good governance, 
especially in a flourishing democracy. These rights uncover the 
wrongdoings and transgressions of the public authorities and 
institutions. The informed public opinion is therefore considered the 
most potent of all restraints upon bad governance in a democracy. The 
rights to freedom of expression and to have access to information in 
matters of public importance are thus not only useful but are 
indispensable to the proper functioning of a democratic system. The oft-
quoted, old dictums are that “let the people have the truth and the 
freedom to discuss it and all will go well”53, and that “in the darkness of 
secrecy, sinister interest and evil in every shape have full swing.”54 Not 
all information in matters of public importance, however, is readily 
revealed by the Government, and an environment of secrecy is 
maintained. Access of the public to the court-proceedings in cases under 
Article 184(3) can expose information as to the matters of public 
importance that may otherwise not be possible for the public to have; as 
in most cases under Article 184(3), it is the Government, or any of its 
                                                           
52 Remaks of Fletcher Moulton, L.J. quoted by Earl Loreburn in Scott v. Scott 1913 AC 417.  
53 William Blackstone cited it in his commentaries. 
54 Bentham said, and Lord Shaw approvingly quoted in Scott v. Scott, 1913 AC 417. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 28 
 
departments or instrumentalities, which is alleged to have infringed the 
fundamental rights of the public and the Court is called upon to enforce 
them. The information as to the court-proceedings in such cases would 
be a vital avenue for public information about what the Government does 
and why the Court interferes. The access of the public to the court-
proceedings in cases heard under Article 184(3) through live-streaming 
would, thus, serve the democracy as much as it would make the exercise 
of judicial power by the Court in such cases transparent.  
Conclusion  
39.  The above discussion leads us to conclude and hold that 
live-streaming (audio and video) of the court-proceedings in cases heard 
by this Court, on a petition or suo motu , under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution should be made available for the information of the public 
through a link on the official website of the Court, in the enforcement of 
the fundamental right of the public, and for the fulfillment of the 
obligation of the Court, under Article 19A of the Constitution. However, 
this Bench of the Court can make an order to live-stream the court-
proceedings of this case only as per the prayer made therein, and cannot 
direct the other Benches of this Court that are, or would be, hearing 
such cases, to live-stream their court-proceedings. We believe that the 
general practice in this regard can be enforced only by making rules 
under Article 191 of the Constitution.  
40.  However, until such rules are made by the Court on the 
administrative side, it lies in the discretion of each Bench of the Court 
hearing such a case to order, or not to order, in the exercise of powers of 
the Court, live-streaming of its court-proceedings and to regulate that 
live-streaming, if ordered. Because the right conferred by Article 19A, as 
aforesaid, is operative and justiciable even without the enactment of a 
law that may provide for the regulation of, and reasonable restrictions 
on, such right. Needless to reiterate that this Court under its rules of 
practice and procedure made under Article 190, namely, the Supreme 
Court Rules 1980, ordinarily sits in Benches, and not en banc as a full-
court, and each Bench irrespective of its numeric strength exercises the 
jurisdiction and powers vested in the Court. 
41.  In the circumstances of the present case, we are inclined to 
exercise our discretion in favour of ordering livestreaming of its court-CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 29 
 
proceedings; however, we have been apprised that in the current state of 
technological set-up available in this Court such an order, if made, could 
not be executed. Courts do not make in-executable orders; we, therefore, 
abstain from making an order for live-streaming the court-proceedings of 
the present case. However, we direct the Registrar of this Court to take 
steps to provide for the requisite technological infrastructure for live-
streaming the court-proceedings, so that any Bench of this Court may, if 
so decides, order for live-streaming the court proceedings of a case being 
heard under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, in future. The Registrar 
shall also place the matter before the Court, on the administrative side, 
for considering amendments in the Supreme Court Rules 1980, in order 
to livestream court-proceedings of all cases heard under Article 184(3) 
and to regulate the practice and procedure in this regard.  
42.  Facility of live audio-hearing of the court-proceedings of all 
Benches of this Court is currently available to all the Judges of this 
Court in their Chambers as well to their staff, and audio recording of the 
court-proceedings is also sometimes made. Therefore, keeping in view the 
current state of technological infrastructure available in this Court and 
the fact that the petitioner’s case (review petitions) is already fixed for 
hearing, we direct that the audio recording of the proceedings of the 
court-hearings of the petitioner’s case shall be made available through a 
link on the official website of this Court, for public information. The 
Registrar of this Court shall ensure that the unedited audio recording of 
the proceedings of the court-hearings of the present case is uploaded on 
the official website of the Court on the same day soon after the hearing 
and before the close of the working hours. 
43.  So far as the prayer of the petitioner to the extent of directing 
the State-owned Pakistan Television (PTV) Corporation to broadcast live 
the proceedings of his case is concerned, we think such a direction would 
breach the freedom of expression and press guaranteed by Article 19 of 
the Constitution as both kinds of direction, viz, to broadcast or not to 
broadcast something, are tantamount to interference into the freedom 
guaranteed by the Constitution, unless such act or omission of PTV 
breaches any legal right of someone or any of its legal obligations and it 
is also made a party to the proceedings initiated thereon.55 Likewise, the 
                                                           
55 Aslam Saleemi v. PTC PLD 1977 Lah 852; Fatehyab v. PBC/PTC NLR 1991 Civil 46; Ammanullah v. 
M.R.C. 1995 SCMR 202. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 30 
 
prayer of the petitioner that the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory 
Authority (PEMRA) may be directed to issue written instructions to all 
private television channels that they cannot be restrained from 
broadcasting the proceedings, appears to us to be not entertainable, as 
none of the private television channels has agitated its right (if any) to 
broadcast the court-proceedings of cases heard by this Court under 
Article 184(3), and we leave the determination of the question as to their 
such right (if any) to be made in a case where they would agitate the 
same and claim enforcement thereof. 
Signing or recording the detailed reasons by a retired Judge of this Court 
44.  The above are the reasons for the short order dated 
13.04.2021 made by us and our learned brother, Justice Manzoor 
Ahmad Malik (since retired). Although we have attempted, to the best of 
our ability, to record these reasons as discussed and agreed to by us and 
our learned brother, Justice Malik, at the time of making the short order, 
the human susceptibility to err demands us to have the concurrence of 
our learned brother in correctly recording the reasons for which he joined 
us in the short order. Therefore, following the precedents of Al-Jehad 
Trust v. Federation  (PLD 1996 SC 324) and CJP Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 61), the office is directed 
to send a copy of these detailed reasons to his lordship for his 
consideration.. The office shall annex the response received from his 
lordship, with these detailed reasons. 
45.  Here, we consider it appropriate to state why we earlier 
offered, and are now offering the detailed reasons to our learned brother, 
Justice Malik (since retired), to consider whether or not he agrees that it 
correctly records the reasons for which he joined us in the short order, 
despite having the advantage of reading the note recorded by one of our 
learned brothers and agreed to by other three, in addition to their 
detailed reasons56 recorded in support of their short order dated 
26.04.2021, expressing their reservations on our sending, as well as on 
signing by Justice Malik, the detailed reasons recorded in support of our 
short order dated 26.04.2021.  
46.  First and foremost, we and our learned brother, Justice 
Malik, followed the precedent of a 13-Member larger Bench of this Court, 
                                                           
56 In CRP No.296/2020, reported as Justice Qazi Faez Isa v. President of Pakistan PLD 2022 SC 119. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 31 
 
which is binding upon us while sitting in a smaller Bench of 10 
Members. Our learned brothers have treated, and dealt with, the 
observation made in para 206 of the judgment delivered in the CJP 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry case  taking it as the opinion of one 
Hon’ble Judge, namely, Justice Khalil-ur-Rehman Ramday, despite the 
fact that his lordship was speaking for a Bench of 13 Members and the 
judgment authored by him (including para 206) was signed by other 6 
sitting Hon’ble Judges of this Court. None of those 6 Hon’ble sitting 
Judges took any exception to any observation made in the judgment 
while signing and becoming party thereto; therefore, each and every word 
written in the said judgment, including para 206 thereof, is to be taken 
as of all 7 sitting Hon’ble Judges of the 13 Member Bench. Futher, the 
judgment, including para 206 thereof, having been signed by majority of 
the 13-Member Bench had become the judgment of the Court, i.e., the 
judgment of a 13-Member Bench of the Court, and did not remain to be 
only of those 7 sitting Hon’ble Judges or of 10 Hon’ble Judges including 
the 3 retired Hon’ble Judges who joined in the judgment (detailed 
reasons of the short order). We have already explained this concept in 
our detailed reasons57 released 29.01.2022 (See para 9 thereof) recorded 
in support of our short order dated 26.04.2021. The 3 retired Hon’ble 
Judges thus signed, and one of them also recorded his additional note, in 
pursuance of the observation and action of the 7 sitting Hon’ble Judges 
forming majority of the 13-Member Bench. With profound reverence to 
the view of our learned brothers, we are unable to understand how 4 or 
all 10 Judges of a 10-Member Bench can declare the observation made, 
and the action done in pursuance thereto, by a 13-Member larger Bench 
to be an error in law, even if it may be so. Ignoring the sanctity and 
authority of a precedent of a larger bench may pass for judicial arrogance 
and lead to judicial chaos.   
47.  Although it is not our function to supply the reasons in 
support of the said precedent of a 13-Member Bench, or to exmine any 
possible arguments contrary to the opinion of our four learned brothers, 
in the present case. It can be done, in our view, only by a Bench larger 
than a 13-Member Bench, but we think it proper to note just some of the 
                                                           
57 Ibid. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 32 
 
points in this regard, to show that the precedent of the 13-Member 
Bench is based on sound wisdom.    
48.  No one can dispute that the short orders are made and 
announced by this Court, after due application of the judicious mind to, 
and after due consideration of, the pleadings of the parties and their 
arguments in the light of the material available on record of cases for 
definite “reasons” that are present in the mind of the judges at the time 
of making those orders. Short orders are made due to paucity of time to 
record detailed “reasons” and due to the urgency of the matters involved. 
That is why the detailed reasons recorded later in support of the short 
orders always bear the date of the short order, not the date of recording 
those reasons. The expression used in the short orders, “for the reasons 
to be recorded later”, clearly means that it is the act of recording reasons 
that is postponed to a later time, and not the act of creating or searching 
for the reasons. The latter meaning, if given, to the expression “reasons 
to be recorded later” would completely shatter the legal sanctity and 
validity of the short orders, and unsettle the well-settled legal position 
according to which the short orders made by this Court are fully 
operative orders, executable forthwith, and a party feeling aggrieved 
thereby is to avail his legal remedy of review within the prescribed period 
of limitation computing from the date of the short order, and not from 
the date of release of the detailed reasons recorded in support thereof. 
49.  Further, we observe it very respectfully and humbly that one 
of our four learned brothers had vacated the office of a Judge of this 
Court when they released their detailed reasons on 04.02.2022 and 
assumed the office of the Chief Justice of Pakistan, but has recorded the 
detailed reasons, and signed the additional note, in his capacity as a 
Judge of this Court which he had on 26.04.2021 when the short order 
was made, and not in his present position and capacity as the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, and their detailed reasons also bears the date of 
26.04.2021, the date when the short order was made, and not the date 
when these detailed reasons were recorded. We, with great respect, say 
that our learned brother has so done as per the above said settled 
practice of this Court. Needless to mention that the office of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan and the office of a Judge of this Court are two CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 33 
 
different offices under the Constitution; one stands vacated on assuming 
the other. Similarly, a judge of this Court who has vacated his office on 
retirement joins the detailed reasons recorded by any of his colleagues in 
support of the short order made by them jointly or records his own 
reasons, in his status, capacity and authority he had on the date when 
that short order was made. 
50.  Another important fact, which also depicts a settled practice 
of this Court, deserves to be noted. Our learned brothers as well as we 
have mentioned the presence of our learned brother, Justice Malik, 
under the heading “Present” for showing the coram and constitution of 
the Bench, in our respective detailed reasons recorded in support of our 
short orders dated 26.04.2021 and 13.04.2021 (both released after his 
retirement). This fact also shows that it is the status of a judge of this 
Court on the date of making the short order that is relevant at the time of 
recording the detailed reasons in support thereof and determines his 
authority to record such reasons. Otherwise, the fact of mentioning his 
presence in the coram of the Bench that records the detailed reasons 
would become a false statement and a patent contradiction in itself 
amounting to blowing hot and cold in the same breath; as, on the one 
hand, we would show him as a Member of the Bench that records the 
detailed reasons but on the other hand, say he is not and cannot record 
the detailed reasons.     
51.  From the said settled practices of this Court, according to 
which the detailed reasons recorded in support of a short order always 
bear the date of the short order, not the date of recording them, and the 
status and capacity of the judges as on the date of the short order, it is 
not hard to discern that it is the status, capacity and authority of a judge 
of this Court as on the date of the short order under which he records, 
after retirement, his reasons for making the short order or joins in the 
reasons recorded by some other judge if he finds that they are the same 
for which he made the short order. These and other points can be 
examined by a Bench larger than a 13-Member Bench when they arise 
before such Bench, however for present, we follow the  13-Member Bench  
and act upon it. CMA No. 1243/2021 in CRP No. 296/2020 34 
 
52.  We may, with great respect, also express our concern on 
adjudicating by some Members of a Bench the precedential effect and 
value of the opinion of other Members of the same Bench, in their 
judgment delivered in the same case. We have never seen such practice 
in our jurisdiction as well as in any of the foreign jurisdictions. Members 
of the same Bench differ on issues and strongly express their respective 
opinions, as well as make comments on the opinion of each other 
highlighting the reasons for which they think other Member(s) has erred 
in his opinion, but do not adjudicate upon the precedential effect and 
value of each other’s opinion. We believe the question of extracting ratio 
decidendi  and determining precedential effect and value of the opinion of 
some Members of a Bench of this Court expressed in a judgment 
delivered in one case, can be examined only in other cases where such a 
judgment is cited as precedent, and that can be done not only by a 
Bench of this Court but even by a court lowest in the judicial hierarchy; 
nevertheless, it is in no way a domain of the Members of the same Bench 
to make this exercise in their respective judgments rendered in the same 
case.   
 
  (Maqbool Baqar)  
Judge 
 
 
 
 (Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel)  
Judge 
 
 
 
 (Syed Mansoor Ali Shah)  
Judge 
 
 
Islamabad,  
13.04.2021. 
Approved for reporting. 
 
Released on 04.04.2022. 
  
 