IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN.  
MR. JUSTICE MAQBOOL BAQAR.  
MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB.   
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 
2005.  
Muhammad Asjad Abbasi and others.   …Peti tioner(s)   
Versus  
Iqbal Muhammad Chauhan and others.   …Respondents  
AND  
CRL.M.A. NO.1879 OF 2016 IN CRIMINAL ORI GINAL PETITION NO. 5 7 OF 
2015.  
(Impleadment Application)  
AND  
CRL. O. P. NO. 42 OF  2017 IN S. M. C. NO.  10 OF 2005.  
Nawaz Akhtar and others.     …Petitioner(s)   
Versus  
Capt. (R) Said Anjum and others.    …Respondents  
AND  
CRL.M.A. NO. 1292 OF  2017 IN CRL. O. P. N O. 57 OF 2015  
Muhammad Asjad Abbasi and others.   …Petitioner(s)   
Versus  
Iqbal Muhammad Chauhan and others.   …Respondents  
AND  
CRL.M.A. NO. 1293  OF 2017 IN CRL. O. P . NO. 57 OF 2015  
Muhammad Asjad Abbasi and others.   …Petitioner(s)   
Versus  
Iqbal Muhammad Chauhan and others.   …Respondents  
AND  
C.M.A. 6998 OF 2017 IN C. R. P. NO. NIL OF 2017 IN S. M. C. NO. 10 OF 
2005.  
Commoners Sky Gardens (Pvt) Lt d and others.      …Petitioner(s)   
Versus  
Govt. of Punjab thr. Chief Secy ., Lahore and others.  …Respondents  
AND  
CRL.M.A.NO. 1926 OF 2017 IN CRL. O. P. N O. 57 OF 2015.  CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 2
(Impleadment Application)  
AND  
CRL.M.A.NO. 430 OF 2 018 .  
 
For the petitioner(s):  Sardar Mu hammad Aslam, ASC  
    Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
    (in C rl.O.P. 57 /15)  
 
Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC.  
    Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR.  
Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC.  
    (in Crl. M. A. 1879/16,  
CMA. 6998/17 & Crl. M. A. 1926/17)  
     
    Nemo. (in C rl. O. P. 42/17) 
 
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
    (in Crl. M. As. No. 1292 -1293 /17) 
 
        
For the respondent(s):  Mr. Shakeel Ahmed, A. G. Punjab.  
    Barrister Qasim Chauhan, Addl. A. G. Pb.  
    (for respdts. 1 -2) 
 
    Mr. Zahid Saeed, In person.  
    (for respdt. 3)  
 
Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, ASC.  
Raja Inam Ameen Minhas, ASC.  
(for respdt. 4)  
 
Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC.  
    Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC.  
    Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR.  
    (for respdts. 6 -16). 
 
Federation of Pakistan:  Mr. Sohail Mehmood, DAG.  
 
Environmen t EPA. Pb.:  Mr. Asif Iqbal, D. G.  
    Nawaz Malik, Dir (Law).  
    Shahid Hassan, Dy. Dir.  
 
 
Date of hearing:  07, 12 -15, 22, 28.03.2018, 05, 09, 10 -12, 
30.04.2018 and 02.05.2018.  
(Judgment Reserved).  
 
J U D G M E N T    
 
 Ejaz Afzal Khan, J:  Environmental  hazard which was 
reported to be imminent on account of proposed New Murree 
Project was taken notice of, which found expression in one of the CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 3
orders passed by his Lordship , as he then was,  Mr. Justice Tassaduq 
Hussain Jillani in the following terms:  
“The R eport of the International Union of Conservation of 
Natural Resources (IUCN) submitted to the Government and 
published on the front page in Daily “The News” dated 29th 
March 2005 makes startling and shocking disclosures about 
the apprehended adverse enviro nmental impact of the 
proposed New Murree Project. The findings, if true, warrant 
serious attention of all those concerned with the 
conversation of the Forests, Supply of Clear Water to the 
Twin Cities of Rawalpindi and Islamabad and the issues of 
siltatio n in Simly and Mangla Dams. The issues raised are 
likely to affect public at large with particular reference to 
the Fundamental Right enshrined in Article 9 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, i.e. the Right to 
life….  
The Patriata Forest a ccording to the afore -referred report 
has a highly fragile eco -system and was declared as 
reserved forest as far back as 1886 is going to receive the 
worst blow i.e. at least 50% of the existing standing stock of 
1.4million conifer trees are likely to be c ut. Imploring 
protection of this valuable forest reserve the report maintains 
that “the development of new township could result in the 
catastrophes like loss of protective forest cover resulting in 
more rapid runoff following storm event; higher peak stre am 
flows; increased instability; and increased sedimentation. 
…… “Such adverse changes in watershed hydrologic 
conditions result in degradation of water quality for the 
population particularly residing in Islamabad, the report said, 
demanding, “to avoid su ch compound disasters and to 
ensure supply of safe water for twin cities, the valuable 
Patriata forests have to be preserved.” “To develop new city 
by cutting sharp slope bedrocks will further aggravate the 
situation for new city and will cause heavy rain siltation in the 
Simly and Mangla Dams”. This move, it is said, would cause 
serious damage to the ongoing Mangla Dam Raising 
project, which was approved at a total cost of Rs. 62.552 
billion including foreign exchange component of Rs. 9.6 
billion. The main  objective of the project was to raise Mangla 
Dam by 30 ft to regain the lost storage capacity due to 
silting and heavy sedimentation.”  
While the New Murree Project may have been motivated to 
improve, expand and create recreational facilities at the hill  
resort in question with regard to which none would have any 
cavil. However, if such a scheme raises serious 
environmental questions requiring deliberations by 
Authorities and Experts concerned and if such a deliberative 
exercise has not been carried out, t his Court is under a 
Constitutional mandate in terms of Article 184(3) read with 
Article 9 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan to 
issue appropriate directions to forestall the likely adverse 
effects on the quality of life in the areas to wh ich reference 
has been made in the report. But before proceeding any 
further it would be fair to issue notice and hear learned 
Advocate General Punjab Inter alia on following preliminary 
queries: - 
(i) Whether any environmental impacts survey was ever 
carried o ut before approving the New Murree 
Scheme?  CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 4
(ii) Whether the Government of Punjab has considered 
the report of International Union of Conservation of 
Natural Resources, if so what effect?  
Since the issues likely to be raised would require 
interpretation of Envir onmental Laws, it would be 
appropriate to call upon Dr. Pervaiz Hassan to appear and 
assist the Court as amicus curiae. Notice shall also issue to 
Director General, Pakistan Environmental Protection 
Agency, Islamabad.  
Let this matter be placed before the Honourable Chief 
Justice of Pakistan for consideration and constitution of an 
appropriate Bench. Subject to the order to be passed by 
him the case shall be fixed before the Bench so constituted 
for 11.04.2015. Till then no tree shall be felled and no hill shall 
be tinkered with in Patriata pursuant to the project in 
question.”  
 
Following the order reproduced above, many other directions and 
orders were passed by this Court. In the meantime, WWF prepared 
an assessment of ecological significance in respect of  the proposed 
New Murree Development Project which being relevant in this case 
also deserves a look and thus runs as under:  
The following brief describes the ecological significance of the 
New Murree Project area and the resulting devastating 
environmental  impacts visualized due to the proposed New 
Murree Development Project (NMDP). The proposed NMDP 
propositions the development of Patriata Reserved Forests 
(Compartments 21 to 38), Murree Tehsil, Rawalpindi District, an 
area of 4,111 acres, into a ‘tourist city of international 
standards.’  
Located at the highest point in the Punjab (about 2,223 m), the 
project area is part of the Himalayan hill tract that includes one 
of the best remaining Himalayan (temperate) forest areas in 
Punjab. There are two ecologic al zones present in the area, the 
’moist temperate coniferous forests’ (Blue pine or kail zone) 
and the ’subtropical Chir pine forests’ (Chir zone); the former 
being the dominant zone. Considered particularly ecologically 
rich, the area boasts the existenc e or probable occurrence of 
more than 200 plant species, 146 bird species, 15 mammals, 22 
reptiles, and 6 amphibians.  
The NMDP proposes development projects in the only surviving, 
intact habitat of the Blue pine ecosystem - the other habitat 
being badly d egraded due to ‘its proximity to Murree; this will 
result in a regrettable fragmentation of this periphery is liable to 
become swarmed by unplanned housing development 
schemes, such as those surrounding Bhurban and Murree. As a 
result, other than the White  oak and Yew trees, which are 
already locally threatened, an additional 17 commonly used 
medicinal plants will be endangered due to the development 
operations.  
The Patriata hill tract has the richest flora to be found in the 
country. According to a recent  study conducted by Pakistan in 
2008, a total of 224 vascular plants were identified from the 
study area, belonging to 166 genera and 71 families. A high CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 5
proportion of endemic species and, old forests render the area 
the status of a unique habitat. Since t he area contains a very 
dense patch of the only remaining tract of pine trees in the 
Punjab Province, it is highly significant in terms of holding a rich 
diversity of fauna and flora.  
The Himalayan forest vegetation provides relatively undisturbed 
habitat  for wildlife species, sustaining their needs for food, 
water and shelter. Any change in the habitat structure will 
affect the variety and population of wildlife species. Changes 
in the vegetation structure will definitely affect the wildlife 
fauna associa ted with them and, conversely, changes in 
faunal composition as well as influence the vegetation it is 
complexly integrated with. Leopards, once reported from the 
area, are no longer sighted; their disappearance can threat to 
the already decreasing populat ion Common Leopards in the 
Murree hills. The Koklass Pheasant, the White -Crested Kalij 
Pheasant, and the Paradise Flycatcher are some of the unique 
bird species inhabiting the Patriata forests, which will also be 
endangered.  
Natural forests form a vital p art of catchments, guaranteeing 
better quality water with lower levels 20f sediments and 
pollutants. The loss of forest cover and subsequent conversion 
to other land usage is rapidly being identified as the major 
reason for the depletion and contamination of freshwater 
supplies, aggravating the looming water crisis that is 
threatening the whole country. Since the concerned area is an 
integral part of the important watersheds of Mangla and Simly 
dams, the proposed development plan, which entails large 
scale decimation of this surviving tract of forest, will have 
massive negative repercussions. Since much of the remaining 
catchment area of these dams has already been built up, 
protection of this region is imperative to guarantee 
groundwater replenishment along  with regulation of water 
table, and to prevent rapid soil erosion - with consequential 
silting of water channels and dams downstream, flash floods 
and landslides.  
The Government of Pakistan has pledged to preserve and 
rehabilitate the country’s remaining  natural forests in a number 
of policy documents, for example, the National Environmental 
Policy 2005, that commits to increase forest cover to 5. 6% by 
2010 and to 6% by 2015. Even the Pakistan Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Paper (PRSP -2003) makes projection s to increase forest 
cover from 4.8% to 5%. This project is, thus, in direct 
contradiction with these policies and goals to conserve natural 
forests.  
The FAO report, “Situation and Developments in the Forest 
Sector -2005”, mentions that Pakistan is losing  forest cover at 
the rate of 1.5 % each year. This is one of the worst rates 
amongst the 48 Asian countries that have been listed. The 
current distribution reveals decline (almost 40%.) in the char 
pine zone, which has been predominantly exploited for 
agricultural and residential land use, along with a significant 
decrease (approximately 51%) in blue pine forest compared to 
estimated forest cover in the past. Pakistan has only 1.8% 
productive forests out of the total 3.1% existing forest cover. 
Under these alarming conditions, it is imperative that remaining 
natural forests in Pakistan, which includes the ' Patriata forest, 
must be protected from further degradation.  
The Project objectives and components have kept changing 
and have still not been clearly de fined or been disclosed to the 
public. At the time of this report being written, the New -Murree CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 6
Project included a 6 Star hotel along with other hotels, 
exclusive housing units, golf course and mono -rail. All these 
mentioned projects are absolutely inappr opriate for a unique 
ecological area, since the heavy machinery required during 
construction portends severe damage to the ecosystem.  
In conclusion, the Punjab Government is advised by WWF 
Pakistan to abandon the existing New Murree Development 
scheme, wh ich is completely unsuitable for this unique and 
environmentally rich region. In its place, the Punjab 
Government can undertake more suitable ecotourism 
initiatives, which conserve the unique natural and cultural 
heritage in Punjab and provide tourist faci litates in conformity 
with local traditions, for the benefit of all levels of society.”  
 
Learned ASC appearing on behalf of the petitioner contended that 
where the orders passed by this Court from time to time and 
paragraph 4 of the judgement rendered in t he case of Suo Motu 
Case No. 10 of 2005  (2010 SCMR 361)  are very clear in their tone and 
tanner, nobody could have continued with the work of construction 
and that any work done in contravention of the orders of this Court is 
liable to be undone and the pe rsons at the back of such work are 
liable to be proceeded against and punished. He next contended 
that the forest which is a source of natural beauty and one of the 
causes of rainfalls is being extermin ated; that the land comprised in 
shamilat -i-deh cannot  be broken up for cultivation or any other 
purpose which is not envisaged by the wajib -ur-arz; that taking 
possession of a few chunks of land comprised in shamilat -i-deh would 
amount to partition which is not only against the provisions of wajib -
ul-arz but  also against the enactments passed from time to time and 
the rules made thereunder.  The learned ASC  maintained  that the 
property comprised in individual proprietary could be used as a 
building site if an NOC is issued in conformity with section 12 of the  
Punjab Environmental Protection Act 1997. The learned ASC next 
contended that any waste, sewerage, drainage or any other form of 
garbage flowing  from houses, building, hotels and restaurants  thus CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 7
constructed  in the highland s would not only affect the catch ment 
areas but fill them with polluted water. Timely action, the learned 
ASC added, would be the need of the hour else the land of beautiful 
landscapes would turn into heaps of stinking dirt. Inaction and 
acquiescence of the government, the learned ASC wen t on to 
argue, facilitated the destruction of the fauna and flora. Simly Dam 
and Rawal Dam, the learned ASC while winding up his arguments 
contended would also be the victims of deforestation , construction  
and consequences flowing therefrom . 
2.  During the  course of arguments , we noticed that a huge 
property comprised in shamilat -i-deh has been broken up for 
construction and many other alike purposes in violation of the terms 
of wajib -ul-arz and the Forest Act  1927. We on our own asked the 
learned Advocate General Punjab t o examine this phenomenon 
and submit a detailed report in this behalf along with the record of 
rights, field map and wajib -ul-arz of the respective villages. He 
accordingly submitted his report along with the relevant record. 
When we asked him as to how shamilat -i-deh could be broken up for  
construction etc he could not give any satisfactory answer. We, 
having realized the gravity of the situation and its adverse bearing on 
the interest of the government  and the environment  around , took 
notice of this aspect of the case and asked the learned ASC s and Sr. 
ASC of the parties to address us on th is issue.  
3.  Learned Sr. ASC appearing on behalf of Bahria Town 
contended that any restriction imposed on sale or partition of 
shamilat -i-deh is violat ive of fundamental rights; that any such 
restriction would be void by virtue of Article 8 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. He next contended that whether CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 8
the proposed construction or the construction already completed is 
against the  provisions of the Punjab Environmental Protection Act is a 
matter pending before the Environment Tribunal, therefore it would 
not be just and proper to meddle in such matters while exercising 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Is lamic 
Republic of Pakistan. He next contended that some restrictions may 
have been imposed on the owners of the shamilat -i-deh by the 
wajib -ul-arz but their effect has been neutralized by section 3 of The 
West Pakistan Land Disposition (Saving of Shamilat)  Ordinance 1959. 
Even otherwise, the learned Sr. ASC added, wajib -ul-arz cannot limit, 
diminish, curtail or extinguish any right in the land or property without 
the consent of the owner, therefore, the owner of shamilat -i-deh can 
partition it or dispose it  without the intervention of the government . 
The learned Sr. ASC contended that where  a great deal of 
construction work has been done, many plots have been transferred 
and superstructure has been raised thereon  following the previous 
practice, right or wro ng, any order of this Court undoing all that has 
been done would not only create complications but also deprive the 
persons investing  in the project of a right accrued which is not in 
conformity with the dictum of this Court rendered in the case of 
Governm ent of Pakistan v Manzoor Brothers  (1995 SCMR 516) . The 
learned Sr. ASC next contended that no exception could be taken 
to the sale and partition of the property where none of the co -
owners in shamilat -i-deh has raised even a whisper i n this behalf. 
Learne d Sr. ASC lastly argued that if this Court comes to the 
conclusion that Shamilat land could not be partitioned, broken -up 
for construction or any other purpose, any declaration given by this 
Court cannot operate retrospectively. The learned Sr. ASC to supp ort CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 9
his contention placed reliance on the case of Application by Abdul 
Rehman Farooq Pirzada versus Begum Nusrat Ali Gonda v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2013 SC 829 ).  
4.  Mr. Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq appearing for  Commoners Sky 
Garden, respondent no.4 herein,  contended that area constructed 
by it falls within the private ownership; that the construction was 
preceded by issuance of a proper NOC by the Rawalpindi 
Development Authority (“RDA”) and Environmental Protection 
Agency (“EPA”); that the respondent no. 4  has also become the 
owner in shamilat -i-deh by the dint of sale but since the proposed 
construction is carried in the private ownership the arguments 
addressed at the bar by the petitioner have least bearing on its case. 
Even wajib -ul-Arz of village Manga , the learned ASC maintained, 
does not restrict partition of property nor does it recognize any right 
of the government in the shamilat -i-deh, therefore, his case has to be 
looked at differently. Learned ASC by referring to clause 4 B of the 
notification da ted 21 January 1941 issued under section 76(c) of the 
Forest Act 1927 contended that it does not tend to impose any 
restriction on the construction raised by respondent no. 4 when it has 
neither broken up any area of shamilat -i-deh nor sought partition 
thereof.  
5.  We have gone through the record and considered the 
submissions for the learned ASCs for the parties.        
6.  Before we deal with the questions raised in these 
petitions it is worthwhile to see what is wajib -ul-arz, how does it come 
to being, what role does it play in the administration of shamilat -i-
deh, what rights does it confer and what restriction does it place on 
the village proprietary body  and what interest the government of the CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 10
province has in shamilat -i-deh, are the questions to be ad dressed 
before any owner of shamilat -i-deh or vendee therefrom can be 
allowed to go ahead with the breaking up of the land for 
construction etc . Wajib -ul-arz is a village administration document 
describing existing customs regarding rights and liabilities of the 
village proprietary body and the government. This document is an 
outcome of consensus of the village proprietary body and the 
government reached at the time of settlement of the village. In the 
case of Haji Qudrat Ali v. Government of N.W.F.P., thro ugh Secretary, 
Law Department, Peshawa r (1993 SCMR 381)  this Court in paragraph 
10 of the judgement quoted with approval the judgement rendered 
in the case of Mst. Bhag Bhari v. Mst. Bhagan (PLD 1954 Lah. 356 at 
360) dealing with the entries in a wajib -ul-arz held as under:  
“Entries in a Wajibul Arz may be of two kinds. They may be statements 
of local custom or usage or they may be recitals of agreements. As 
statements of custom or usage they are strong evidence of the 
existence of such custom or usage but they have only an evidentiary 
value. Agreements incorporated in the Wajib -ul-Arz are however 
binding but only on the parties to the agreements, and even in such 
cases it is open to a party to prove that in fact no such agreement 
was entered into though the  task would be difficult.”  
 
Before we go ahead, let us examine the relevant clauses of the 
wajib -ul-arz of each of the villages forming subject matter of the 
controversy in this case. The first in the sequence is the wajib -ul-arz of 
village Manga which rea ds as under:  
  
ض䘥 ا᱓ت وا᱑را垆 اᙤ 
  
)䚴ا(     ؤں 㻠 رے屩 ۔䆎 承㨱 㐽 ঎傑 㺸  ان䆎 ں峤 俖 ⸞ ر㥃⨭ 㞼㜌 㞼 وṎ 把ت د剚⹢ ہ㖓ڑ وᠢ 婧 嬸㨱 垑
ادىᗚ 啵 -4- 15226  㑵رو仁 啵  اس嵗 ى᳥ ░ ╕ 把ت د剚⹢ 㞪ل ر㯵 981 ك6 懓㟣 ଘ 䪬亾 132 ك12 㖓 م
 勴 141 12 ك6  زت᱑ اॼ 㷨 㞪 اس رᚕ  اور䆎 ں峤 رᖯ ر㥃⨭ 劜 ۔ وہ䆎 䆈ں اُ㫤 رد و⠩ ں⛸ در啵 㞪۔ اس ر嵗 مCRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 11
۔䆎  承㨱  媎  ر㥃⨭  
  
ب۔     嵗‹ ᱓ 㲁 嵗 ر✔ ا㱾  دار▛ 愡 ا寄 嵗 ᣲ᱑ 峤 ࿀ ر㊓ 姟⛪ 䰯㑈 ᚕ 㷨 㲁俖 很孆 ᠣ㲢 ۔۔۔㲁俖 很孆 ᠣ㲢
ا ▗ ⺍㥃 㽻 اᚕ  از㞢 ۔䅎 嵗 ࠹ل رᚕ ᠢ 很᱑ 峤 䟢 ا䟢 ا㞜 ᱓ 㨱 峤 姟⛪ ᚕ  اور䰍وا㨱 ᚕ 㷨 啓 ز㷨 ▗ ᄭ 
愴  اور峤 㷩 㞜 ጦ 嬸  دار▗ 愡 ا寄 㷨 㞪 ر嬸峤 اد䊳 ا㧩 垑 徉 ۔嵗 Ꮉ峤 ᚕ 恗 ڈ㕄 ᠢ 很᱑ 峤 䟢 ا䟢 ا㷨 داران㞪 ر 
رىᄯ ⸞ 㞪ہ ر垆䰮 㣰 ܉ෝ 㯌  اور㻠 很᱑ 㲢 ࠹ل ر▗ ار૯ 㥃  دار▗ 寄 ⺍㥃 㞜 ᚕ 㞺 وᠢ 峤 ೧ 㣰 ܉ᚕ ਮ㞑  很᱑ 㷨
رᄯ ⸞ ت剚⹢ ▗ 㥃 䰍 وا㯌  اور㻠  وہ دےᠢ 嵖‹ 扳د د⠩ ⿽ ࢁ啓 زṎ ⸞ 㞜 䆨 واጦ 㲁 㻠 峤 抁 愒㈲ 㥃 ۔ اس䅎  اور很᱑ 㷩 ا
۔㻠  䰍  د⠩  ࿝  ╕  䆨 وا 㯌 
  
ج۔     婨㻠ا᳥ 啵 劜 峭 ᄣ ا䂺  آ܉دى㷨 䝫䰮 愡 ا寄 嵗 媎 弥㱾  آ܉دىŲŏŮǌŦ ǔ ƷŬ  嵗 ق䳑  آ܉دى啵 ڑىᄱ ؤں㻠 رے屩
䅏 峤 راج垆 ا㥃 劜 㨱 峤 剙⹢ 啵 ㇒ ارا劜 㷨 م اس嗚 㺸 䝫䰮 愡 ا寄 庫፮ 㞺ୢ Ṏ 㡘وا آ܉د ى  徉 Ŗǉ Ǘ ƴ㱾 弥㱾 㽻 اور ا嵗 
۔嵗 䅋 峤 ات㓱㥃  درج㲁俖 劜 㨱峤 د፱ ࿀ 娛 ہ㐗 徉 ㇒ ارا剙⹢ 䆨 ࣿرت ܉೧  وہᠢ 嵗 㲁俖 ن㥃䰮⊠  
  
د۔   ⺍㥃 م噣 ا㥃 ㇒ ارا㷨  اسᠢ 很᱑ ⇵ 㺸 ㇒ اراᄣٳارى ا ǔ ǀŇŋ䰮 很 دارو⺍㥃 م噣 ا嬸㨱 ਯ  داران▗ Ṏ ٳارى اس ǔ ǀŇŋ䰮 ،
ں 峤 ٳار ǔ ǀŇŋ䰮  دار吶 ذ峭  اور وہ䆎 承㨱 م噣ف ا㈲ ن䝬䰮 ᷌ 㨱 峤 رᖯ ت剚⹢ ᠢ ے㨱 婨 ى᳥ 愡 㽻۔ ا㻠 ے㨱 ى᳥ 愡 徚㟥㥃
۔䆎  
 
Wajib -ul-arz of village Sulkether has identical content which reads as 
under:  
"  ۔䚴ا  ۔把ت د剚⹢    ؤں㻠 رى屩   ‹ر愹 ا㸲 ا㑵رو仁 ۔嵗 ᙤ 戆 ࢌ㇒ون ارا㿫 䪬亾 ل ‹ر㯵  ‹ر愹رہ ا䅏 Ⳣ 圡ຩ 啵
 Ⳣ ᥉ 勴 㖓 䪬亾 ᩶ل آ㯵  ‹ر懓㟣 ଘ 䪬亾 ل دس㯵89   㞪۔ اس ر嵗  درج把ت د剚⹢ 啵 ات㓱㥃 Ṏ 䪬亾 ⋲ ل㯵 圡ຩ 愹ا
 وہ䆎 䆈ن اُ㫤 ردو⠩ ں⛸ درṎ 啵 ر㱾亽  ۔䅎峤 媎 ر㥃⨭ زت᱑ اॼ ᚕ 㷨 㞪 اور اس ر䆎 ں峤 ر㥃⨭ 劜 
  
ب۔     ᄭ ا嵗‹ ᱓ 㲁 嵗 ر✔ ا㥃  دار▗ 愡 ا寄 ۔ اور嵗 ᣲ峤 ࿀ ر㊓ 姟⛪ 䰯㑈 ᚕ 㷨 㲁俖 很孆 ᠣ㲢 ۔㲁俖 ᠣ㲢
䟢 ا䟢 ا㞜 ᱓ 㨱 峤 姟⛪ ᚕ ے اور技ا د㨱 ᚕ 啓 ز㷨 ▗    دار▗ ⺍㥃 ᚕ  از㞢 㽻 اور ا䅎 嵗 ࠹ل رᚕ ᠢ ؤے᱑ 峤
㣰 ܉ᚕ ਮ㞑 啓 ز㨗 ا اور峤 㷩 㞜 ු  و㭸 嬸  دار▗ 愡 ا寄 㺸 㞪 ر嬸峤 اد䊳 ا㧩 ⡠  ܉徉 ؤے᱑ 峤 䟢 ا䟢 ا㷨 ان 峤 弥峤 
  ࠹ل▗ ار૯ 㥃  دار▗ 愡 ا寄 ⺍㥃 㞜 㟿 㞺ୢ ᠢ  府۔ اور زا䅎 很و᱑ 㷨 رىᄯ ⸞ 㞪ہ ر垆䰮 㣰 ܉ෝ  و㯌 ۔ اور㻠 很و᱑ 㲢ر
剚⹢ ▗ 㥃 䰍 وا㯌  اور慿技 د嵗‹ 戇 د啓 زṎ ⸞ 㞜 ᄣ ا䪬 واጹ 㲁 㻠峤 抁 愒㈲ 㥃  اس彛و᱑ 䬉够 ⴣ 㞜 ▗ از 㷩 راᄯ ⸞ ت
۔㻠  ے䯽  د⠩  ࿝  ╕   وہ ᠢ  很و᱑  
  CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 12
 د䚴ا ᠣ㲢 ㆏吴 ى⨭و ۔ 嵗 ᣲ峤 啓 ز 䅎人 ࢑آ弥㱾  婨 嵗 媎 㥃 啓 ز嬸峤 人 ࢑آ㡘吴 弥㱾 啵 ؤں㻠 رے屩 
Ŗǉǎ ƴن د䝬䰮 巩ب ܉"  
 
Wajib -ul-arz of village Kathar being replica of wajib -ul-arz of the other 
villages reads as under:  
 " ض䘥 ا᱓ت وا᱑را垆 اᙤ  
 
۔䚴ا   垑 ۔扨㨱 㐽 ঎傑 㺸  اس嵉 ᥢ峤 俞 ⸞ ر㥃⨭ ،㞼㜌 㞼 و府ا㣡 ᠢ 峤 㷨 把ت د剚⹢ ہ،㖓ڑ وᠢ 婧 嬸㨱   
ب۔     啵 ؤں㻠 رے屩 1211 㨲 رᙤ 承 ࢌ㇒ ارا愹ا2 ڑہ䈵 ،46 ا哶 ،142 懓㟣 ଘ ،33 勴 㖓 ،988 ات㓱㥃 ، درج
ردو ⠩ ں⛸ در啵 ر㱾亽 ㇒، ارا嵉  很孆 ᠣ㲢 ،䆎 承㨱 媎 ᚕ ر㥃⨭ زت᱑ اॼ 㞪 ر抁  اور䆎 ں峤 ر㥃⨭ 劜  وہ䆎 䆈ں اُ㫤
 ، اور䰍ا㨱 ᚕ 㷨 ▗ ᄭ ا嵗‹ ᱓ 㲁 嵗 婨 ر✔ اჄ ا㱾  دار▗ 愡 ا寄 ، اور嵗 ᣲ峤 ࿀ ر㊓ 姟⛪ 䰯㑈 ᚕ 㷨 㲁俖 ᚕ
峤 䟢 ا䟢 ا㞜 ᱓ 㨱 峤 姟⛪  峤 帻 ڈ㕄 وے، اور᱑峤 ،䟢 ا䟢 ا㷨  دار ان▗ ⺍㥃 ᚕ  از㞢  اور䅎 嵗 ࠹ل رᚕ ᠢ وے᱑ 
 ᠢ 峤 㣰 ܉ᚕ ਮ㞑 啓 ز㨗  اور峤 ا峤 㷩 㞜 ු  و㭸 嬸  دار▗ 愡 ا寄 㺸 㞪 ر嬸峤 اد䊳 ا㧩 徉 ،嵗 Ꮉ峤 ᚕ 㨱 ᚕ 㞺ୢ
 دا▗ 愡 ا寄 ⺍㥃 㞜  䬉够 ⸞ 㞪 ر▗  از府، اور زا䅎 وے᱑ 㷨 رىᄯ ⸞ 㞪ہ ر垆䰮 㣰 ܉ෝ  و㯌  اور㻠 وے᱑ 㲢 ࠹ل ر▗ رচ ر
 㲁俖 㥃 䰍 وا㯌 㽻 ا㻠 ے技د د⠩ ࿝ ╕ ᠢ 嵗‹ 戇 د⿽ ࢁ啓 ز㞜 ᄭ ا㽻 ا䆨 واෝ 㲁 㻠 峤 抁 愒㈲ 㥃 ، اس䅎 وے᱑ ٹ㷚
و᱑ 㷩 راᄯ ⸞ ۔㻠 ے䯽 ࿝ ╕ ᠢ 㻠 ے  
ج۔     درج 㨱 د፱ 劜 㷨  ان嵗 剙⹢ ೧ 啓 ز悇، ا嵗 ũǎ Ʒơƪ ǖ Ƹ ǔ ƹŪ  㷨 ن䝬䰮 ᠣ㲢 ف وہエ ،嵗 愴  آ܉دى㷨 ؤں㻠 رے屩
 㱾 دار娛 啵 ؤں㻠 رے屩 ،嵗 䅋 㷨 ░ 怯ᕨ র لᶣ 䆨، ܉劜  ، وہ嵗 力 㲁俖 Ṏ 㣰، ܉嵗 䅎 峤 ات㓱㥃  ى㝅 Ꭴ رو圡ຩ
۔Ꮉ᱑ 徉 د媎 㨗 㺸 ہᔊჴ 很اⳢ 嵉 忕م دᝯ ل⡜ ࿀ ٳارى ǔ ǀŇŋ䰮 㢻ر  
د۔     ᠢ وے،᱑ ⇵ ٳارى، ǔ ǀŇŋ䰮 ،⺍㥃 م噣 ا嬸㨱 ਯ  دار▗ 弥㱾 㽻 ا㺸  اس卄 ،嵗 创  ‹رہ೨ 㷨 ؤں㻠 رے屩 رتㄯ
剚⹢ ᠢ ے㨱 婨 ى᳥ 愡 㽻 ا㻠 ے㨱 ى᳥ 愡 㥃 م اس噣اٳارى  ǔ ǀŇŋ䰮  دار吶 ذ峭 اور و䆎 承㨱 م噣ن ا䝬䰮 ،᷌ 屨 㨱 峤 رᖯ 把ت د
۔姽峤 㺸  
2۔    ᷌  اور嵉 ᥢ⅁ ೧ 啵 㑵ور仁  و㞪 ر㺸 㘠  دورी  اور嵉 ᥢ⅁ 啵 㑵رو仁 㖓 㞪 ر㺸 ران⺕㥃 ن䝬䰮 屨 悬吴
 و㺸 嬸ᵮ ❊ ى䞆 䝫䰮 ہ،㖓 و䝫䰮 把ن د㻠⿊܉  䝫䰮 㖓 㩴 峭 婨 ، اور嵗 婨 وٹ㥃 روك ر㷨 㩴 嵉 ᥢ㨱 ارہ㽽 㨱 䆨 ೧ ⩱ا
۔嵉 ᥢ⅁ 婨 啵 ╌ 㷨 ؤں㻠  اس悬吴 㺸 ؤں㻠 ے⨭ دو㩴  ، اور嵗 Ꮉ᱑ 䬊 㺸  ܉ܫ اس◒ 弥㱾 ⸞  
3۔    ۔嵗 媎 㷨 㟮 ق䳑 媛人آ"  
  
The wajib ul arz of village Mangal is also identi cal in its content and 
context which reads as under:  CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 13
ض䘥 ا᱓ت وا᱑را垆 اᙤ  
1۔  ۔䚴ا    把ت د剚⹢ ۔䆎 承㨱 㐽 ঎傑 㺸  اس䆎 ں峤 俞 ⸞ ر㥃⨭ 㞼㜌 㞼 و㍗ا㣡 Ṏ 㺸 ت剚⹢ 嬸㨱 ڑᠢ 嗚 垑
ᙤ  承 ࢌ ㇒ ارا 啵  ؤں㻠  رے屩 
䪬亾    ل㯵    㫣)愹ا(    ڑہ䈵      ا哶        㨲ر      ଘ
 懓㟣        勴 㖓   
-5-   -0-   2405     1-6-10    4 -1 -143      12 -0-12   14-
7 -8        14-0- 2230 
۔䅎峤  ر㥃⨭  劜   وہ 䆎  䆈ں ا 㫤  رد⠩  ں⛸ در Ṏ  ت㇓ ان ارا 䮵  ۔嵗  ات㓱㥃   درج 把ت د 剚⹢  劜  Ṏ 
ب۔    ᚕ 㷨 㲁俖 ت᱑ ᠣ㲢 ۔㲁俖 ᠣ㲢 垑  ᇆ ᠢ ⬍ 峤 婨 姟⛪ ᚕ ⸞ ṏ و㩴 㽻۔ ا嵗 ᣲ᱑ 峤 ࿀ ر㊓ 姟⛪ 䰯㑈 
ᵳ 剡 ⺾ 䰍 وا㯌 ⩲䪫 ا┡ ۔䅎 وے᱑ 㷨 㨱 㲡 ࠹ل ر㞜  وار㟮 㺸 ᚕ ۔嵗 ラⓥ ◒ 㥃 嬸㨱 䉺اी ᚕ 㱾 ᠣ㲢 愡⻑ 
۔㻠 وے᱑ 徉 د㞪ا ر峤  
2۔   ⺕㥃  و䞪䰮 ᷌ 屨 悬吴  嵗 Ꮉ⅁ ೧ 啵 㑵رو仁 ت㇓ ارا㘠  دورी ۔ اور嵗 Ꮉ⅁ 啵 ت剚⹢ 㑵ور仁 㖓 㞪 ر㥃 ران
 㖓 ◒ 弥㱾  ܉ܫ㷨  اس婨 嵗 媎  روك弥㱾 ۔嵉 ᥢ㨱 ارہ㽽 رচ ⸞ رہ㱾亽 㞪 ر䰋 㺸 嬸ᵮ ى䞆 ❊ ن㻠⿊ ܉᷌ اور
  悬吴  㥃  ㆏吴  㩴   اور 㻠  很᱑  䬊  ⸞  ن䝬䰮 ۔嵗  Ꮉ آ 媎  啵  ╌  㷨  ㆏吴  رے屩 
3۔   ۔嵗 媎 ق䳛 媛人 آ弥㱾 啵 ؤں㻠 رے屩  
 4۔    㱾 ᳮ 嵗 ر冿 ار㸭⋏ 愡 ا啵 ㆏吴 رے屩120  ᣲ峤 لㄯ و㨱 峤 ⋲ ܉࿀ وں䂺 Ṏ 嵗 ᣲ᱑ اہ دى៑ 峭⻝ 㜢 Ꭴرو
د娛 ،伶 م䰮 ا嵗 媎 ㇒ ارا㷨 ᳮ ن㻠๦ 婨⛪ ⸞ ⋲ اس ܉嵗  峤 ⋲ ܉࿀ وں䂺 ೧  وہ峤 府㌑ ࿀ ؤں㻠 㫣 婨䰮ᳩ Ṏ ۔嵉 付 اران
۔嵗 Ꮉ峤  ادا㨱  
5۔ ۔嵗 ⫈ 䟢 婨  اور嵗 媎  ‹ہ弥㱾 啵 ؤں㻠 رے屩  
6۔   ᱓ ۔嵗 ⫈ 䟣 媎 ن䝬䰮 ى卬 ㅨ رॼ ᠢ 很䟣 رḍ 弥㱾 ہ弎 آ㽻۔ ا嵗 媎 啵 ا寃 把ر دḍ 弥㱾 㞺اس و  ╕
۔䅎 وے᱑  دى婨 تᳩ ا㷨 ᳮ ۔㻠 ے技 د㨱 ጑ 兵 㕄 ࿀ دى⹢ 㕟 ᠢ وے䟣 رḍ ى卬 ㅨر  
7۔   ۔嵗 㷨 㟮 㩴 ى垆 弥㱾 婨 ۔嵗 ᣲ峤 媎 人 ࢑آ啓 ز弥㱾 啵 ؤں㻠 رے屩  
   
A perusal of the relevant clauses of the wajib -ul-arz of each of the 
villages reproduc ed above shows that the rights of the proprietary 
body of the village in shamilat -e-deh are neither exclusive nor 
unlimited. Their rights in shamilat -e-deh are confined to grazing their 
cattle  etc. and not beyond that. Sale of the property comprised in 
shamilat -i-deh is not restricted but it cannot be lost sight of that the 
vendee  under no circumstances  can acquire a title better than the CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 14
one the vendor himself ha s. As wajib -ul-arz of each village provides 
that any tree small or big growing in ups and downs  of the property 
would vest in the government, such right cannot  not be extinguish ed 
with the sale of the property. No r can the vendee be allowed to act 
in derogation of such clauses while dealing with the property. It is in 
view of this essential aspect t hat it has been provided in the wajib -ul-
arz that shamlat -i-deh could neither be broken up for cultivation nor 
partitioned without the permission of the government. The rationale 
behind this recital is to protect the rights of the government on the 
one han d and those of the owners on the other. This is what has 
been provided under Rule 4A framed under section 76 (c) of Forest 
Act 1927; that no person shall clear or breakup for cultivation or any 
other purpose any land in the area reserved as charagaha (Fore st 
and pasture Land) and this is what is provided in rule 4B that no 
person or persons in any estate shall partition jointly owned lands 
(shamilat -i-deh) without the sanction of the provincial government. If 
this property is allowed to be broken up for cul tivation or partitioned 
without the permission of the government, quite obviously, the 
government would be at the losing end. We do not understand how 
suitable chunks of land were chosen and taken possession of without 
having recourse to the legal proceedi ngs and without the permission 
of the government in gross, grave and glaring violation of the law 
governing the partition of such land. We do not understand how the 
trees and bushes running in millions were cut from the shamlat -i-deh 
and how was it convert ed into a building site.   We also do not 
understand how the government slept over its rights and sat around 
like an idle spectator when everything was ruined and run amuck  by 
the Bahria Town or for that matter any other builder  without realizing CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 15
that fauna  and flora are better served by the natural growth of trees 
than the mountains of iron, cement and concrete . Why such sights 
did not  boil the blood of the officials working in the revenue 
hierarchy , right from the patwari up to the Senior Member Board of 
Revenue? Why did the officials of the Forest Department , right from 
the Forest Guard to the Chief Conservator and the Secretary collude 
with the Bahria Town in its predacious motive s and piratical designs ? 
What elevated the Bahria Town and its managers to a  level where 
the nabbing hands of the law enforcers could not reach them 
notwithstanding all these excesses and atrocities were reported to 
the NAB. Government land was aggressively taken possession of and 
lavishly enjoyed by a cabal of land grabbers but those sitting in the 
chambers of power at every level aided and abetted them as if it is 
not for them to prevent such acts and that some force from above 
or abroad would land in to prevent them. It is something terrible 
because o fficial collusion of this ma gnitude may not have been 
experienced even in the nightmare. We against this backdrop  would 
be rather callous  and even cruel to see the landgrabbers  grab the 
property and destroy fauna and flora of the area and do nothing to 
stop, if not break, the hand be hind it.     
7.  Now the question arises how far section 3 of The West 
Pakistan Land Disposition (Saving of Shamlat) Ordinance 1959 
neutralizes the effect of the wajib -ul-arz as was contended by the 
learned Sr. ASC for Bahria Town. Before we appreciate thi s aspect of 
the case it is worthwhile to reproduce section 3 of the Ordinance  
which  reads as under:  
“3.   Shamilat not included in disposition of land unless specifically 
mentioned as subject matter of the disposition. — (1) Notwithstanding 
any law, usage o r custom to the contrary, in any disposition of land, 
whether testamentary or otherwise, effected by the maker by means 
of a writing or orally and whether made before or after the CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 16
commencement of this Ordinance, words or phrases of a general 
nature, purpor ting to convey rights or interests incidental, contingent, 
or collateral, to that land, shall not be so construed as to include 
therein the Shamilat or any portion thereof appurtenant to such land, 
unless such Shamilat or a portion thereof has been specifi cally 
mentioned as the subject matter of the disposition.  
(2)  This section shall not affect any decision of a competent court or 
authority given before the commencement of this Ordinance: - 
(a) if it is not open to review, appeal or revision, or  
(b) if it is so open, no such proceedings have been taken, and the 
decision has consequently become conclusive between the parties. ” 
 
A perusal of the provision reproduced above shows that the 
disposition of any land effected by the owner by means of a writing 
or or ally made before or after the commencement of the 
Ordinance, words or phrase of general nature, purporting to convey 
rights and interest incidental, contingent or collateral to that land 
shall not be so construed as to include therein shamilat or any porti on 
thereof appurtenant to such land unless shamilat or portion thereof 
has been specifically mentioned as the subject matter of the 
disposition. This section by no stretch of imagination neutralizes the 
effect of any of the clauses of wajib -ul-arz dealing with shamilat -i-deh 
nor does it override or extinguish rights of the government in shamilat -
i-deh. We, therefore, do not agree with the argument of the learned 
Sr. ASC for the Bahria Town. The argument that such restriction being 
inconsistent with the fund amental rights shall be void is devoid of 
force when the wajib -ul-arz is an outcome of the consensus between 
the village proprietary body and the government of the province, 
therefore, neither the village proprietary body nor the government 
can resile ther efrom. This Court in the case of Ghulam Hussain v . 
Allah Baksh  (1991 SCMR 1386 ) while interpreting section 3 of the 
Ordinance, has already held as under:  
“As regards the three last cases, it maybe noted that these related to 
share in the shamilat. In the f irst one it was held that since plaintiffs did 
not base their claim upon any right as proprietors  of any land 
assessed to land revenue, they were not entitled to the share in the 
shamilat. This was in view of the fact that only land holders had/have 
any ri ght in shamilat. The Ordinance I of 1959, however, envisaged 
that even if land - holding is sold it will not be taken that Shamilat rights CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 17
have also been sold unless specifically so stated: The right in Shamilat 
was no more contingent on land holding.  The r easons maybe that 
the legislature took into account the fact that because of drought or 
famine, a landholder may sell his land, go away to any other place or 
in the neighbourhood for livelihood and still retain his cattle and graze 
them in the old pasture of shamilat, or, that he was not to be ousted 
from the community by depriving him of his share in the shamilat. 
Reasons maybe diverse but it is clear that the ordinance recognized 
two rights independently of each other and not contingent, i.e. right 
in the  land proprietorally held a right in the shamilat land. The second 
case too, is based on contingency of land holding for share in 
shamilat and if the former is lost by adverse possession the latter is also 
lost. But this too is prior to the Ordinance. In t he third case, the right 
was lost because from cause of action suit was not filed within 
limitation. ”  
 
8.   The argument that where wajib -ul-arz of village Manga 
does not restrict partition of property nor does it recognize any right 
of the government in the shamilat -i-deh, therefore, the case of 
respondent No. 4 has to be looked at differently is not correct as the 
wajib -ur-arz of village Manga clearly provides that the property 
comprised in shamilat -i-deh would not be broken up for cultivation or 
any oth er purpose nor would it be partitioned without the permission 
of the government. Rule 4A and 4B of the Rules of Guzara lands or 
forest and waste lands of Murree and Kahuta Tahsils, other than 
Reserved and Protected Forests under section 76 (c) of the Act X VI of 
1927 as mentioned -above also provide similar restrictions. The 
argument that where a great deal of construction work has been 
done, many plots have been transferred and superstructure has 
been raised thereon following the previous practice, right or wrong, 
any order of this Court undoing all that has been done would not 
only create complications but also deprive the persons investing in 
the project of a right accrued which is not in conformity with the 
dictum of this Court rendered in the case of Gove rnment of Pakistan 
v Manzoor Brothers  (supra ) has not impressed us as the  departure 
from the rule s has its origin in  collusion rather than practice . Needless 
to say the one or any number of wrongs cannot make a right. The CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 18
case of Government of Pakistan v M anzoor Brothers  (supra ) being 
distinguishable on facts and law has no relevance to the case in 
hand. The argument that if this Court comes to the conclusion that 
Shamilat land could not be partitioned, broken -up for construction or 
any other purpose, any d eclaration given by this Court cannot 
operate retrospectively  has also not impressed us when everything in 
this case appears to have been done collusively. The judgement 
rendered in the case of Application by Abdul Rehman Farooq 
Pirzada versus Begum Nusrat  Ali Gonda v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2013 SC 829) , too, has no relevance to the case in hand  when the 
controversy as to the rights of the owners in shamilat -i-deh has 
already been set at rest by this Court as back as 1991 in the case of 
Ghulam Hussain  v. Allah Baksh  (supra) . The argument that no 
exception could be taken to the sale and partition of the property 
where none of the co -owners in shamilat -i-deh has raised even a 
whisper in this behalf is also devoid of force because the interest of 
the co -owner in shamilat -i-deh is not exclusive and unlimited as held -
above and that no property comprised in shamilat -i-deh could be 
partitioned without the permission of the government and without 
having recourse to the legal proceedings under the relevant law.  
9.  As a sequel to what has been discussed above, we 
have no hesitation to hold that any area of shamilat -i-deh broken up 
for cultivation or any other purpose, partitioned, taken possession of 
or constructed in violation of the wajib -ul-arz and rule 4A an d 4B  of 
the Rules mentioned -above , being illegal and unlawful  is of no 
effect . The area thus broken up, partitioned, taken possession of or 
constructed be retrieved by the government forthwith. All 
construction work in shamilat -i-deh be stopped forthwith. The CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 19
construction work carried in private ownership would continue only if 
it is okayed by the RDA and EPA. The persons and officials of the 
revenue department be proceeded against . The NAB is directed to 
investigate the case and file references against all  those who are 
found responsible for committing, aiding and abetting the crime at 
any level or in any form.  
10.  If at all a great deal of construction work has been done 
on the property comprised in shamilat -i-deh, plots have been 
transferred , superstruc ture has been raised thereon and third -party 
interest has been created therein, a spade would remain a spade 
and an illegal act would remain illegal. However, the question s what 
to do with the allottees , how to deal with their cases and what 
remedial measu res could be taken in this behalf shall be dealt with 
by the implementation Bench. We, therefore, request the 
Honourable Chief Justice of Pakistan to constitute an implementation 
bench in this behalf  to deal with the questions mentioned above.  It is, 
howev er, added that the Provincial Government and the Forest 
Department would take care of the areas of the Shamilat -i-deh to 
develop it by afforestation and reforestation.     
11.  For the reasons discussed above, Criminal Original 
Petitions No. 57 of 2015 and  42 of 2017 in Suo Motu Case No. 10 of 
2005 as well as Criminal Misc. Applications No. 1879 of 2016, 1292 to 
1293 and 1926 of 2017  in Criminal Original Petition No. 57 of 2015  and 
CMA. No. 6998 of 2017 are disposed of in the terms mentioned 
above.   
JUDGE  
I had the privilege of going through the judgement authored by my learned 
brother Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan, but have not able to persuade myself to agree 
with the same and would therefore respectfully add my dissenting note.  
JUDGE  
 CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PE TITION NO. 57 OF 201 5 IN S.M.C.NO.10 OF 2005 
 20
 
JUDGE  
 
Announced in open  court at Islamabad on ______________________  
 
 
JUDGE  
Approved for reporting  
Barrister Sohaib Shahid  
  ORDER OF THE COURT  
With the majority of two by one, the final order of this Court is 
recorded in paragraph s 9 and 10  of the majority judgement .  
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
Islamabad  
04 May 2018  
Barrister Sohaib Shahid   