IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
 
 
CIVIL PETITIONS NO.2790  OF 2018  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 
6.6.2018 passed by the Lahore High 
Court, Lahore in W.P.No.224129/18)  
 
Hamza Rasheed Khan   …Petitioner (s)  
 
 Vs.  
 
Election Appellate Tribunal, Lahore  
High Court , Lahore and others.   …Respondent (s)  
   
For the Petitioner (s)  : Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Munawar Iqbal Duggal, ASC.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
For Respondent  # 3 : Mr. Azam Nazir Tarar, ASC  
Mr. Muhammad Omer Riaz, ASC  
 
Date of hearing  : 19.07.2018.  
 
ORDER  
 
   We have heard learned counsel for the 
petitioner and counsel for the contesting 
respondent.  Several  issues h ave arisen in this case 
which include, whether the order of this Court 
dated 18.7.2013 constitutes a declarat ion in terms 
of Article 62(1)( f) of the Constitution  of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973. P ursuant to the 
aforementioned order, criminal proc eedings were 
launched on the same allegations which have been 
culminated in  an acquittal  maintained upto th is  2 
Court vide Order dated 1 8.07.2013, whether such  
judgment of th is Court would washout the earlier 
observations  purporting  to be a declaration in 
terms of Article 62(1) (f) of the Constitution . The 
third question in this case is, whether a c andidate 
who has withdrawn his N omination Papers, can 
file a writ petition against the order dismissing the 
appeal filed against acceptance of the Nomination 
Papers  of an opposing candidate.   
 To consider , inter alia , the aforementioned 
questions, leave is granted. Since interpretation of 
the Constitution may be involved, notice under 
Order XXVII of the CPC may be issued to the 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan.  
2.   Needless to say that obviously the result 
of the election would be subject to the outcome of 
these proceedings.  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
19th July, 2018  
Not Approved For Reporting  
Nisar/*  
 