IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
                    (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, C.J.  
  Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
  Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
     
Constitution Petitions Nos.34 & 38 of 2022   
(Under Article 184(3) o f the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan. ) 
 
Rana Tahir Saleem     …Petitioner  in Const.P.34/2022  
Muhammad Javaid     …Petitioner  in Const.P.38/2022  
 
        Versus  
Province of Punjab thr. Chief Secy.  
to the Govt. of Punjab, Lahore and others…Re spondents in Const.P.34/2022  
Federation of Pakistan thr. Secretary  
Establishment, Islamabad and another   …Respondent s in Const.P.38/2022  
 
For the petitioner (s):  Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukat, ASC  
    (Via video -link, Lahore)  
 
     Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahza d, AOR  
    (in Const.P.34/2022)  
   
    Barrister Haris Azmat, ASC  
    (in Const.P.38/2022)  
     
For the respondent(s):  N. R.   
 
Date of hearing:   23.11.2022 
 
    O R D E R   
 
  Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Police force in a 
Province p rovides an essential service to the public : it includes, inter alia , 
maintenance of peace and order in society and prevention, detection and 
investigation of offences. The role of the Police force is critical for maintaining 
social stability and peace in t he society. For such purpose , a Police force that is 
independent, efficient and enjoys trust of the people promotes a healthy society . 
He submits that there are 36 districts in the Province of Punjab. During the last 
four years, each of the districts  has w itnessed transfer s of the DPO , who is the 
fulcrum of the police force administration and for the conduct of criminal Const. Petitions Nos.34 and 38 of 2022 (2).doc  2
investigati on in every district. The consolidated average tenure of service of all 
the DPOs during the last four years in all the districts  of Punjab is 5.86 months. 
On the other hand Article 15(2) of the Police Order, 2002 (“Police Order” ) 
provides for a tenure of three years for the post of DPO .  Article (15)(3) of the 
Police  Order allows early transfer of a DPO in case of inefficiency or 
ineffectiveness but with the concurrence of both the District Government Head 
and the District Public Service Safety Commission. The provincial government 
has failed to follow the statutory command and is in continuous breach of Article 
15 ibid. Likewise, t he petition shows that the average tenure of an Inspector 
General of Police in the Province of Punjab during the said period is 6.25 months . 
In this regard Article 12 of the Police Order prescribes  that the term of office of a 
Provincial Police Officer and  a Capital Police Officer shall be 3 years.  
2.  Learned counsel adds that the frequent transfer of the Police 
Officers in the Province of Punjab has occurred  on account of political 
influence/intervention. He has highlighted the recent instance of transfe r of the 
lady DPO in District Layyah  allegedly on account of political intervention. 
Frequent transfer of administrative heads of the police force of Districts, 
Metropolitan Cit ies and the Provinces affects the command  structure of the force 
and its capabi lity to effectively render public service in accordance with the law. 
Resultantly, the performance of the criminal justice system is diminished thereby 
injury the quality of life of the ordinary citizen. Moreover, insecurity of tenure 
leads to a tendency a mong police officers to seek political patronage for securing 
or retaining the important posts which in  turn worsens the service fibre .  
3.  Learned counsel has explained that one of the Provinces , namely , 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa has implemented the Police Orde r faithfully . The police 
force in that Province is therefore credited to be independent and fair in the 
performance of its dut ies in comparison to their counterparts in the other 
Provinces. He adds that the police force in the Province of Balochistan , desp ite Const. Petitions Nos.34 and 38 of 2022 (2).doc  3
difficult circumstances , also enjoys public support and respect of the public 
because the officers face lesser political interference . However, he states that the 
situation in the Province of Punjab is different . For the enforcement of the 
fundamental rights of the people and of the law as laid down in the Police Order, 
the provincial government is liable to account.  
4.  The issue in hand concerns  the enforcement of citizens’ 
fundamental right  of life and liberty quite apart from the lawful enforcement of 
the Police Order in the Province . In the above facts  the conditions of Article 
184(3) are duly complied.  
5.  The police force cannot be made an instrument for the promotion of 
vested/elite interests. Integrity, independence and trustworthiness are cruc ial 
attribute s of the Police  force for ensuring peace in and smooth  functioning of the 
society. To secur e such condition s is a priority for the Police force in the entire 
country. In the first instance, notice be issued to the Provincial Police Officers 
and Home Secretaries of the governments in all the Provinces and the ICT 
administration. They shall through their respective officers furnish data for the 
last eight years on the criteria and pattern tabulated in the petition. The Province 
of Punjab shall al so file its reply to the allegations made in this petition . Needful 
be done within two weeks. Re -list in the week commencing 12.12.2022.  
Constitution Petition No.38 of 2022  
  Learned counsel shall further prepare himself on the questions 
posed to him duri ng the hearing. Re -list. 
 
                         Chief Justice   
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD.  
23rd November, 2022  
M. Azhar Malik +Naseer  