SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Larger Bench  - II: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Civil Petitions No.167 -P and  391/2022  
(Against the judgment dated 18.12.2021 passed by Khybeer Pakhtunkhwa  
Subordinate Judiciary Service Tribunal in Service Appeal No.06 -P of 2021)  
 
Syed Asghar Ali Shah                 (in C.P. 167-P/2022 ) 
Muhammad Younas Khan           (in C.P. 391/2022 )  
 
....Petitioners  
Versus  
Kaleem Arshad and others             (in both cases )  
….Respondents  
For the petitioners:  
  In-person.  (in C.P.167-P/2022 ) 
Hafiz S. A. Rehman, Sr. ASC.  (in C.P. 391/2022 ) 
 
For the respondents:  
  Syed Hamid Ali Shah, ASC. 
Syed Rafaqat H. Shah, AOR.  
(in C.P. 391/2022 ) 
 
Mr. Hasan Nawaz Makhdoom, Addl. AGP.  
Ch. Amir Rehman, Addl. AGP.  
Mr. Ayyaz Shoukat, AG (Islamabad)  
Mr. Khalid Ishaq, AG (Punjab)  
Mr. Sanaullah Zahid, Addl. AG (Punjab)  
Mr. Baleeghuzzaman, Addl. AG (Punjab)  
Malik Waseem Mumtaz, Addl. AG (Punjab)  
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Addl. AG (KP)  
Mr. M. Ayyaz Khan Swati, Addl. AG (Balochistan)  
Barrister Zeeshan Adhi, Addl. AG (Sindh)  
 
Date of Hearing:   15 January 2024  
 
ORDER  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J . Petitioners seek leave to appeal  under Article 
212(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(“Constitution”) against the judgment  of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
Subordinate Judiciary Tribunal (“Tribunal”) , dated 18.12.2021 , whereby 
the issue of seniority of respondent No.1 appointed as Additional District 
and Sessions Judge from the selection process of the year 20 01 was 
considered and decided  in terms of Rule 10(a) of the Khyber CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 2 
 
Pakhtunkhwa Judicial Service  Rules 20011 read with Section 8(3) of the 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Civil Servants  Act 1973 , and his seniority was 
fixed along with his batchmates above the petitioners who were 
appointed from the selection process of the years 2002 and 2003 .  
2. Learned counsel for respondent No.1, in the course of hearing of 
the petitions before a regular Bench of this Court , raised a preliminary 
objection regarding the mainta inability of these petitions  for leave to 
appeal  under Article 212(3) of the Constitution  on the basis of the law 
declared by this Court in Gomal,2 which held that “no appeal lies to this 
Court in terms of  Article 212(3) against the decision of a Tribunal created 
by a Provincial law to which the proviso to clause (2) has not been 
applied .”3 Admittedly , there is no federal law that extends c lause (2) to 
the Tribunal in terms of the said proviso. The question of maintainability , 
raised by the learned counsel, entailed  the interpretation of Article 212 of 
the Constitution . Under Section 4 of  the Supreme Court (Practice  and 
Procedure) Act, 2023 (“Act of  2023”) i f any matter involv es interpretation  
of a constitutional provision , the Committee4 is to constitute a Bench 
comprising not less than five Judges of the Supreme Court to hear the 
matter. The regular Bench  of this Court , therefore,  referred the matter to 
the Committee for  constitution of the larger Bench in accordance with 
Section 4 of th e Act of  2023 , on 09. 01.2024 . Hence , this Bench. On the 
last date of hearing , this Bench issued fresh n otices under Ord er XXVII -
A, CPC to the Attorney -General for Pakistan and Advocate -General, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, as well as  Advocate s-General of other provinces .    
Reconsideration of Gomal and the maintainability of the petitions for leave 
to appeal  under Article 212 (3) of the Constitution.  
3. First, we  take up the question of maintainability of the instant 
petitions for leave  to appeal. The question raised in Gomal  was whether 
an appeal lies to the Supreme Court under Article 212(3) against an 
order of a Tribunal created by a Provincial law to which the proviso to 
Clause (2) of the Article 212 has not been made applicable. Gomal  
answered this in the negative  by holding that  no appeal lies to this Court 
                                                
1 Or Rule 9(1)(a) of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Senior Judicial Officers (Terms & Conditions of Service) Rule s, 1979 
(since repealed by Rule 14 of the Rules, 2001)  
2 Dean / Chief Executive, Gomal Medical College, Medical Teaching Institution, D.I. Khan v. Muhammad A rmaghan 
Khan,  PLD 2023 SC 190.  
3 Para 20 ibid  
4 Constituted under the Act, 2023.  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 3 
 
in terms  of Article 212(3) against the decision of a Tribunal created by a 
Provincial  law to which  the proviso to Clause (2) has not been applied. 
Gomal  went ahead to direct that a ll the pending petitions or appeals,  
being not maintainable , were to be returned  forthwith by the Office and 
that no such leave petitions were to be entertained in future  except 
matters regarded as past and closed or reserved or part heard, subject to 
the direction of the Bench concerned , and matters  heard under the 
direction of the Hon’ble Chief Justice .5  
4. In Gomal, the fact s were that an employee of Gomal Medical 
College (“College”) upon being terminated from service filed an appea l 
before the Appellate Tribunal  established under the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Medical Teaching Institution Reforms Act, 20156 (“Reforms 
Act”). The said appeal was allowed,  and the employee was directed to be 
reinstated in service with back benefits. Against this order of 
reinstatement,  the College preferred a petition for leave to appeal  under 
Article 212(3) of the C onstitution before this Court. In this background , 
the above question regarding the maintainability of the petition for leave 
to appeal before this Court under Article 212(3) arose.  
5. In Gomal , a two-member  Bench of this Court held that the appeal 
arising from the decision of a Provincial Tribunal constituted under 
Article 212(1)(a) are not maintainable before this Court under Art icle 
212(3) unless the Federal Legislature extend s the provision of c lause (2) 
of Article 212 to the said Provincial Tribunal through a Federal Act. This 
Court in Gomal  first identified the principle and then proceeded to 
interpret Article 212 in the light  of the said principle. According to 
Gomal , the principle is that “it is only the Parliament that can (if at all) 
enact legislation that affects or acts upon the  jurisdiction of this Court. 
The Provinces have no such legislative competence .”7 Taking this further, 
Gomal  reasoned that jurisdiction can only be conferred on this Court 
through the federal legislature in terms of entry No. 55 of the Federal 
Legislative List of the Constitution and that the  provincial legislature 
while establishing a  Provincial Tribunal cannot confer jurisdiction of 
                                                
5 See para 20 a,b,c & d of Goma l 
6 As a matter of background Khyber Pakhtun khwa Medical Teaching Institution Reforms Act, 2015 was enacted and in 
the year 2020 through an amendment in the said Act an Appellate Tribunal was established in terms of  Article 
212(1)(a) of the Constitution.   
7 Para 15 of Gomal  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 4 
 
appeal on this Court, unless and until effect is given to proviso to Art icle 
212(2) of the Constitution through an Act of Parliament. According to 
Gomal,  clause (3) of Article 212 could only be ‘activated ’ through proviso 
to clause (2) which formed the  necessary “bridge” connecting c lause (2) 
and (3) of Article 212 and only under the cover of an Act of Parliament 
could the door to this Court be opened  under Article 212(3) . Gomal  went 
ahead to hold that if t he Provincial Assembly does not wish to follow this 
route or Parliament refuses to enact the enabling legislation in terms of 
the proviso, then the door to this Court remains shut.  And w hen clause 
(2) does not apply , the jurisdiction of the other courts, w hich in practical 
terms would mean recourse to the High Court under Article 199, would 
remain open, holding clause  (2) and its proviso the gateway to clause (3).  
6. We have heard the learned counsel fo r respondent No.1, the 
Attorney -General and the Advoca tes-General of all the Provinces and ICT.  
All8 of them  argued  that Article 212(3) is a stand -alone provision and 
decision of the Provincial Tribunals established under Article 212(1) can 
be appealed before the Supreme Court. They also contended that Article 
212(2) is an “ouster clause ” that keeps the  other courts away in matters 
that fall within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and do not in a ny manner 
confer any additional jurisdiction on the Provincial Tribunal s, hence even 
if clause (2) is not made applicable to the Provincial Tribunals 
established under Article 212(1),  the Provincial Tribunals under Article 
212(1) still continue to exist and function , their jurisdiction is not 
affected and the appellate jurisdiction conferred by the Constitution on 
this Court against any decision of the Provincial Tribunal s under Article 
212(3)  remains intact . Mr. Amir Rehman, Additional -Attorney General f or 
Pakista n explained that the object of c lause (2) of Article 212 is to leave 
the option of invoking the ouster clause with the Provinces , respecting 
their provincial autonomy under our  federal scheme. He added that 
clause  (2) does not confer jurisdiction  as understood in Gomal  but simply 
provides for an ouster clause, keeping away other courts from taking up 
matters falling under the jurisdiction of the Provincial Administrative 
Tribunals.  If the proviso to c lause (2) is not invoked, only the ouster 
clause is not available in a Province, which neither affects the 
                                                
8 Except the Advocate -General Sind who took a novel argument that both the remedies under Article 199 and under 
Article 212(3) are available, however, he failed to substantiate his point.  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 5 
 
jurisdiction of the Provincial Administrative Tribunals nor the appellate 
jurisdiction of this Court against the decisions of these Administrative 
Tribunals under c lause (3). We have noticed that the arguments of the 
law officers before us were similar to the ones submitted by the then law 
officers before the two-member  Bench in Gomal . 
7. During the course of hearing in Gomal, it was pointed out by the  
Advocate -General, KPK that the interpretation of Article 212 in this case 
will also apply to  Khyber Pukhtunkwa Subordinate Judiciary Service 
Tribunal Act, 1991, as decisions from the said Tribunal are also 
challenged through leave to appeal before this Court under Article 
212(3). This submission was acknowledged by the Bench and therefore 
notices were issued to Advocates -General of all the Provinces .9 Gomal,  
therefore, while interpreting Article 212 , had considered its impact  on all 
the provincial laws r elating to the Tribunals established in respect of the 
terms and conditions of service of the members of the  subordinate 
judiciary.   
8.  In order to better understand Gomal , we have gone through  Article 
212 of the Constitution, which is reproduced  hereunder, for ready 
reference: - 
Administrative Courts and Tribunals  
212(1) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the appropriate 
Legislature may by Act provide for the establishment of one or more 
Administrative Courts or Tribunals to exercise  exclusive jurisdiction in 
respect of  
 
(a)  matters relating to the terms and conditions of persons who are 
or have been in the service of Pakistan, including disciplinary 
matters;  
(b)  matters relating to claims arising from tortious acts of 
Government, o r any person in the service of Pakistan, or of any 
local or other authority empowered by law to levy any tax or cess 
and any servant of such authority acting in the discharge of his 
duties as such servant; or  
(c)  matters relating to the acquisition, admin istration and disposal of 
any property which is deemed to be enemy property under any 
law. 
 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, where any 
Administrative Court or Tribunal is established under clause (1), no 
other court shall grant an inju nction, make any order or entertain any 
proceedings in respect of any matter to which the jurisdiction of such 
Administrative Court or Tribunal extends and all proceedings in respect 
of any such matter which may be pending before such other court 
immediate ly before the establishment of the Administrative Court or 
Tribunal other than an appeal pending before the Supreme Court, shall 
abate on such establishment:  
 
                                                
9 Para 6 of Gomal  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 6 
 
 Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to an 
Administrative Court or Tribun al established under an Act of a Provincial 
Assembly unless, at the request of that Assembly made in the form of a 
resolution, Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) by law extends the provisions to 
such a Court or Tribunal.  
 
(3) An appeal to the Supreme Court from a judgment, decree, order 
or sentence of an Administrative Court or Tribunal shall lie only if the 
Supreme Court, being satisfied that the case involves a substantial 
question of law of public importance, grants leave to appeal.  
Article 212, starts with a non-obstante c lause and has three parts: (i) 
clause (1) empowers the appropriate legislature to establish 
Administrative Tribunals with exclusive jurisdiction over specif ic subject 
matters provided in clauses (a), (b) and (c); (ii) c lause (2) does two thin gs, 
it provides for an “ouster clause ”, excluding the jurisdiction of other 
courts in matters falling under the jurisdiction of the Administrative 
Tribunals under c lause (1) , and an “abatement clause”, abating any 
proceedings in respect of any such matter pending before any other court 
except the Supreme Court . The proviso to c lause (2) extends the “ouster  
clause” in c lause (2) to the Provincial Administrative Tribunals 
established under c lause (1) only if on the request of the Provincial 
Assembly through a  resolution, c lause(  2) is extended to a Provincial 
Tribunal through an Act of Parliament;  and (iii) under c lause (3) an 
appeal  by leave  is provided to the Supreme Court against the decisions of 
these Administrative Tribunals, if  they involve a substantia l question of 
law of public importance.  
9. Article 212 (1) has a non-obstante  clause , i.e., “Notwithstanding 
hereinbefore contained ”, that overrid es other provisions of the 
Constitution, in particular , Article 142,10 which vests exclusive power in 
the federal legislature to make laws with respect to any matter in  the 
Federal Legislative List  and concurrent power in the federal and 
provincial legislatures to make laws only with respect to criminal law, 
criminal procedu re and evidence . Article 212(1) authorizes and allows the 
appropriate legislature s, both federal and provincial,  to establish 
Administrative  Tribunals with exclusive jurisdiction for dealing with 
specific subject matter s as provided in c lauses (a), (b) and (c) thereof . 
Federal legislature might not  otherwise possess legislative competence 
under the Federal Legislative List , or under the concurrent power 
mentioned in Article 142, to establish these Administrative Tribunals 
                                                
10  Article 142 also begins with the phrase:  “Subject to the Constitution”  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 7 
 
regarding su bject matters enumerated under c lauses (a) , (b) and (c) of 
Article 212(1);  however, Article 212(1) of the Constitution empowers both 
the federal and provincial legislature s to establish such Administrative 
Tribunals  over and above the permissible legislative competence under  
Article 142 and the Federal Legislative List.  This unique legislative power 
of the provincial and federal legislatures to establish Administrative 
Tribunals under Article 212 with specialized subject matter and a 
dedicated forum of appeal , i.e., the Supreme Court,  is the significance of 
the non-obstante  clause  that enables Article 212 to override the regular 
constitutional regime.    
10. Clause (2) of Article 212  also contains a non-obstante  clause , which 
does two things: first, it  ousts the jurisdiction of all other courts vested in 
them in terms of Article 175 to deal with matters covered under the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the Administrative Tribunals  established under 
Article 212(1) ; and second,  it provides that any such matter pending 
before any other court shall abate, excluding matters  pending before the 
Supreme Court. The proviso to clause  (2) further provides that the said 
ouster clause will come into effect for the Provincial Tribunals only if on 
the resolution of th e Provincial Assembly the Parliament  passes a n Act, 
which extends the provisions of clause  (2) to such a Tribunal. Such a 
Federal Law was once enacted  in 1974 titled,  the Provincial Service 
Tribunals (Extension of Provisions of the Constitution) Act, 1974  and 
admittedly there is no such law that extends to the Provincial Tribunal in 
question.  
11. Clause (2) of Article 212 is, in our opinion,  merely an ouster clause 
and not a jurisdiction clause. In case of Federal Tribunals, it provides 
that no other court can take jurisdiction over any matter which falls 
under the subject  matter of the Administrative Tribunal established 
under Article  212(1).  If clause (2) has not been made  applicable to a 
Provincial Tribunal,  it at best  means that there are  other forums also 
available to redress the grievance of the officer s, e.g., the High Court 
under Article 199 or the Civil Court s under Section 9 of the Civil of 
Procedure Code, 1908 . In the absence of c lause (2), all the judicial 
forums in a Province have concurrent jurisdiction along with the 
Provincial Administrative Tribunal. Once a civil servant invokes the 
jurisdiction of the Provincial Tribunal, the remedy of an appeal  by leave  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 8 
 
against any decision of the Provincial Tribunal before this Court becomes  
alive. Remedy of appeal under c lause (3) will not be available if the civil 
servant approaches  the High Court or the Civil Court for the redressal of 
his grievance.  Applicability of c lause (2) to a Provincial Tribunal is totally 
insignificant as it has no  effect on the remedy  of appeal against the 
decision of the Provincial Tribunal be fore this Court  which is  ensured 
under c lause (3) . 
12. Gomal repeatedly  lays stress on clause ( 2) and its proviso to sa y 
that unless the provision of c lause (2) is made applicable to a Provincial 
Tribunal, the remedy of appeal under c lause  (3) before this Court is not 
available against  any decision of a Provincial Tribunal. This line of 
reasoning is based on the central principle fo rmulated  in Gomal ; that 
only federal le gislature  can vest jurisdiction  in the Supreme  Court under 
the Constitution (entry 55 of the Federal Legislative List) and therefore 
unless th ere is  an Act of Parliament  extending c lause (2) to a Provincial 
Tribunal , right to  appeal is not  available to this Court under clause  (3). 
This line of reasoning is, with re spect , flawed  as Gomal  fails to appreciate 
the clear and direct provision of the Constitution , i.e. clause (3) of Article 
212, and instead places reliance on the legislative competence to  enact a 
sub-constitutional law under the Constitution. While Gomal  is right 
when it reasons that the appellate jurisdiction can only be conferred 
upon the Supreme Court by federal legislature under entry 55 of the 
Federal Legislative List and  not by the provincial legislature , it utterly 
fails to appreciate that it is the non-obstante  provision of Article 212 of 
the Constitution itself  that is allowing appeal by leave from a P rovincial 
Administrative Tribunal  to the Supreme Court . The “principle” 
enunciated in Gomal , that “ it is only the Parliament that can (if at all) 
enact legislation that acts upon or affects  the jurisdiction of this Court[;] 
[t]he provincial assemblies cannot do so” , has little significance once the 
Constitution  itself has conferred appellate jurisdiction on the Supreme 
Court against matters arising fro m a Tribunal constituted under Article 
212(1) (a). Even  otherwise, the foundation al premise of Gomal  that only 
federal legislature can vest jurisdiction  in this Court seems to have no 
nexus or co -relation with c lause (2) which is simply an ouster clause. It 
is not as if the act of the Parliament under the proviso to  clause (2) 
converts the Provincial Tribunal into a Federal Tribunal, or the provincial CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 9 
 
legislation into federal legislation, it simply ousts other courts from 
exercising jurisdiction in matters covered by a Provincial Tribunal.   
13. Clause (3) is the third part of Article  212, which provides than an 
appeal  shall lie to the Supreme  Court from a judgement, decree order or 
sentence of the Administrative Tribunal, and the Supreme Court shall 
grant leave if the Supreme Cou rt is satisfied that a substantial question 
of law of public importance arises in the case. Clause (3) has no co -
relation whatsoever with the ouster clause of clause (2). Whether a 
Provincial Tribunal enjoys the ouster clause or not , does not affect the 
appellate jurisdiction of this Court. Clause (3) is independently connected 
with all the administrative Tribunals, inc luding Provincial Tribunals, 
established under Article 212(1). It is once again reiterated that the 
appeal to the Supreme Court is available against orders of both the 
Federal and Provincial  Administrative Tribunal s by a  special 
constitutional scheme  provided under Article 212 , which due to the non -
obstante clause is over and above any sub -constitutional legislation 
under the regular constitutional scheme.  Gomal , with respect , overlooks 
this important distinction and proceeds to assess the maintainabi lity of 
appeal before the Supreme  Court under Article 212(3) through a sub -
constitutional lens. If there were no Article  212(3), Gomal  would have 
been right in holding that only federal legislature can confer jurisdiction 
on the Supreme Court and not the provincial  legislature,  but the 
provincial legislature (or for that matter even the federal legislature) has 
not conferred th e right of appeal on this Court;  it is the Constitution 
itself that has done so  under Article 212(3). It is therefore difficult f or us 
to understand how Gomal  holds that clause  (2) is the gateway to clause  
(3), when we find no such co -relation  between the two clauses. The view 
in Gomal  that unless there is an Act of the Parliam ent in terms of the 
proviso to c lause (2) , the Supreme Court cannot sit over the decisions  of 
the Provincial Tribunal  in appeal,  in our view and  with due respect , is 
erroneous and  deconstructs the unique constitutional scheme of 
establishing Administrative Tribunals under Article 212 , which grant s an 
appellate remedy  to the Supreme Court from the decisions  of the all 
Admi nistrative  Tribunal s–federal and provincial .  
14. For the above reasons, the law declared in Gomal  that unless and 
until the proviso to Article 212(2) of the Constitution is activated, appeal CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 10 
 
against an order of a Provincial Tribunal is not available before this 
Court under Article 212(3) of the Constitution , and that in the absence of 
such a law passed  by the Parliament , the decision of a Tribunal 
established under the Provincial law is to be challenged under Article 
199 of the Constitution , is not correct  and is therefore overruled . 
Merits  of the present case   
15. Coming to the merits of the present case, briefly the facts are that 
vide letter dated  6th November 2000 issued by the Services & General 
Administration Department, Government of NWFP (as it then was), the 
provincial government wrote to the Registrar , Peshawar High Court for 
creation of 10 additional posts of Additional District and Sessions Judges 
to be filled on the recommendation of the Peshawar High Court under the 
erstwhile NWFP Senior Judicial Officers (Terms and Conditions of 
Service) Rules, 1979  (“Rules, 1979”) . Names were solicited for the above 
posts by the Peshawar High Court from the District & Session s Judges of 
KPK. One  such letter addressed to District & Sessions Judge, D.I.Khan, 
is dated 09.12.2000 . And in response , vide letter dated 21.02 .2001 
issued by the District & Sessions Judge, Dera Ismail Khan, name of 
respondent No.1 , namely , Kaleem Arshad Khan , advocate along  with one 
other was proposed from District D.I.K han for the post  of Additional 
District and Sessions Judge (“ ADJ”) in the selection process initiated by 
the High Court in the year 2001. Respondent N o.1 sat through the 
written examination and stood first in the said examination .11 He was 
called for an interview and appeared before the Selection Committee and 
stood at the top of the merit list.12 In pursuance to delegation notification 
dated 29.08.2001 issued under Section 5 of the N.W.F.P Civil Servants 
Act, 1973, the Chief Justice of Peshawar High Court appointed four 
Additional & Sessions Judges vide Notification dated 19th September  
2001;  however, respondent No.1 who stood first in the said selection 
process was denied appointment . It is also pointed out that Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Ju dicial Service Rules, 2001 (“Rules, 2001”) were 
introduced repealing Rules, 1979.    
 
                                                
11 Award List dated 21 April 2001.  
12 See para 4 of Kaleem Arshad Kha n v. Secretary to Gov ernment of N.W.F.P , 2004 PLC (CS)  1558  CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 11 
 
16. The respondent  No.1 challenged this non-selection before the 
Peshawar High Court, through a writ petition which was allowed vide 
judgment  dated 09.4.2004  [reported as Kaleem Arshad Khan v. Secretary 
to Government of NWFP  (2004 PLC (CS) 1558) ] with the direction  to 
appoint respondent No.1 as Additional & District Sessio ns Judge on the 
available seat. Thereafter , the petitioner was appointed vide Notification 
dated 22.02.2005. Thereafter, respondent  No.1 was granted seniority 
w.e.f. the date of his Notification and not from the date of Notification of 
the rest of his batchmates , i.e., 19. 09.2001,  who were appointed from the 
same selection process held in the year 2001.  The issue of seniority 
became more important because through selection process in the year 
2002 and 2003, several other ADJs were appointed, who wer e placed 
higher in seniority tha n the said respondent. After the denial of the 
seniority by the A dministration Committee of the Peshawar High Court  
vide letter dated 13.03.2021 , the respondent  No.1 challenged the same 
before the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Sub ordinate Judiciary Service Tribunal  
(“Tribunal”),  which through the impugned judgment dated 18.12.2021 , 
allowed his appeal and granted him seniority along  with his batchmates 
who were appointed from the same selection process held in 2001. The 
contention of the petitioners, who are admittedly appointed from the 
selection process of the years 2002 and 2003,  is that they are senior to 
respondent No.1  because the date of appointment of respondent No.1 is 
22.02.2005.  
17. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have 
examined the case record. Section 8(3) of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Civil 
Servants Act , 1973 provides that the seniority shall be determined in 
accordance with the Rules prescribed under the said Act and Rule 10(a) 
of the Rules, 2001 provides that persons selected for the service in the 
“earlier selection ” shall rank senior to the persons s elected in a “later 
selection. ” The date or year of selection process determines the seniority 
of an officer  as per Rule 10(a). Implied in the selection process is a group 
or batch  of candidates  who go through the selection process together and 
are subsequ ently selected and appointed together. Admittedly, 
respondent  No.1 was a part and parcel the selection process of the year 
2001 but he was denied appointment which he challenged before the 
High Court  and was successfully appointed on th e direction of the High CP No.167 -P/2022 , etc 12 
 
Court. His seniority under Rule 10(a) will be considered from the date of 
his selection process  along with his group and batchmates who were a 
part of the same selection process.  It is also admitted that the petitioners 
were appoint ed through the subsequent selecti on process of the years 
2002 and 2003 .  Hence, the petitioners cannot claim seniority over 
respondent No.1.  
18. We have gone through a well -reasoned judgment of the  Tribunal , 
which has elaborately attended to the issue of seniority and other 
ancillary questions relating to limitation and res judicata , which were not 
specifically raised before us.  We see no reason to take a view different 
from the view taken by the Tribunal  and also find that there is no 
substantial  question of law of public importance in this case that 
qualifies grant of leave  to appeal . Hence , these petitions are dismissed, 
and the seniority of respondent No.1 settled by the Tribunal is upheld.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While I  agree with the outcome and result I do not 
agree with the reasoning given, hence I have 
appended my separate opinion on maintainability.  
 
Sd/- 
(Ayesha A. Malik, J.)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad  
15 January 2024.  
Approved for reporting . 
Sadaqat.  Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge   Ayesha A. Malik, J. - I have read the opinion of the majority as 
authored by Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. and while I agree with the 
conclusion on the issue of maintainability, being that these Petitions 
are maintainable, I do not agree with the reasons given therein. So 
far as the reasons and conclusions drawn on the merit of the case, I 
have no disagreement.  
 
2. On the question of maintainability, the Gomal  case1 has been 
relied upon for its interpretation of Article 212 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 ( Constitution ). In the instant 
Petitions, the dispute em anates out of service appeals decided by the 
service tribunal for the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa against which Petitions 
under Article 212(3) of the Constitution have been filed before this 
Court. The relevant Provincial law is the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
Subordinate J udiciary Service Tribunal Act, 1991 ( SJST Act ) read 
with the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Judicial Service Rules, 2001 ( JS 
Rules ), and the issue is whether leave to appeal can be filed before 
this Court in terms of Article 212(3) of the Constitution given the 
decisi on rendered in the Gomal  case.  
 
3. The Gomal  judgment finds that where a Provincial law 
establishes Administrative Tribunals or Courts (herein after referred 
to as the Tribunal ) under Article 212(1) of the Constitution, it must 
first, by way of a resolution followed by an Act of Parliament, oust the 
jurisdiction of all other courts to grant exclusive jurisdiction to the 
Provincial Tribunal, and only then can the remedy of appeal  before 
this Court, as contained in Article 212(3) of the Constitution, be 
availed. The relevant law under consideration in the Gomal judgment 
was the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Medical Teaching Institutions Reforms 
Act, 2015 (Act) which provided for a medical tri bunal which heard 
appeals in service matters under the Act. The decision of the medical 
tribunal was challenged before this Court under Article 212(3) of the 
Constitution by way of a leave petition wherein the question of 
maintainability arose being whethe r a leave petition under Article 
212(3) of the Constitution is maintainable. The Gomal  judgment finds 
that where a Province establishes the Tribunal under Article 212(1) of 
the Constitution, then an appeal to the Supreme Court from a 
judgment, decree, orde r or sentence of the Tribunal shall lie to the 
                                                
1 Dean/Chief Executive, Gomal Medical College, Medical Teaching Institution, D.I. Khan v. Muhammad 
Armaghan Khan and others (PLD 2023 SC 190) ( Gomal ). CP. No.167 -P/2022, etc.                 - 2 - 
   Supreme Court, subject to the fulfilment of the requirements 
contained in the proviso  to Article 212(2) of the Constitution. The said 
judgment explains that the proviso  must be activated  for the remedy 
under A rticle 212(3) of the Constitution to be made available because 
the Provincial Legislature, on its own, cannot affect or act upon the 
jurisdiction of this Court without intervening Federal legislation. The 
Gomal  judgment refers to the proviso  to Article 212 (2) as the bridge  
between Sub -Articles (1) and (3) of Article 212 for the purposes of 
availing the constitutional remedy of an appeal before this Court. It 
further explains that if the Provincial Assembly does not activate the 
proviso  then the remedy of ap peal before this Court is not available to 
such Provincial Tribunal.  
 
4. Consequently, the question before us is whether these Leave to 
Appeal Petitions ( Petitions ) under Article 212(3) of the Constitution 
are maintainable given that these Petitions arise out of a judgment 
from a Provincial Tribunal, admittedly for which the requirements 
contained in the proviso to Article 212(2) have not been fulfilled.  
 
5. The re levant Article of the Constitution (Article 212) provides 
that the appropriate legislature may by an Act establish the Tribunal 
having exclusive jurisdiction in respect of the subject -matters 
described in Sub -Articles (a), (b) and (c) of Article 212(1) of the 
Constitution. So, Article 212(1) allows the competent legislature, be it 
Federal or Provincial, as the case may be, to establish the Tribunal 
with exclusive jurisdiction for the given subject -matters. Article 
212(1) starts with a non-obstante  clause notwithstanding anything 
hereinbefore contained  which addresses the constitutional authority 
with respect to legislative competence set out in Article 142 of the 
Constitution. It may be noted that Article 212(1) of the Constitution 
has an overriding effect o n Article 142 of the Constitution which 
provides that it is subject to the Constitution . Therefore, the 
constitutional command is that while legislative competence is 
derived from Article 142 of the Constitution, the Constitution itself 
grants competence t o the relevant legislature to establish the 
Tribunal on the given subject -matters under Article 212.  Effectively, 
Article 212(1) of the Constitution gives competence to the Federal and 
Provincial Legislatures to establish the Tribunal on the given subject -
matters such that the Tribunal has exclusive jurisdiction and Article CP. No.167 -P/2022, etc.                 - 3 - 
   212(3) further provides that an appeal to the Supreme Court from the 
judgment, decree, order or sentence of the Tribunal shall lie to the 
Supreme Court. This appeal under Article 212(3)  is not as of right but 
is subject to the satisfaction that a substantial question of law of 
public importance arises in the case.  
 
6. Article 212(2), on the other hand, provides that 
notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained , no other court can 
grant an injunction, or make any order, or entertain any proceeding 
in respect of any matter for which the Tribunal established under 
Article 212(1) has exclusive jurisdiction, and any pending matter 
before such other court shall abate. For the purposes of the  
Provincial Legislature, by way of a proviso , it states that the ouster of 
jurisdiction as explained in Article 212(2) of the Constitution shall 
not apply unless the Provincial Assembly, in the form of a resolution, 
requests for an Act of Parliament to ext end the provisions of Article 
212(2) to the Tribunal. Accordingly, Article 212(2) ousts the 
jurisdiction of all other courts for the purposes of the Tribunal under 
Article 212(1) established by Parliament and where the Provincial 
Assembly is concerned, it must by way of a resolution request for an 
Act of Parliament which will oust the jurisdiction of all other 
Provincial courts or tribunals. An example of this proviso  being 
activated is the Provincial Service Tribunals (Extension of Provisions 
of the Consti tution) Act, 1974 being a Federal law which extended the 
provisions of Article 212(2) of the Constitution to the Provincial 
Service Tribunals of Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and 
Sindh resulting thereby in a direct leave to appeal petition before  this 
Court under Article 212(3) of the Constitution.  
 
7. Hence, the question is what is the effect of this ouster of 
jurisdiction under Article 212(2) and whether it is mandatory for the 
proviso  contained therein to be activated in order for the leave to  
appeal to be filed before this Court. To my mind, Article 212(3) of the 
Constitution is the constitutional mandate which prescribes that 
leave to appeal before the Supreme Court for the Tribunal established 
under Article 212(1) of the Constitution can be filed directly, meaning 
thereby, the Constitution itself provides for the remedy of appeal 
before the Supreme Court. Both Sub -Articles (1) and (3) of Article 212 
of the Constitution are exceptions to the legislative authority CP. No.167 -P/2022, etc.                 - 4 - 
   contained in Article 142 of th e Constitution as the Constitution itself 
authorizes and permits the Federal and Provincial Legislature, 
irrespective of the authority given in Article 142 of the Constitution 
read with the Federal Legislative List ( FLL), to establish the Tribunal 
and to allow its leave to appeal directly before this Court. Article 
212(2) merely ousts the jurisdiction of other courts or fora. 
Resultantly, even though the Tribunal is established under Article 
212(1), the ouster of jurisdi ction of other courts is automatically 
triggered by Article 212(2) of the Constitution and with respect to 
federal courts but for the provincial courts it is necessary that the 
Provincial Assembly activate the proviso  to Article 212(2) of the 
Constitution.   In such case, the Tribunal will be an exclusive forum, 
which totally and completely ousts the jurisdiction of all other courts 
or fora with respect to the special subject -matters contained in Sub -
Articles (a), (b) and (c) of Article 212(1) of the Constit ution. However, 
if the proviso is not activated, meaning there is no resolution by the 
Provincial Legislature (followed by an Act of Parliament) the ouster of 
jurisdiction will not be triggered. Consequently, a litigant will have 
the option to avail its re medy before any other forum including the 
remedy before the Supreme Court.  
 
8. Gomal appears to read exclusivity  and ouster  as synonymous, 
because it relies on the principle that the Provincial Legislature 
cannot act upon the jurisdiction of this Court wi thout intervening 
Federal legislation, hence, in order for the Tribunal to have exclusive 
jurisdiction, the proviso  must be activated. This in turn means that if 
the proviso  is activated, then the exclusivity of the Tribunal will mean 
ouster of the jurisdi ction as well. However, to my understanding, 
exclusivity will not per se  oust the jurisdiction of other courts without 
an express provision stating so as exclusivity of jurisdiction does not 
imply the ouster of jurisdiction.  
 
9. For ouster of jurisdiction  to take effect an express provision is 
required which is precisely what Article 212(2) of the Constitution 
does. In other words, the proviso does not act as a bridge between 
Sub-Articles (1) and (3) of Article 212, rather it allows and empowers 
the Provin cial Legislature to decide whether, for the purposes of the 
establishment of the Provincial Tribunal, remedy should lie CP. No.167 -P/2022, etc.                 - 5 - 
   exclusively to the Supreme Court or, in the alternate, giving more 
options to the litigant.       
 
10. As far as the discussion of the m ajority opinion in the instant 
matter on Entry 55 of the FLL2, to my mind, and with great respect, 
is not relevant to the dispute at hand. The issue before us in this 
matter is simply whether the remedy of appeal as provided in Article 
212(3) of the Consti tution is available to the Petitioners. The answer 
to this question is in the affirmative as this remedy has been 
provided, specifically and categorically, by the Constitution itself, and 
not by way of any ordinary legislation. In my opinion, therefore, th ere 
is no issue pertaining to legislative competence under Entry 55 of the 
FLL. Consequently, the entire discussion as to Entry 55 of the FLL in 
the instant case, has no bearing or impact on the outcome of the 
issue of maintainability.  
 
11.  Furthermore, as to my understanding, even Gomal  discusses 
Entry 55 of the FLL in its Paragraph No. 14 in a specific and limited 
context with reference to the Interim Constitution, 1972 ( 1972 
Constitution ) as an explanation to the point that competence to 
make law confe rring additional jurisdiction on the Supreme Court 
lies only with Parliament, if at all, that too, to the extent and manner 
specified therein and further that the Provinces do not have 
legislative competence with regard to the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court. Thus with reference to this discussion, Gomal  highlights that 
the 1972 Constitution did not have a provision equivalent to Article 
212(3) of the existing Constitution and linked the legislative entry to 
Article 188 thereof. This provision of the 1972  Constitution has no 
equivalent in the present Constitution and it is for this reason that 
Gomal  has expressed its reservations as to Entry 55 of the FLL by 
using the words ‘if at all’ in parentheses, the import of which may 
have escaped the attention of t he majority’s opinion.  While 
discussing the present Constitution in Paragraph No. 15, Gomal  
stresses on the fact that the Provinces have no legislative competence 
                                                
2 Entry 55 of the Part -I in Fourth Schedule:  
 
‘55. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the 
matters in this List and, to such extent as is expressly authorized by or under the Constitution, 
the enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and the conferring thereon of 
supplemental powers.’  CP. No.167 -P/2022, etc.                 - 6 - 
   to enact legislation that affects or acts upon the jurisdiction of this 
Court, and hence, in this context, Gomal  considers the proviso to 
Article 212(2) as a bridge between Article 212(1) and (3) of the 
Constitution, meaning thereby Article 212(3) cannot be regarded as 
an independe nt standalone provision as it needs the proviso  to 
activate the exclusivity and ouster of jurisdiction. So the focus of 
Gomal  in fact is the issue of legislative competence of the Provincial 
legislature with respect to the jurisdiction of this Court.  
   
12.  Accordingly, as Article 212(1) of the Constitution itself confers 
jurisdiction on the Provincial Legislature to establish the Provincial 
Tribunal under Article 212(1), the Constitution also confers appellate 
jurisdiction to the Supreme Court from a jud gment, decree, order or 
sentence of the said Provincial Tribunal, the remedy of leave to 
appeal before the Supreme Court is available against the decision of 
the KPK Service Tribunal established under Article 212(1) since these 
Petitions are with reference  to the appeal under Section 5 of the SJST 
Act from an order of the said Service Tribunal.  
 
13. Accordingly, these Petitions under Article 212(3) of the 
Constitution are maintainable.      
 
 
 
              JUDGE  
 
 
Approved for Reporting  
Azmat / Kehar Khan  
 
 