IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Review Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:   
 Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
 Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
 Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmed Malik  
 Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
 Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
 Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Sh ah 
 Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
 Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
 Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.296 OF 2020 a/w  
Civil Misc. Application No.1243 of 2021 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.297 OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.298 OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.299 OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.300 OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.301 OF 2020 &  
 
C.M.A. NO.4533 OF 2020 IN CRP NO.NIL OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.308 OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIE W PETITION NO.309 OF 2020 &  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.509 OF 2020   
 
 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.296/2020)  
 
Sindh High Court Bar Association  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.297/2020)  
 
Mrs. Sarina Isa  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.298/2020)  
 
Supreme Court Bar Association  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.299/2020)  
 
Muhammad Asif Reki President Quetta Bar 
Association  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.300/2020)  
 
Shahnawaz Ismail, VC Punjab Bar Council  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.301/2020)  
 
Balochistan Bar Council  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.308/2020)  
 
Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists  … Petitioner(s)  
(in CRP No.309/2020)  
 
  CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 2 -
Abid Hassan Minto  … Applicant(s)  
(in CMA No.4533/2020  
in CRP No.Nil of 2020)  
 
Pakistan Bar Council thr. VC  … Applicant(s)  
(in CRP No.509 of 2020)  
Versus  
The President of Pakistan and others  … Respondent(s)  
(in CRP 296 -3012 & 308 -
309 & CRP 509 of 2020)  
 
The Supreme Judicial Council thr. its Secretary 
and others   … Respondent(s)  
(in CMA No.4533 of 2020)  
 
 
For the Petitioner( s) : Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa (In -
person)  
(in CRP. 296/2020)  
 
  Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
(through Vide Link from Karachi).  
(in CRP.297 & 309/2020)  
 
Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa (In -person)  
(in CRP.298/2020)  
 
Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Sh ah, AOR 
(in CRP.299, 300, 301 & 308/2020)  
 
Nemo  
(in CMA.4533/2020)  
 
Nemo  
(in CRP.509/2020)  
 
For Federation of Pak.  : Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP.  
   
For President, PM & 
AGP.  : Mr. Sohail Mahmood, Addl. AGP.  
   
Date of Hearing:   02.03.2021; 03.03.2021,  
08.03.2021; 17.03.2021 & 
18.03.2021  
 
 * * * * *   
    JUDGMENT:   
 
Munib Akhtar, J. : The learned petitioner in CRP 296/2020 filed 
CMA 1243/2021  (“CMA”)  seeking the following relief:  
 
“Therefore, for the reasons stated above [in the CMA] this 
Hon’ble Cour t may be ple ased to: (a) direct the State -owned 
Pakistan Television Corporation (PTV) to broadcast live the 
proceedings of the petitioner’s case, (b) to direct the Pakistan 
Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) to issue 
written instructions to all private chan nels that they cannot 
be restrained in any manner whatsoever from broadcasting 
the proceedings and (c) to order live streaming of court 
proceedings.  CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 3 -
 
The prayer has been made in the best interest of 
justice. ” 
 
2. The CMA was  heard over  several dat es and was u ltimately  
dismissed by a majority of 6:4 on 13.04.2020, when the following 
short orders were made (reported as Justice Qazi Faez Isa and 
others v President of Pakistan and others  PLD 2021 SC 595):  
 
[per Umar Ata Bandial, Sajjad Ali Shah, Munib Akhtar, Qazi  
Muhammad Amin  Ahmed and Amin -ud-Din Khan, JJ. :] 
 
“For reasons to be recorded later, this Misc. Application is 
dismissed. However, the right of the people to have access to 
information in matters of public importance under Article 19 -
A of the C onstitution is recognized, the details and modalities 
of which are to be decided by the Full Court on the 
administrative side. ” 
 
[per Maqbool Baqar, Manzoor Ahme d Malik, Mazhar Alam 
Khan Miankhel and Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, JJ .:] 
 
“For the reasons to be rec orded later,  we dispose of  the 
miscellaneous application (CMA No.1243/2021) filed by the 
Petitioner in review petition (CRP No.296/2020) in the 
following terms:  
 
i) Article 19 -A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973 (“Constitution”) cr eates an obl igation on 
State institution, including the Judiciary, to take the 
necessary measures to ensure realization of the fundamental 
right of citizens to have access to information in matters of 
public importance. Cases under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, including review petitions and other matters 
arising therein, are matters of public importance, and the 
public has a right to know and see how proceedings in these 
cases are conducted and concluded by the Court. We, 
therefore, hold that Live St reaming  (audio and video) of Court 
hearings of these cases should be made available for 
information of the public through a link on the official website 
of this Court, and for this purpose the Registrar of this Court 
should take steps to provide for the re quisite technological 
infrastructure and make arrangements for necessary 
amendments in the Rules under Article 191 of the 
Constitution to regulate its practice and procedure in this 
regard;  
 
ii) Keeping in view the current state of technological 
infrastructure  availab le in this Court and the fact that the 
review petitions filed in the case are fixed for hearing, we 
direct the audio recording of the proceedings of the court 
hearings of the said review petitions to be made available to 
the public through a link o n the of ficial website of this Court. 
The Registrar of this Court shall ensure that the un -edited CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 4 -
audio recording of the proceedings of the court hearing of the 
review petitions is made available to the public on the official 
website of the Court on the sa me day s oon after the hearing 
and before the close of the working hours. ” 
 
[per Yahya Afridi, J.:]  
 
“For the reasons already recorded in my judgment delivered in 
Constitution Petition No.17 of 2019, the present Civil 
Miscellaneous Application No.1243 of 20 21 is di smissed, as 
the relief sought by the petitioner would “negate the very spirit 
of the oath taken by the petitioning Judge” . 
 
2. However, for the reasons to be recorded later, I find the 
right of the public to have access to live -streaming or audio -
video rec ording, written transcript or any other medium, of 
the court hearings in the proceedings of public importance, 
including those under Articles 184(3) and 186 of the 
Constitution, is their fundamental right under Article 19A of 
the Constitution. The Registra r of this Court is, therefore, 
directed to place the matter before the Full Court for 
appropriate steps as it deems fit, under Article 191 of the 
Constitution, to effectuate this fundamental right of the 
public.”  
 
 The Order of the Court was as fol lows:  
 
“By majority of 6 to 4 (Maqbool Baqar, J; Manzoor Ahmad 
Malik, J; Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel, J and Syed Mansoor 
Ali Shah, J dissenting), Civil Misc. Application No.1243 of 
2021 is dismissed.”  
 
3. The following are our reasons for dismissing the CMA.  
 
4. The learn ed petitioner, who appeared on his own behalf, 
anchored and seated his case in support of the CMA in the well 
known legal precept that justice must not  only be done, it should be 
seen to be done. As is well known, this fundamental rule, essential 
for the d ispensation of justice , was stated in the form in which it is 
best known by Lord Hewart, CJ , who  famously said in R v Sussex 
Justices ex parte McCarthy  [1924] 1 KB 256, [1923] EWHC KB 1 as 
follows: “ … a long line of cases shows that it is not merel y of som e 
importance but is of fundamental importance that justice should 
not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to 
be done ”. 
 
5. The learned petitioner began his submissions by drawing 
attention to Article IV of the Code of Conduct f ormulate d for Judges 
of the Supreme Court and the High Court s by the Supreme Judicial CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 5 -
Council under Article 209(8) of the Constitution, where express 
reference is made to the aforementioned rule  in the second 
paragraph . It was submitted that since the rule  lay at the heart of 
the code of conduct to which Judges had to adhere, it was vitally 
important that it be applied with vigor. The CMA was filed to ensure 
that justice should be seen to be done  in the instant case, i.e., the 
review petitions being heard b y the Co urt. It was submitted that it 
was important that the public at large should actually see justice 
being done, which could only be ensured by giving them access to 
the proceedings and hearings in terms as prayed for in the CMA.  In 
support of his case , the le arned petitioner gave a homely example , 
referring to his young granddaughter who, when asked whether she 
saw justice, replied that she only saw it when she came to the 
Court, or on TV. And, even though the courtroom was almost 
invariably packed on the days  that the review petitions were fixed 
for hearing, the learned petitioner submitted that that represented 
only a tiny sliver of the public . Even though the hearings were in 
open court to which members of the public  (including the press)  had 
access that was  not the same as the public at large having the 
opportunity to hear and see  the proceedings  for themselves . It was 
for that reason that relief was prayed for  as in the CMA. In support 
of his prayer, the learned petitioner , inter alia, referred to local and  
foreign case -law. In particular, he relied on two cases: National 
Director of Public Prosecutions  v. Media 24 Limited & others  [2017] 
ZASCA 97 decided by the Supreme Court of Appeal of South Africa  
(“NDPP ”) and Swapnil Tripathi v. Supreme Court of  India  AIR 2018 
SC 4806  (“Swapnil ”) decided by the Supreme Court of India.  
 
6. We intend no disrespect for not immediately engaging with the 
submissions made by the learned petitioner  in support of his 
application. The reason is that the learned Additional A ttorney 
General (“ AAG”) in reply raised a preliminary objection that needs to 
be considered first. It is only if the legal hurdle thrown up by this 
objection is crossed that there will be a need to consider in detail 
the submissions made by the learned pet itioner.    
 
7. The learned AAG opposed the application on two main 
grounds:  CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 6 -
a. The application was not maintainable as it ha d been filed in 
review jurisdiction under Article 188 of the Constitution, 
which by its  nature was limited; and  
b. There was no constitution al or st atutory right available which 
provide d for public broadcast and/or live streaming of 
proceedings of the Court.  
 
8. The preliminary issue as to maintainab ility was in the context 
of the main petitions being an invocation of the  review jurisdiction  of 
the Court . The learned AAG s ubmitted that to invoke the 
fundamental right of access to information under Article s 19 and/or  
19A of the Constitution (which plea sustain ed the CMA)  the proper 
course would  have been  for the  learned petitioner to file a petitio n 
under Article 184(3). In this regard, Order XXV I of the S upreme 
Court Rules, 1980 (“SCR”), which relates only to the review 
jurisdiction,  was referred to show that an application for 
enforcement of fundamental rights under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitut ion did not lie in terms thereof . Such petitions  
/applications are treated in the SCR under Order XXV and it was 
submitted that the two courses could not be conflated and 
intermingled. Therefore, it was submitted, the CMA was not 
maintainable and ought to be dismi ssed.  
 
9. In response to the preliminary objection, the learned 
petitioner relied on O. 33, R. 6  SCR. Th is well known rule relate s to 
the inherent powers of the Court and is in the following terms:  
 
“Nothing in these Rules shall be deemed to 
limit or otherwis e affect the inherent powers of 
the Court to make such orders as may be 
necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent 
abuse of the process of the Court.”  
 
The learned petitioner submitted  that the Court had ample 
powers under the afore -mentioned Rule to make an order of any 
nature which would further the “ ends of justice ” or “ prevent abuse 
of the process of the Court ”. He added that the transgressions and 
illegalities committed by the respondents in his case necessitated 
public broadcast and/or li ve strea ming of the review proceedings so 
that the public would become aware of the truth. He, therefore, CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 7 -
contended that the present case was a fit one for the Court to 
exercise its powers under Rule 6.  
 
10. We have carefully considered the preliminary objecti on and 
the reply thereto. Certainly, t he prayer made in the CMA, as 
candidly (and quite properly) accepted by the learned petitioner  
himself , is novel. As far as the records show n o such request has 
previously been made. In essence, the CMA seeks enforceme nt of 
two fundamental rights, namely, freedom of speech (Article 19) and 
right to information (Article 19A). While there is no cavil with the 
proposition that petitions filed to enforce fundamental rights are to 
be appreciated, it needs also to be ensured that the se are processed 
through proper channels. Procedural law has to be complied with ; 
otherwise , the ju dicial system will enter chaos.  Therefore, with 
respect, regardless of how (and not just  jurisprudentially)  important  
the claim put forward by a misc ellaneou s application may be, it 
cannot  be lost sight of that w hat were before the Court were 
petitions inviting the exercise of review jurisdiction under Article 
188. As has already been elaborated upon in other judgments and 
decisions (including those em anating from these very review 
petitions), t his jurisdiction is far more restricted in scope compared 
to the original jurisdiction exercis able under Article 184(3). In short: 
in review jurisdiction  the Court can only determine whether a 
material irregulari ty has b een committed in the judgment  under 
review  and, even  if the answer be in the affirmative,  it must further 
be shown that the irregularity has had a substantial effect on the 
outcome of the case . Reference may be made to the leading case of 
Mohamma d Amir Kha n v. Controller of Estate Duty  PLD 1962 SC 335 
at 340 . As is clear even on a bare perusal, the CMA, with respect, 
raises an altogether new prayer t hat has no nexus with the review 
jurisdiction of the Court.  
 
11. In contrast to the position when review jurisdic tion is being 
exercised , the Court, when treating a matter in i ts jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) , can pass any order of the nature mentioned in 
Article 199 if two requirements are satisfied: firstly, the case raises a 
question of public importan ce and s econdly, it is related to a 
violation of any fundamental right (s). (This is of course only a CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 8 -
summary statement of the jurisdiction, which has over the years 
developed a rich and complex jurisprudence. What has just been 
said must be read in the lig ht of th e relevant case law.)  However, 
what is relevant for present purposes is that  it is Article 184(3) , and 
not Article 188, that would be the proper vehicle for considering 
relief of the nature sought by, and through, the CMA. Even the case 
from the In dian jur isdiction cited by the learned petitioner (noted 
above) tends to show this . In Swapnil  the jurisdiction of the Indian 
Supreme Court was invoked under Article  32 of the ir Constitution 
(which can be treated as equivalent to our Article 184(3) ) for li ve 
strea ming of cases of constitutional importance having an impact on 
the public at large. Therefore, even on the basis of the case -law cited 
by the learned petitioner the CMA involv es adjudication of 
substantive law issues and, with respect, appears to b e wrongl y filed  
as a miscellaneous matter  in the review jurisdiction of the Court. In 
our view there fore there appears to be force in the preliminary 
objection  taken . 
 
12. As noted above, the learned petitioner sought to rely on O. 33, 
R. 6 to overcome the objection of maintainability . With respect, we 
are unable to agree that the hurdle can be crossed  in this manner.  
The said  Rule has no relevance to the facts of this case , in the 
context of the CMA . It can be invoked by t he Court to either further 
the “ends o f justic e” or to “ prevent abuse of the process of the 
Court ”. However, n either of these conditions is engaged in the 
present context. With respect, it cannot be that  the “ends of justice” 
will be defeated  or there will be an “abuse of the process of the 
Court” if the relief sought in the CMA is  not allow ed, i.e., public 
broadcast and/or live streaming of the review proceedings  is denied . 
The primary  reason put forward by the learned petitioner was his 
and his family’s constant public humiliation and degrada tion at the 
hands of the respondents. Now even if it be accept ed that the 
learne d petitioner’s reputation  (and that of his family)  has been 
tarnished by the acts of the respondents  in the manner as 
contended , no cogent reason was put forward as to how hear ings in 
the present matters,  held according to settled practice and time 
honored principles , would prevent the alleged negative publicity 
surrounding him from being dispelled. After all, the Court (including CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 9 -
of course this Bench ) sits, and  was sitting , as an “open court ”, a 
term which has been defined in Black’s Law Dictionary , (10th ed., at 
page 1263) as being a  “court session that the public is free to 
attend ”. This obvious point could not be denied and the learned 
petitioner very fairly conceded the same . Howeve r, his insistence 
was upon  the anxiety  that arose from the fact that even if the public 
was allowed to enter the courtroom, this access was subject to 
limitations such as space constraints ( only intensified with the 
advent of Covid -19). As a result , he sub mitted , the vast majority of 
the public would be excluded from observing the review hearings. 
This apprehension of the learned petitioner is, with respect, without 
force. For it to be accepted would mean that until the advent of 
present -day means o f commun ication and broadcast, which have 
only been around in the modern era, there have never been open 
and public hearings in the courts of law. What has  happen ed for 
many centuries  prior thereto  and is accepted as such even today all 
around the world —that is, t hat the open court system is quite 
sufficient to ensure transparency and openness in the judicial 
system and of court proceedings —would be cast in doubt, if not 
abandoned altogether. Such a result cannot, with respect, be 
countenanced on any view o f the ma tter. Furthermore, it is to be 
noted that the public , which is always welcome to sit in the open 
court proceedings, includes members of the press  (and also, which 
is a distinctly recent phenomenon, vloggers  and bloggers ). They  are 
free to witness C ourt pro ceedings and frequently do so.  Certainly, 
they appear to have attended in droves to witness the proceedings 
both in these review petitions and the proceedings in relation to the 
hearing of the petitions under Article 184(3) from which these 
petitio ns emana te. If therefore the learned petitioner’s primary aim 
was to disseminate his narrative to the public at large, this task can 
be easily performed , and has been duly performed all along  by the 
journalists  and vloggers /bloggers  who have throughout closely 
followed all the proceedings, including his arguments , in Court. 
Insofar as his expressed anxiety about incorrect reporting is 
concerned  that, with respect, shows little respect for the press and 
vloggers/bloggers and belittles their efforts and repor ting, wh ich is 
not warranted. In any case i t is an accusation ( whether stated 
expressly or impliedly) for which the Court can not provide a  remedy CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 10 -
unless  (which is altogether a different matter)  the reporting falls 
within the parameters of contempt as set o ut in Ar ticle 204 of the 
Constitution. No doubt any alleged misleading reporting o f Court 
proceedings (unfortunate as it may be  and as to which we record no 
finding whatsoever ) is of acute discomfiture to the party concerned. 
However, as has been said in the UK Co urt of Appeal  in R v Central 
Independent Television plc  [1994] 3 All ER 641  (per Hoffman LJ (as 
he then was) ): 
 
“ …Newspapers are sometimes irresponsible  
and their motives in a market economy cannot 
be expected to be unalloyed by considerations 
of commerci al advantage. And publication may  
cause  needless pain, distress and damage to 
individuals  or harm to other aspects of the 
public interest. But a freedom which is 
restricted to what judges think to be 
responsible or in the public interest is no 
freedom. Freedom means the right to publish 
things which government and judges, however 
well motivated, think should not be published. 
It means the right to say things which 'right -
thinking people' regard as dangerous or 
irresponsible . This freedom is subject only to 
clearly defined exceptions laid down by 
common law or statute… It cannot be too 
strongly emphasised that outside the 
established exceptions (or any new ones which 
Parliament may enact in accordance with its 
obligations under the convention) there i s no 
question of balancing freedom of speech 
against other interests. It is a trump card 
which always wins .” (emphasis supplied)  
 
 
13. In view of the above discussion, we therefore concluded that 
the preliminary objection taken by the learned AAG had to be 
sustained a nd, with respect,  the CMA dismissed as not 
maintainable , on account of being incompetent in the review 
jurisdiction of the Court.  
 
14. The foregoing is dispositive of the CMA. However, it would not 
be inappropriate to say something about the substantiv e law 
questions raised in the CMA, even if such be only on a tentative and 
provisional basis. We start with a basic premise: the judicial system 
should, administratively speaking, be alive and alert , and 
responsive,  to technological advances and changes th at can CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 11 -
enhance the transparency and openness of judicial proceedings. An 
approach that smacks of  Luddite thinking should be avoided. But at 
the same time  it should be kept in mind —and this is the corollary —
that one need not be dazzled and mesmerized by adv ances in  
technology. It must always be remembered that technology is merely 
a tool and an aid. It is, to use an old fashioned phrase, the servant 
and not the master. And, if one may borrow a phrase from a 
different context, simply because yes, we (technolo gically)  can, that 
does not mean that we , therefore , necessarily must.  This side of the 
coin—the corollary —is unfortunately often lost sight of in the 
razzmatazz of the Internet age. A sober and robust approach is 
much to be preferred.  
 
15. Having said that, l et us no netheless return to the basic 
premise: technological developments should be monitored  and 
appreciated,  to ensure that access to justice for litigants is 
constantly improving. Our dismissal  of the CMA should not 
therefore be construed as a n absolute  refusal  of public broadcast 
and/or live streaming of Court proceedings. Instead, it should be 
understood as an exercise in judicial restraint and caution. We are 
aware that judicial systems around the world are experimenting 
with cameras in the courtroom . Some ar e regularly broadcasting  
/live streaming their proceedings while others are participating in 
pilot projects. In the former category, we have the UK and Canadian 
Supreme Courts who have permitted live streaming of their cases 
since long (the links c an be fo und on their official websites). In the 
latter group, we have the State and Federal Courts of the USA, all of 
which are at varying stages in terms of allowing broadcasting of 
their hearings.  
 
16. We have already expressed the view that the relief sough t 
throug h the CMA is novel. As a result, there have been no judicial 
pronouncements by this Court on the merits and demerits of 
allowing public broadcast and/or live streaming of Court 
proceedings. However, the decision rendered by the Indian Supreme 
Court , noted above, provides insight into the factors which may be 
considered by a Court while deciding a petition seeking such relief , 
and the manner in which it is to be disposed of. The matter  in CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 12 -
Swapnil  was in essence a public interest litigation filed by a  group o f 
public-spirited persons who sought “ Supreme Court case 
proceedings of constitutional importance having an impact on the 
public at large or a large number of people to be live streamed in a 
manner that is easil y accessible for public viewing” and for 
“guidelines to be framed to enable the determination of exceptional 
cases that qualify for live streaming and to place those guidelines 
before the Full Court of this Court ”. The Court allowed the petition 
but emphasi zed the issues which had to be sorte d out be fore such 
live streaming could be permitted. A few of these are listed below for 
reference:  
a. How will the live streaming project be phased;  
b. In what categories of cases will live streaming not be 
permitted;  
c. What types of communications will not be streamed ; 
d. Would Judges/Court have power to disallow live streaming in 
the interests of justice;  
e. How would the identity of witnesses, accused and 
complainants who wished to remain anonymous be protected;  
f. What equipment would be used to live stream proceedi ngs; 
g. In what manner would live streaming be done;  
h. How much time lag will be provided during the live streaming 
to ensure that sensitive/confidential information is not 
revealed;  
i. How would the cameras be positioned; and  
j. Would the Court retain copyright ov er the r ecorded 
proceedings?  
 
17. A somewhat similar approach was taken in  NDPP , the other 
case noted above from South Africa . Although that matter was only 
concerned with the broadcast of criminal trials, the principles laid 
down appear to be of general appli cation. In that case the Court  
accepted that trial court proceedings c ould be televised but it did 
not set down any fixed rules to regulate such broadcast and instead 
left it to the discretion of each trial court to determine whether a 
case before it is fi t for li ve telecast. The Supreme Court  of Appeal  
also acknowledged that in allowing the broadcast of court CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 13 -
proceedings, the following stakeholders’ interests would need to be 
considered:  
a. The interests of the prosecuting authority, the accused and 
the publ ic to ho ld a trial that is fair and is seen to be fair;  
b. The interests of the media and the public in maintaining 
freedom of the press and in ensuring open justice;  
c. The interests of  the participants in the trial process; and  
d. The interests of the Court and the publ ic in maintaining the 
dignity and decorum in the administration of justice.  
 
18. It is significant that these judgments confirm that a decision 
on public broadcast and/or live streaming cannot be taken hastily. 
Instead, it is a matter which requires ca reful co nsideration of 
multiple factors and participation of the different stakeholders 
involved in the judicial  system. As a result, this exercise cannot be 
carried out on the judicial side but can only be deliberated upon on 
and be approved by the Court in its administrative manifestation. 
This is evident from the experience of the Indian Supreme Court  
which referred the matter of live streaming to the Chief Justice for 
further action. In fact, even in this Court similar matters have been 
determined by th e Full C ourt sitting on the administrative side , e.g., 
approval for setting up of video link s for hearing cases at the 
principal seat and the branch registries was given by the Full Court 
after an extensive discussion. This was followed by the constitution  
of an I T Committee which was tasked with examining the matter 
and recommending appropriate solutions. At no stage was the issue 
referred to in , or decided by , a judicial order.  In our view, there 
appears to be a certain overlap (both technologically and o therwise ) 
between granting permission for hearings through video link and for 
permitting public broadcast/live streaming of Court proceedings.  
 
19. Accordingly, keeping in view the evolving practice of the 
Courts around the world and acknowledging the benefit s of 
technology for the justice system, we refer the matter of public 
broadcast and live streaming of Court proceedings to the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice so that he may place it before the Full Court for 
deliberation and appropriate action.  
 CRP.296 of 2020, etc.  - 14 -
20. The foregoing are t he reaso ns for our short order , noted 
above,  in terms of which  the CMA  was dismissed . 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
       Judge  
 
         Judge  
 
 
       Judge  
 
         Judge  
 
Islamabad,  
13.04.2020. 
 
 
   NOT APPROVED FOR REPO RTING.   