IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
  Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
  Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
 
CRIMINAL M. A. NO. 641 OF  2023  IN  
CRIMINAL PETITION NO. NIL OF 2023  
(Application for exemption of Filing of Petition through Special 
Attorney in the matter of arrest of the petitioner from the premises 
of IHC) . 
 
Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi  …Petitioner(s)  
  
Versus  
The State and others  …Respondent(s)        
  
 
For the petitioner(s)  
 : Mr. Im ran Ahmed Khan  Niazi  
(in-person)  
(on Court’s call)  
Mr. Hami d Khan, Sr. ASC  
Raja Aamir Abbas, ASC  
Mr. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC  
Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC  
Mr. Salman Safdar, ASC  
Mr. Niaz ullah Niazi, ASC  
Mr. Ashfaq Ahmed Kh aral, ASC  
Mr. Muqt edir Akhtar Shabbir, ASC  
Mr. Waqar R ana, ASC  
   
For Federation  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, AGP  
a/w:Barr. Maryam Ali  Abbasi , Adv. 
Mr. Jav aid Iqbal Wains, Addl AG  
Mr. Rashdeen Nawaz Kasuri,  
Addl. AG  
   
For NAB  : Mr. Asghar Hussain, PG NAB  
Mr. Muzaffar, DPG  
Mr. M. Rafay Ma qsood,  
Sr. Spl. Pro secutor  
   
For ICT  : Mr. Jehangir Khan  Jadoo n, AG 
Dr. Akbar Nasir Khan , IGP  
   
Date of hearing   : 11.05.2023  at 05:45 pm 
 Crl.M.A. NO. 641 OF 2023  
  
   2
O R D E R  
 For the reasons  to be recorded later, this Misc. Application is  
allowed , Criminal Petit ion be numbered  accordingly  and the same is 
converted into  appeal and  disposed of in the following terms : 
i) The ma nner of execution  of the arrest warrant  issued by the 
Chairman , National Accountability B ureau ( NAB) dated 
01.05.2023 in the Al-Qadir Trust case within the premises of 
the Islama bad High Court  against petitioner  is invalid and 
unlawful . The execution of said warrant  violate d the 
petitioner ’s right  of access to justice and the sanctity and 
safety of the  Court  as he had already surrendered to the 
Court for seek ing judicial relief against the action taken by 
NAB in the Al-Qadir Trust cas e. In this regard, the 
fundamental rights of the  petitioner  under Articles 4, 9, 10 -A 
and 14 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
have been infringed.    
 
ii) The petitioner is directed to be pro duced before the  
Islamabad High Court tom orrow i.e. 12.05.2023 at 11:00 am  
for hearing of his Writ Petition filed to challenge the NAB 
action ag ainst him in the Al-Qadir Trust Case . The NAB 
authorities and the ICT Police shal l ensure fo olproof 
security to the petitioner until his production in the 
Islamabad High Court  in this regard .  
 
iii) The Registrar of t he Islam abad High Court is directed to 
place the  matter i.e. the Writ Petition before the Hon ’ble 
Chief Justice of the Islamabad High Court for constituti ng a 
Bench for hearing the same.  
 
iv) In order to ensure the security of the petitioner  until  his 
appear ance in  the High Court tomorrow i.e. 1 2.05.2023 at 
11:00 am , he shall remain in the premises where he is 
presently retained in police cust ody, namely, the Police 
Lines Guest House, H -11, Islamabad  (Police  Guest House ).  Crl.M.A. NO. 641 OF 2023  
  
   3
v) Whilst the petitioner is in the Police Guest House , he shall 
be entitled to meet up to 10 guest s, whose par ticulars shall 
be provided by him to the  concerned Police Office r, subject 
to security che ck by the police.  These persons shall be 
allowed to stay with the petitioner as long as desired by 
him.  
    
vi) This order sh all remain valid until  the production of the  
petitioner  before the  High Court in the aforementioned Writ 
Petition tomorrow i.e. 12.05.2023 at 1 1:00 am  and shall be 
subject to any order that is passed by the High Court.  
 
vii) This order shall not cause any prejudice to  the proceedings 
of investigation being conducted by  the NAB in th e matter 
of the Al-Qadir Trust .  
 
 
 
 
    
              
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
 
 
  
  Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
 
  
 
 Sd/- 
Judge  
Islamabad , 
11.05.2023 .   
 
 
   NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING .  
 
 
 
 
 