IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
Civil Petition No. 69-Q of 2015   
(Against the judgment dated 04.02.2015 passed by the High Court of 
Balochistan in C.P. No.631/2014 )  
 
 
 
Jamal Khan  
 
  …Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
 
 
Secretary Home Department  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner(s):  Mr. Abdus Saleem Ansari, ASC  
 Mr. Manzoor Ahmed Rehmani, ASC  
 
 
For the  Respondent(s) : N.R. 
 
Date of hearing:  09.09.2020.  
 
ORDER  
 
              Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Jamal Kha n, petitioner,  
is in contest over a piece of land with rival claimants ; they relied upon 
an arbitration agreement , purportedly executed way back on 2.2.2000; 
according to him , the instrument is fake as he n ever thumb marked 
any such agreement and, thus,   the respondents were liable to be 
prosecuted for forgery and fraud . After his failure with the local police, 
the petitioner approached a Justice of Peace albeit with no better fate ; 
a learned Division Bench of the High Court of Balochistan  declined to 
issue a direction for registration a criminal case on the ground that 
prima facie  the dispute inter se the parties was of civil nature as both 
sides were asserting their divergent claims on a common land . 
Inordi nate delay and availability of alternate remedies were other 
considerations that weighed with the High Court.  
2.   Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that 
accusation disclose d commission of a cognizable offence and as such a 
statutory duty was ca st upon the Station House Officer  to register a Civil Petition No.69 -Q of 2015  2
formal First Information Report  so as to investigate the same  and his 
failure was amenable to in terference.  
3.  Heard.  
4.  Be that as it may, at the center of controversy is a thumb 
impression on an arbitrat ion agreement being attributed to the 
petitioner, however, repudiated by him  as forge. Report submitted by 
the police does not support petitioner’s claim and there is consensus 
that both sides are locked in a dispute of civil nature . Against the 
above pecu liar backdrop, refusal by the Justice of Peace  to issue 
direction to the Station House Officer  and non -interference by the High 
Court therewith do not suffer from any jurisdictional error or flaw 
calling for intervention by this Court. Petition fails. Leav e declined.    
 
  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
9th September , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 