IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Bench -III: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
C.P.560 -K/2019  to C.P.5 89-K/2019  
(Against the consolidated judgment of High Court  of Sindh at Karachi   
dated 31.05.2019, passed in ITRAs  No.22 of 201 4, etc. ) 
 
Commissioner Inland Revenue Zone -IV, Karachi  (In all cases)  
     
...…. Petitioner (s) 
Versus  
M/s A.P. Moller Maersk  (In CP 560 -K to 573 -K of 2019)  
M/s Safmarine Container Line  (In CP 574 -K to 589 -K of 2019)  
….Respondent(s)  
For the petitioner (s): Dr. Shahnawaz, ASC.  
(In all cases)  Mr. Abdul Wahid, Addl. Commissioner, FBR.  
For the respondent(s):  Mr. Khalid Javed Khan, AS C 
    (In all cases)  (Through V.L. Karachi Registry)  
 
Date of hearing:  12.01.2024  
ORDER  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - The question before us is 
whether income arising from container detention charges ( “CDC” ), 
container service charges ( “CSC” ) and terminal handling charges 
(“THC” ) falls within the category of “profits from the operation of 
ships in international traffic”  in the context of double taxation 
conventions concluded between Pakistan and Denmark, as well as 
between Pakistan and Belgium .  
2. The resp ondents are non -resident companies, one 
incorporated in Denmark and the other in Belgium. They are 
involved in cargo shipping activities, conducting their business 
operations within Pakistan through the authorized agent, M/s 
Maersk Pakistan (Private) Limit ed. The respondents filed income tax 
returns, accounting for income derived from freight charges, CDC, 
CSC and THC. They claimed entitlement to tax benefits under Article 
8 of the Convention between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the 
Kingdom of Denma rk for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the 
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 2 
 
(“Pakistan -Denmark Convention” ), and similarly, under Article 8 of 
the Convention between the Kingdom of Belgium and the Islamic 
Republic of Pakist an for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the 
Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to Taxes on Income 
(“Pakistan -Belgium Convention” ), as the case may be.  
3. The Deputy Commissioner Inland Revenue disagreed 
with the aforementioned assessment, assert ing that CDC, CSC, and 
THC were not eligible under the beneficial provisions of the Pakistan -
Denmark Convention and the Pakistan -Belgium Convention. The 
Deputy Commissioner reasoned that these charges were not explicitly 
covered under Article 8 of either Convention, which addresses 
beneficial taxation in relation to “profits from the operation of ships 
in international traffic”. The respondents remained unsuccessful both 
in the appeal before the Commissioner Inland Revenue (Appeals) and 
in the subsequent ap peal before the Appellate Tribunal Inland 
Revenue. Nevertheless, the High Court, in its decision given in 
Income Tax References filed by the respondents, concluded that 
profits arising from CDC, CSC, and THC fell within the scope of the 
term “profits from the operation of ships in international traffic” as 
stipulated in Article 8 of the two Conventions. Consequently, such 
profits were deemed eligible for the benefit of favourable taxation. The 
Department is now seeking leave to appeal the High Court’s 
deter mination, challenging the inclusion of CDC, CSC, and THC 
under the umbrella of “profits from the operation of ships in 
international traffic” and their eligibility for beneficial taxation 
envisaged in Article 8 of the two Conventions.  
4. We have heard the  arguments of the learned counsel for 
the parties and have carefully gone through the record.  
5. The respondents, being tax residents of Denmark and 
Belgium, are entitled to the benefits and concessions under the 
Pakistan -Denmark Convention and the Pakista n-Belgium 
Convention, as the case may be, in line with the provisions of Section 
107 of the Income Tax Ordinance 2001 ( “Ordinance” ). Under 
subsection 2(c) of Section 107 of the Ordinance, the taxability of the 
respondents’ income is to be determined under the provisions 
contained in the two Conventions which override the Ordinance. 
These Conventions provide for allocation of taxing jurisdiction to the CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 3 
 
contracting States in respect of different heads of income. With 
respect to the income falling under the he ad of “profits from the 
operation of ships in international traffic” which is dealt with under 
Article 8 in both the Conventions, the allocation of jurisdiction to the 
contracting States is not identical. The Pakistan -Belgium Convention 
assigns the sole ri ght to tax profits from operating ships in 
international traffic to the residence State. In contrast, the Pakistan -
Denmark Convention permits the source State to tax these profits, 
but only to the extent derived from sources within that State, in 
accordance with its domestic law. However, this difference is not 
relevant for the purposes of the dispute before us. The issue before 
us, common to both the Conventions, relates to the nature of profits 
arising from CDC, CSC, and THC: whether the se profits fall within 
the scope of the term “profits from the operation of ships in 
international traffic” or not. If this question is decided in the 
affirmative, the respondents’ profits resulting from CDC, CSC, and 
THC will be subjected to taxing provis ions contained in Article 8 of 
the respective Conventions. Otherwise, profits resulting from CDC, 
CSC, and THC will not be considered as shipping income eligible to 
be dealt with under Article 8 of the two Conventions.    
6. Notably,  the matter at hand involves the interpretation of 
international tax conventions. Recently, this Court in Snamprogetti1 
emphasized the distinctiveness of international tax treaties, their 
specific interpretive framework, and the importance of equitable 
outcomes in cross -border taxation. International tax treaties, 
conventions or agreements, given their unique nature,  as held in 
Snamprogetti , require a distinct interpretive approach compared to 
the one used while interpreting domestic legislation.  These 
agree ments being international treaties are governed by the rules of 
interpretation outlined in the Vienna Convention on the Law of 
Treaties. Tax treaties differ from domestic tax laws in language, 
application, and purpose. These treaties are relieving in natur e and 
seek to avoid double taxation, while domestic tax law imposes tax in 
specific situations.  Tax treaties require a broad purposive 
interpretation, and their interpretation may be more liberal than 
domestic law. Treaty interpretation is a separate subje ct from 
                                                
1 Snamprogetti Engineering B.V. v Commissioner of Inland Revenue , 2023 SCMR 
1055.  CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 4 
 
statutory interpretation, accentuating the need to interpret tax 
treaties independently of domestic law. The role of a State in a 
bilateral agreement is more of implementing the terms of such 
agreement rather than that of interpreting the same and that too in a 
unilateral manner. Given that the primary purpose of tax treaties is 
to avoid and relieve double taxation through equitable and acceptable 
distribution of tax claims between the countries, it is important that 
the provisions of these treaties  are interpreted in a common and 
workable manner, taking into account international tax language, 
legal decisions of other countries, model treaties2, along with their 
commentaries, developed by the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development ( “OECD” )3 and the United Nations 
(“UN” )4, and scholarly academic works where appropriate.  
7. We see that the operation of ships in international traffic 
has been given special tax treatment in Pakistan -Denmark 
Convention and the Pakistan -Belgium Convention in  accord with the 
OECD Model Convention ( “OECD MC” ) and the UN Model 
Convention ( “UN MC” ). The general policy underlying the special rule 
for international shipping and the deviation from the allocation of 
taxing rights based on the permanent establishment principle has its 
roots at the very beginning of tax treaty law. Maritime shipping was 
viewed as an activity that warrants a special rule. Having regard to 
the distinct nature of activities carried on by shipping (air transport 
was also added to this categ ory later) entities which operate across 
different routes spread across several countries and the complexity of 
apportioning profits arising from such business across numerous 
countries, it was felt that general provisions dealing with business 
profits wou ld result in taxation of fragmented profits in numerous 
countries, thereby possibly leading to double taxation. Accordingly, it 
was considered necessary to introduce a separate provision in the 
OECD MC, and also  in the UN MC, to specifically deal with prof its 
from operations of shipping and air transport business in 
international traffic. The provision relating to shipping and air 
transport takes precedence over the general rule relating to business 
                                                
2 Model treaties provide standard frameworks of guidance for treaty negotiation and are of high 
persuasive value in terms of defining t he parameters of double taxation treaties and have world -wide 
recognition as basic documents of reference in the negotiation, application and interpretation of 
multilateral or bilateral tax conventions.  
3 OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and on Capital.  
4 United Nations Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and Developing Countries.  CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 5 
 
profits and the permanent establishment principle is not a pplied to 
profits falling within its scope of application i.e. profits arising from 
the operation of ships and aircraft in international traffic. More 
importantly, this provision also takes into account the fact that 
shipping and air transport enterprises invariably carry on a large 
variety of activities to permit, facilitate or support their inte rnational 
traffic operations.5  
8. The issue  before us  pertains to the characterization of 
income arising from CDC, CSC, and THC. Let us have a look at the 
meaning  of CDC, CSC, and THC in order to understand the nature of 
these incomes. The High Court has observed, and there exists no 
contention between the parties on this point, that CDC  is the 
amount collec ted on account of rent of container, which is charged 
if a customer holds the said container beyond the stipulated time 
required to discharge the goods at the intended port of 
disembarkation; CSC is collected by shipping lines on account of 
services in respect of containers which may be required due to 
discharge of goods at the destination; and THC is collected by 
shipping lines on account of terminal charges incurred at the port 
of disembarkation. With this understanding of the aforementioned 
sources of income viz. CDC, CSC and THC, we proceed to examine 
whether such income align s with the expression “profits from the 
operation of  ships in international traffic” . 
9. The Commentary on Article 8 of the OECD MC provides 
guidance about qualifying activities and related profits with respect to 
income falling under the head of “profits from the operation of ships 
in international traffic”. It provides that the profits covered consist in 
the first place of the profits directly obtained by the enterprise from 
the transportation of passengers or cargo by ships that it opera tes in 
international traffic such as any activity carried on primarily in 
connection with the transportation, by the enterprise, of passengers 
or cargo by ships that it operates in international traffic. It is then 
recognized that with the evolution of int ernational transport, shipping 
enterprises invariably carry on a large variety of activities to permit, 
                                                
5 Georg Kofler, in Reimer & Rust (eds), Klaus Vogel on Double Taxation Conventions  (5th edn 2021) 
vol 1, art 8, para s 7, 33. See also Shefali Goradia , ‘Taxation of Services ’ in Guglielmo Maisto (ed) , 
Current Tax Treaty Issues , vol 18  (IBFD EC and International Tax Law Series  2020 ) 535-536; Ola 
Ostaszewska and Belema  Obuoforibo (ed s), Roy Rohatgi on International Taxation , vol 1  (IBFD 
2018)  187. 
 CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 6 
 
facilitate or support their international traffic operations. The 
expression “profits from the operation of ships in international traffic” 
therefore al so covers profits from activities directly connected with 
such operations as well as profits from activities which are not 
directly connected with the operation of the enterprise’s ship in 
international traffic as long as they are ancillary to such operati on – 
activities that the enterprise does not need to carry on for the 
purposes of its own operation of ships in international traffic but 
which make a minor contribution relative to such operation and are 
so closely related to such operation that they shou ld not be regarded 
as a separate business or source of income of the enterprise should 
be considered to be ancillary to the operation of ships in international 
traffic.6 We also note that since 2017, the UN MC Commentary fully 
reproduces the OECD guidance.  
10. The objective scope of Article 8 of the OECD MC and the 
UN MC with its reference to “profits from the operation of ships in 
international traffic” covers not only profits directly obtained by the 
enterprise from the transportation of passengers or car go by ships 
that it operates in international traffic, but also, profits from activities 
directly connected with such operations as well as profits from 
activities which are not directly connected with the operation of the 
enterprise’s ships in internation al traffic as long as they are ancillary 
to such operation. Activities are to be considered ancillary to the 
operation of ships in international traffic if (i) the enterprise does not 
need to undertake them for the purposes of its own operation of ships 
in international traffic but which otherwise (ii) make a minor 
contribution relative to such operation and (iii) are so closely related 
to such operation that they should not be regarded as a separate 
business or source of income. Article 8 OECD and UN MC th erefore 
applies not only to profits directly obtained in international traffic e.g. 
transport of passengers or cargo, sales of tickets of the enterprise, 
leasing of ships, but also to profits directly connected with 
international traffic and to profits anc illary to international traffic e.g. 
inland transport, interest, code sharing and slot chartering, haulage 
services and catering services, provision of goods and services to 
other enterprises, sales of tickets on behalf of other enterprises, 
                                                
6 OECD MC Commenta ry, art 8 . CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 7 
 
advertising on  behalf of other enterprises, letting of immovable 
property, rental of containers.7 
11. The issue in question  concerns income arising from three 
sources: CDC, CSC, and THC. Notably, two of these sources involve 
charges imposed for services related to conta iners, whereas the third 
pertains to charges associated with terminal services for cargo 
handling. In the context of such income sources, Vogel, a recognized 
authority, emphasizes the widespread use of containers in 
international transport. Profits arising  from short -term storage of 
containers or from detention charges for the late return of containers , 
according to Vogel, are covered within the purview of “profits from the 
operation of ships in international traffic”. Further, special 
remuneration for serv ices ancillary to container operations are 
covered within the ambit of shipping income from international 
traffic. Income derived from services provided for cargo handling is 
also considered part of shipping income from international traffic 
when directly connected or ancillary to the operation of ships in 
international traffic.8  
12. We thus reach the conclusion that profits arising from 
CDC, CSC and THC are connected with and ancillary to the operation 
of ships in international traffic. Consequently, these profits squarely 
fall within the purview of the expression “profits from the operation of 
ships in international traffic”. Therefore, CDC, CSC, and THC 
collected by the respo ndents are part of the revenue earned in 
shipping in international traffic and are to  be dealt with in 
accordance with the provisions of the Pakistan -Denmark Double 
Taxation Convention and the Pakistan -Belgium Double Taxation 
Convention, as the case may be . As a result, we do not feel inclined to 
interfere with the judgment of the High Court. These petitions  are 
therefore  dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
Judge  
 
                                                
7 Georg Kofler, in Reimer & Rust (eds), Klaus Vogel on Double Taxation Conventions  (5th edn 2021) 
vol 1, art 8, para s 33, 35.  
8 ibid, p aras 44-46. CP No.560 -K/2019, etc 8 
 
Islamabad,  
12th January, 2024.  
Approved for reporting  
Iqbal   
Judge  
  
  
 