IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 594 of 2020  
(Against the judgment dated 15.5.2020 passed by 
the Peshawar High Court Peshawar in Crl. M./BA 
No.1227 -P/2020)  
 
 
Jehanzab Khan  
 
 …Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
 
The State through A.G. KPK & others  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner(s):  Syed Iqbal Hassan Shah Gillani, ASC  
 with Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
For the State:  Mr. Arshad Hussain Yousafzai, ASC  
 with Momin, I.O.  
 
For the Complainant : Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC  
 along with complainant . 
 
Date of hearing:  09.07.2020.  
 
     ORDER  
 
         Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Jahanzeb Khan, petitioner 
herein, seeks admission  to post arrest bail ; he had allegedly issued two 
bank cheques to Masoo d-ur-Rehman complainant in the sums of 
Rs.20,00,000/ - and Rs.97,00,000/ -, respectively , bounced upon 
presentation ; after arrest, he was released on bail by a learned Magistrate  
vide order dated 27.12.2019 on the basis of an Iqrarnama , purporting 
clearance of substantial portion of the default ; the complainant disputed 
genuineness of the instrument , in view whereof, a learned Additional 
Sessions Judge  cancelled the bail vide order  dated 27.2.2020 ; motion to 
secure bail failed in the High Court vide order dated 15.5.2020 , vires 
whereof, are being assailed  herein .  
2.  Heard.  
3.  It would be inexpedient to attend factual divergence  over the 
impugned arrangement that appears to have paved petitioner’s  way for his 
release on bail  at the magisterial forum  through a negotiated  settlement  
though  retracted  subsequently , a circumstance resulting into cancellation Criminal Petition No.594 of 2020  
  
 2
thereof ; it appears to have weighed with the High Court to decline the 
request  as well .  
 Judicial discretion in bail matters is by now clearly contoured . 
Having regards to the facts and circumstances of each case, the Court may 
decline the request even in cases falling outside the remit of prohibition , 
however, exercise of judicial  authority cannot be abandoned  to relegate in 
subservience  to the arrangements  inter se  the parties  for the disposal of 
bail petitions  nor the corporal coercion can be allowed  to extract swift 
settlements or concessions  in lieu of a promised freedom . Grant of bail  
cannot be subjected to riders and conditions , if otherwise, a case stands 
made out.  In criminal dispensation of justice, the Court being a n 
independent  adjudicator  at all stages  must religiously maintain its 
neutrality without having any responsibility to the either side ; it is more 
important in cases involving recoveries and retrievals for the complainant , 
designed to  be effected  through plenary modes  and procedures  other than 
criminal prosecution. Deviation off the beaten path  would thro w normal 
statutory arrangements to the wind , therefore, petitioner’s release and his 
subsequent arrest on the basis of an abortive /disputed  arrangement fail to 
commend our approval .  
4.  Adverting to the petitioner’s case , though there is a reference to 
issuance of bank cheques and their failure on the bank counter, 
nonetheless, details of financial obligation in sati sfaction whereof the 
instruments were purportedly issued is conspicuously missing  in the 
crime report . Substantial amounts no twithstanding, nonetheless, offence 
complained is punishable with three years imprisonment or fine or with 
both and as such does not attract the statutory bar . Petitioner’s 
continuous detention is not likely to improve upon investigative process, 
already concluded , thus,  he cannot be held behind the bars as a strategy 
for punishment . A case for petitioner’s release on bail stands made out . 
Criminal petition is converted into appeal and allowed ; the petitioner shall 
be released on furnishing bonds in the su m of rupees one million with two 
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned trial 
Court/duty Magistrate.   
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
9th July, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 