  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
 
Civil Appeal No.1621  of 20 17  
  and  
C.R.P.50/2017 in C.M.A.5782/2016 in C.A.1621/2017  
  and 
C.M.A.1451/2017 in C.A.1621/2 017 
  and  
Civil Petition No. 5122  of 20 17  
  
Federation of Pakistan thr. M/o Defense  …Appellant  
                                        Versus  
Mrs. Ajmal Samia (decd) thr. her LRs & others  …Respondents  
  
For the Appellant :  
Raja Shafqat Abbasi, DAG  
With Syed Usman Hassan, Sub -Registrar  
Mr. Iftik har Ahmed, Dy. MEO  
Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Asstt.  
 
For the Applicant : 
(CMA 1451/17)  
 
  
 
Mr. M. Shahid Kamal Khan, ASC  
Mr. Zulfikar Khalid Maluka, ASC  
 
For Respondent -1(ii) &1(iv) : 
 
For Respondent -3: 
 
 
For Responde nt-2: Syed Qalb -i-Hassan, ASC  
 
Mr. Zulfikar Khalid Maluka, ASC  
Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC  
 
Mr. Muhammad Amir Malik, ASC  
  
On Court’ s Call: 
 Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
  
Date of Hearing:  11.01.2 023 
ORDER  
 
 The appel lant in this case is the Federation of Pakistan and is 
represented by  Raja Shafqat Abbasi , learned Deputy Attorney -General 
(‘DAG’). Learned DAG  commenced his arguments but basic facts were 
not enumerated precisely . Therefore, we wanted to se nd for the 
Attorney-General for Pakistan so that h e could come and render 
proper assistance . However, on enquiring who the Attorney -General is, 
we were not given a satisfactory  answer to what is a simple query.  We 
then called upon Chaudhry Aamir Rehman, learned Additiona l  
 CA 1621/17 etc   2 
 
 
Attorney -General , present in Court , to answer our query and he said 
he was unable to . It transpires that Mr. Ashtar Ausaf Ali  resigned from 
the post of Attorney -General a couple of months back and in his st ead 
no one has been appointed  till date despi te lapse of more than a 
reasonable period . 
 
2. Article 100 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
(‘the Constitution ’) stipulates that : 
 
‘100. (1) The President shall appoint a person, being a 
person qualified to be appointed a Judge of the 
Supreme Court, to be the Attorney -General for 
Pakistan.  
 
(2) The Attorney -General shall hold office during  
the pleasure of the President and shall not engage in 
private practice so long as he holds the office of the 
Attorney -General.  
 
(3) It shall be the dut y of the Attorney -General to 
give advice to the Federal Government upon such legal 
matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal 
character, as may be referred or assigned to him by 
the Federal Government, and in the performance of his 
duties he shal l have the right of audience in all courts 
and tribunals in Pakistan.  
 
(4) The Attorney -General may, by writing under 
his hand addressed to the President, resign his office. ’ 
 
3. The Attorney -General for Pakistan is a constitutional post and it 
cannot be  left vacant. There is no mention of a n acting Attorney -
General in the Constitution. The law also requires notice to the 
Attorney -General under Order XXVIIA of the Code of Civil Procedure 
(and not to a DAG or Additional Attorney -General)  in certain cases . 
Neither a DAG nor an Additional Attorney -General is a substitute for 
the Attorney -General. We may also assume that when a DAG or an 
Additional Attorney -General attends Court he/she does so  on 
instructions received from the Attorney -General.  
 
4. Therefore,  the AGP (whoever that may be) and the Federal Law 
Secretary should be in attendance on the next date.  CA 1621/17 etc   3 
 
 
 
5.  We also expect  to be properly assisted on the next date of 
hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
11th January 2023 
Mudassar /                                                    ‘Approved For Reporting’                                   
  
 