IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original /Review Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.64 OF 2013  
[For Implementation of Judgment dated 08.06. 2012,  
passed by this Court in Constitution Petition No.87 of 2011 ] 
AND 
CIVIL REVIEW PETITION  NO.191 of 2012  
IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.87 OF 2011  
 
 
Workers ' Party Pakistan through  
its General Secretary & 6 others  (in both cases ) 
Petitioner(s)  
  
   VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan & 2 others  (in both cases ) 
Respondent(s)  
 
For the Applicant/  
Petitioner(s)  : Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Bilal Hassan Minto, ASC 
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
   
For the Federation  : Mr. Irfan Qadir, Attorney General for Pakis tan.  
   
For the ECP : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, Sr.  ASC 
Mr. Abdul Rehman, Addl.DG (Elections)  
Mr. Sanaullah Malik, Director (L)  
   
Date of Hearing  : 14.03.2013  
 
ORDER  
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry , CJ.—  In continuation of 
our order dated 13.03.2013, the Election Commission of Pakistan 
(ECP) and the learned DAG were required to submit as under:  
i. Details of the compliance of observations/directions 
contained in the judgment reported as Workers’ Party 
Pakistan through Akhtar Hussain and 6 others v. CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 2 - 
 Federation of Pakistan and 2 others  (PLD 2012 SC 681), 
which were to be implemented without promulgation or 
amendment in the Representation of the People Act, 1976, 
(ROPA) .  
 
ii. And details of those directions  which were to be 
implemented through legislation .  
 
2.  On behalf of the Federation , the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan has appeared and stated that the 
Government of Pakistan (GOP) got examined the proposed 
amendments through Law Ministry and in the meanwhile a 
Special Committee of the Senate wa s also constituted and on the 
basis of the same coupled with the observations made  by the Law 
Ministry, draft of the proposed amendments was sent back to the 
ECP for further action and according to his instructions reply of 
the same has not been received  so far.  
 On our query, learned counsel for ECP stated that he has no 
instructions and after contacting the Commission, he would be in 
a position to react in this behalf .  
3.  The learned Attorney General also informed that in all 
fairness perhaps it would not be now possible for the Parliament 
to legislate the law as it was desired by the ECP because on 15th 
March, 2013, the Parliament is going to complete its term of five 
years under Article 55 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973,  but if need be , subsequent thereto by adhering 
to the process of legislation in terms of Article 89 of the CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 3 - 
 Constitution, needful can conveniently be done through issuance 
of an Ordinance.  
4.  Learned counsel for the ECP stated that in view of 
various provisions of the R epresentation of the People Act, 1976 
(ROPA) some of which have been read in the Court i.e. Section 70 
onward covering the definition of corrupt practices  etc., and 
directions  & observations made in the case of Workers ’ Party 
Pakistan  (supr a) etc., ECP is of the opinion that it is equipped 
with sufficient powers  under the Constitution to arrange/organize 
free and fair elections. However, if ECP decide d to take up any 
issue requiring legislation , a request shall be sent to the 
concerned autho rity for approaching the President of Pakistan to 
issue the Ordinance .  
5.  Thus, it is observe d that in view of the importance of 
the issue of holding general elections  in the country , if need be, 
the President of Pakistan in accordance with the Constitut ion is 
always competent to issue Ordinance  to meet the requirement 
and to fulfil the objects and purposes , for which it is to be 
promulgated a nd there should not be any difficulty either for the 
ECP or the Competent Authority to act in accordance with the 
Constitution.  CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 4 - 
 6.  The ECP has also placed on record nomination paper , 
which ha s been prepared by it , for the forthcoming elections of 
the Nati onal and Provincial Assemblies.   
7.   We have gone through it  with the assistance of learned 
counsel for parties.   
8.  Learned Attorney General has stated that under Section 
107 of the ROPA, a request was sent by ECP for the amendment 
of Rule 3 of the Representation of the People (Conduct of 
Election) Rules, 1977, but the President of Pakistan  so far  has not 
approved  the amendments , therefore, without adhering to the 
rules, the Election Commission may have not got printed 
nomination papers as GOP had reservations on some of its 
portions like ‘as what is the necessity to seek information about a 
person with regard s to his involvement in any criminal case in the 
last six months etc . because a person cannot be disqualified 
unless  he has been convicted and sentenced  for the commission 
of offence, if committed by him ’. In the same manner the 
requirement of disclosing inform ation about the travelling of a 
candidate outside the country, etc.  are unnecessary .  
9.  The argument so raised by the learned Attorney 
General has been opposed by learned counsel for the ECP .  He 
has contended that the Election Commission has to arrange/  
organize free, fair and honest elections and also to guard against CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 5 - 
 the corruption in terms of Article 218(3) of the Constitution. 
Therefore, when a candidate who presents himself before the 
electors, they are entitled  to know about his full credentials an d 
issuance of such nomination papers is not beyon d the scope of 
the Constitution and  law.  
10.  Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr. ASC appearing for one of 
the political parities, i.e. PTI stated that there was no necessity 
for seeking amendment of Rule 3 of the Representation of the 
People (Conduct of Election) Rules, 1977,  as the proforma of the 
Nomination Paper has been improved to gather further 
information with regard to a candidate to fulfil  the object, 
purpose and command of the Constitution. He stated that  besides 
Article 218(3) , Article 222 of the Constitution also empowers the 
Commission as according to it “subject to Constitution , no such 
law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any of the 
powers of the Commissioner or an Election Commission  under 
this Part ”. He has also referred to the residuary powers of the 
ECP under Section 104 of the ROPA . He further stated that no one 
amongst the present Parliament arians  or prospective candidates 
and the voters have come forward to raise objection on th is 
proforma.  
11.  Mr. Bilal Hassan Minto, learned counsel for the 
petitioner also supported the contentions of learned counsel for CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 6 - 
 the ECP as well as Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr. ASC and also 
relied upon relevant Section 103(c) of the ROPA , which deals wit h 
the powers of the Commission to ensure fair elections.  
12.  This Court in the case of Worker s’ Party  Pakistan  vide 
order dated 28.03.2012 directed that any of the respondents or 
any other political party, which is interested to join the 
proceedings , may  appear and file their concise statements 
without seeking any formal permission from the Court and in 
response thereto some of the political parties entered appearance 
to assist the Court.   
13.  The object and the purpose of pronouncement of the 
judgment i n the case of Worker s’ Party  Pakistan , was to ensure 
that elections are arranged and organized by the ECP strictly 
under Article 218(3) of the Constitution. For convenience the 
same is reproduced herein below:  
“218(3)  It shall be the duty of the Election C ommission to 
organize and conduct the election and to make such 
arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the 
election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in 
accordance with law, and that corrupt practices are 
guarded against.”  
 
14.  The observati ons and the directions were made in the 
said case keeping  in view the above provisions of the Constitution 
and the law . Expressions ‘fairly’, ‘justly ’ and ‘honestly ’ used 
therein were elaborately interpreted . Neither t he learned counsel , 
who appeared to as sist the Court nor anyone else subsequent CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 7 - 
 thereto , either representing any political party or the general 
public had objected on the judgment by seeking its review.  
15.   Now the ECP ha s made some additions in the 
nomination forms  following command of Cons titution under 
Article 218(3) as well as keeping in view observations/directions 
in Workers party’s case. A copy of the same has been placed on 
record. It is not possible to reproduce the contents of the same, 
however, for sake of convenience the contents of the Nomination 
Paper shall be read as a part of this Order.  
16.  Mr. Hamid Khan, learned Sr. ASC for PTI stated that 
the contents of Nomination Paper are in the knowledge of all 
stakeholders i.e. electors, prospective candidates as well as the 
incumben t Parliamentarians and no objection on  it has been 
raised  by any one of them . The learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan at this stage stated that the GOP itself is a supporter for 
holding free and fair general elections in the country but subject 
to law, and Government  has also not expressed any objection but 
some observations were made .  It was the ECP , which  had itself 
approached the President of Pakistan for amendment of the Rules 
and has now decided to print the nomination papers without his 
decision. T he learned counsel for the ECP stated that after having 
given second thought as he has already stated in his arguments  it 
was decided not to press for amendment of Rule 3 of ROPA, CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 8 - 
 1976.  Therefore, nomination papers were printed and made 
available for the i nformation of all concerned including interested 
persons, who are likely to contest elections,  so he/they  should 
have information of its particulars, which are required to be 
furnish ed at the time of filing the nomination paper .   
17.  In our order dated 1 2.03.2013, we had already made it 
clear that the ECP is required to perform its functions strictly in 
accordance with the Constitution. For sake of convenience, 
relevant paras from the judgment of Worker s’ party were 
reproduced. No doubt the ECP has a Constitutional commitment 
and obligation to arrange and organize elections according to 
Article 218(3) and it also enjoys powers to do so as it has been 
described under Article 222 of the Constitution . Under the 
constitutional provision, ECP is responsible to arrange, organize  
and conduct elections honestly, justly, fairly and in according with 
law and emphasis is that corrupt practices should be  guarded 
against . Thus, in view of such provision of Constitution  a solemn 
object  should be  that no corrupt person is allowed to enter in 
Parliament . With this commitment  of the Constitution,  the ECP 
without chang ing the complexion or contents of Rule 3 of the 
Rules, 1977, has made improvement s in the proforma, already 
appended with the ROPA . There is no hard and fast ru le to make 
improve ment in a proforma of nomination paper, particularly CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 9 - 
 when required object is to enforce Article 218(3) of the 
Constitution . A detailed information about a candidate is essential 
to be obtained  as on his success he has to represent a 
const ituency on behalf of more than hundred thousands electors , 
for a period of five years  and on winning the election he shall be a 
most responsible person along with others who will govern th e 
country .  It is the mandate of the Constitution that the people of  
Pakistan shall be governed by the Chosen Representatives, 
therefore, a candidate who come s forward  for election , is suppose d 
to provide his complete credentials to the voters  enabling them to 
caste votes in favo ur of such person who is honest and  believes  in 
fairness and is free from any disqualification under Article 63 of 
the Constitution and is also qualified under Article 62 of the 
Constitution. Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC has stated that no one has 
raised objection to the contents of nomination papers .  We agree 
with him and believe that GOP is also of the  opinion that there 
must be free, fair and honest elections as well as free from any 
corruption.  Therefore, when all the stakeholders i.e. the ruling 
party and the other  political parties , voters, who se number is 
about  eight crore  and the Nation as a whole is expecting that 
their representation in the Parliament should be made by honest 
person (s) who are no t polluted by allegation of corruption in any 
manner . Thus, it is declared  that ECP in compliance of  Article CMA No.64 of 2013 in Const.P.No.87 of 2011  - 10 - 
 218(3)  read with Article 222 of the Constitution  and sections 103 
& 104 of Representation of Peoples Act, 1976  as well as the 
judgment in the case of Workers’ Party Pakistan  (supra)  has 
prepared /improved  nomination papers  for the forthcoming 
Genera l Election s of Pakistan for National and Provincial 
Assemblies , in accordance with the Constitution  and the law.  
18.  As far as the other amendments are concerned, if any, 
the ECP may point out to the Court on the next date of hearing.  
19.  Adjourned to 15th March, 2013.  
  
 
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad  Judge   
14.03.2013  
*Hashmi * Judge   
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  