THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
      (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, C.J.  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Civil Petition No. 225-P of 2023 
(Against the judgment dated  22.02.2023 
of the Peshawar High Court, Mingora 
Bench (Dar -ul-Qaza) Swat passed in WP 
No.657 -M of 2020 )  
 
Government of  Khyber Pakhtunkhwa through  
Secretary, , Elementary & Secondary Education  
Department, Peshawar and others    …Petitioner s  
Versus  
Amjad ur Rahman and others      …Respondent s 
  
For the p etitioner s: Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Additional Advocate  
    General, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  a/w 
    Mr. Mehmood Ghaznavi, D.E.O. (Male) Chitral  
Respondent  No.1:  In person.   
Date of hearing:   11 December 2023     
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ. This is yet anothe r prime example of frivolous litigation 
being initiated by a provincial government. The petitioner s had advertised in 
the year 2018 for the selection of two computer teachers in basic pay scale 
of 12 and had prescribed the minimum qualification as Intermed iate with 
one year diploma in computer sciences. The respondent No.1 held a B.Sc. 
and M.Sc. degree in computer science and came on the top of  the merit list 
but still was not appointed for the reason that he was over -qualified. It 
appears that those in cha rge of educating the children of the province were 
bereft of common sense by disqualifying a person who was more qualified 
and thus better placed to impart computer science  education and favoured 
one less qualified . Not only the respondent No.1 was made to  suffer but the 
children , who would have benefit ed from his knowledge , were condemned . 
2. There is no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment. Leave to 
appeal is  declined and this petition is dismissed with cost s incurred by the 
respondent No.1, tha t is two hundred thousand rupees to be paid to the 
respondent No.1 on or before 31 December 2023. Needless to state the 
judgment  regarding appointment  of respondent  No.1 will also be 
implemented by or before  such date , and if it is not complied with, the 
Secretary, Elementary & Secondary Education, Government  of Khyber CP-225-P of 2023.doc  2
Pakhtun khwa  may be proceeded against for contempt of Court. A copy of 
this order be sent to the petitioners and the respondents , to the Advocate 
General, Chief Secretary and Secretary Law of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa who 
will undoubtedly ensure that the government does not generate such 
unnecessary litigation and then, for no valid legal reason, challenge the 
decisions of the High Court which also drain s the resources of the 
government, paid for by the taxpayers.   
         Chief Justice  
 
      Judge  
 
     Judge  
Islamabad  
11.12.2023  
M. Azhar Malik /* 
 
   APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 