SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  1
Yahya Afridi, J. -  I had, in my order  dated 23.02.2023,  dismiss ed all 
three proceedings as they were not maintainable for adjudication of 
this Court under its original jurisdiction provided under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(‘Constitution’).   
 
2. Before  I explain the reasons for my short order declaring all 
three proceedings as not maintainable under the law, it would be 
appropriate to first record the admitted factual background leading to 
the present proceedings. It started with the dissolution of the 
Provincial Assembly of Punjab on 14.01.2023, followed by the 
dissolution of the Provincial Assembly of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa on 
18.01.2023. This led Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf (“PTI” ), through its 
Secretary General, to move the Lahore High Court by filing a 
constitutional petition (Writ Petition No. 5851 of 2023)  under Article 199 of 
the Constitution, seeking, in essence, the constitutional authority to 
appoint a date for the holding of the General Election for the Provincial 
Assembly of Punjab. This petition, along with three petitions f iled by 
Munir Ahmed  (Writ Petition No. 6118 of 2023) , Zaman Khan Vardag  (Writ 
Petition No. 6093 of 2023)  and Sabir Raza Gill  (Writ Petition No. 6119 of 2023)  
on the same matter, were taken up on 30.01.2023, and after providing 
three hearings to the parties , were finally decided by the Single Bench 
of the Lahore High Court vide judgement dated 10.02.2023, whereby a 
clear writ of mandamus  was issued to the Election Commission of 
Pakistan in terms that;  
“Given  the constitutional provisions mentioned above and  
the judgements of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, the 
prayer made in the “consolidated petitions” is allowed and 
the “ECP” is directed to immediately announce the “date of 
election” of the Provincial Assembly of Punjab with the 
Notification specifying reas ons, after consultation with the 
Governor of Punjab, being the constitutional Head of the 
Province, to ensure that the elections are held not later 
than ninety days as per the mandate of the 
“Constitution”.”  SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  2
The Governor of Punjab and the Election Commissi on of Pakistan 
challenged the above Single Bench judgement in Intra -Court Appeals 
before the Divisional Bench of the Lahore High Court. With the set 
appeals was also a Contempt Petition filed by PTI, seeking enforcement 
of the Single Bench judgement dated 10.02.2023. Similarly, on 
06.02.2023, Mashal Azam Advocate invoked the original jurisdiction of 
the Peshawar High Court seeking similar relief for the appointment of 
a date for the holding of the election to the Provincial Assembly of 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. D uring the pendency of the Intra -Court appeals 
before the Division Bench of the Lahore High Court and petition before 
the Peshawar High Court, a two -member bench of this Court on 
16.02.2023 while hearing a service matter relating to the transfer of 
police o fficer Ghulam Mehmood Dogar  (Civil Petition No. 3988 of 2022) , 
apprehended the delay in holding of the General Elections of the 
Provincial Assembly of Punjab, and found that there was ‘rare and 
imminent danger of violation of a clear and unambiguous constitutional 
command’ ; the bench made a referral to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of 
Pakistan for invoking and initiating of the suo moto  jurisdiction of this 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. The referral was 
positively considered on 22.02.202 3, and Suo Moto Case No. 1 of 
2023, along with two other Constitutional Petitions filed by the 
Islamabad High Court Bar Association (Const.P.1 of 2023)  and a joint 
petition filed by Muhammad Sibtain Khan and Mushtaq Ahmed Ghani 
(Const.P.2  of 2023) , the wor thy Speakers of the Punjab and Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Assemblies, respectively, were fixed for hearing on 
23.02.2023.  
 
3. Given the factual matrix of the legal proceedings leading to the 
present three petitions, which came up for hearing before this Court 
on 23.02.2023, we note that: firstly, the Intra -Court Appeals filed by SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  3
the Governor of Punjab and the Election Commission of Pakistan 
against the judgment of the Single Bench dated 10.02.2023 were 
pending  before the Lahore High Court, while the Peshawar High Court 
was also hearing a Constitutional Petition seeking similar relief for 
appointment of the date of election to the Provincial Assembly of 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; secondly, the judgments of the pending 
proceedings before both the High Courts could be challe nged before 
this Court under its appellate jurisdiction envisaged under Article 185 
of the Constitution.  
 
4. This Court in Ch. Manzoor Elahi’s case1, while dilating on the 
jurisdictional contours of the original jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court under Art icle 184(3) of the Constitution, inter alia, laid down 
that where the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution and 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution had concurrent 
jurisdiction and the matter was pending adjudication before both 
courts, the later had to show restraint in exercising its jurisdiction , 
premised on the principle of ensuring that a party is not deprived of 
his vested right of Appeal under the law. To appreciate the principle 
enunciated by this Court in the above case, w e must consider the facts 
leading Ch. Manzoor Elahi to seek his legal redressal by invoking the 
original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution. Ch. Manzoor Elahi, initially challenged his incarceration 
in the High Court of Sin dh and Balochistan, wherein the High Court 
on a preliminary issue of jurisdiction declared that it had the authority 
to issue writs in relation to tribal areas of Quetta division in the 
Province of Balochistan. While the appeal of the Federation against 
this preliminary finding of the High Court before this Court, and the 
main petition before the High Court was pending, Ch. Manzoor Elahi 
                                                        
1 Ch. Manzoor Elahi v. The Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1975 SC 66)  SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  4
also challenged before this Court his illegal detention by filing a 
petition invoking the original jurisdiction of the Su preme Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Mr Justice Hamoodur Rahman, C.J., 
while rendering the opinion of the court opined that:   
“It is no doubt correct that the jurisdiction of this court under 
clause (3) of the Article 184 can be invoked wh en a question of 
public importance concerning  the enforcement of any of the 
fundamental rights is involved but, I would like to add, since this 
is the first application of its kind, that it does not follow from that 
this Court is bound to exercise these concurrent powers even 
where these conditions a re fulfilled for this is only an enabling 
provision. If the jurisdiction of any of the High Courts has already 
been invoked under Article 199 of the Constitution and the matter 
is pending adjudication there then two further well -established 
principles beco me attracted. The first is that where two Courts 
have concurrent jurisdiction and a petitioner has already elected 
to invoke the jurisdiction of one of such Courts then he should be 
bound by his election and must pursue his remedies in that 
Court. The seco nd is that if one of the Courts having such 
concurrent jurisdiction happens to be a superior Court to which 
an appeal lies from the other court of concurrent jurisdiction then 
the Superior  Court will not normally entertain such an application 
after a simil ar application on the same facts has already been filed 
and is pending adjudication in the lower Court, because, that 
would deprive one of the parties to the litigation in the lower court 
of his vested right of appeal conferred by another provision of the 
Constitution, namely, Article 185. ”  
       (emphasis provided)  
 
 
5.  I am also mindful of the positive exercise of the original 
jurisdiction by an eleven member bench of this Court in the case of 
Miss Benazir Bhutto2, while the petition s on the same subje ct matter 
were pending adjudication before the Lahore High Court.  This Court, 
in the said case, made an exception to the strict adherence of the 
practice of this Court, as settled in Ch. Manzoor Elahi’ s case ( supra ), 
on the touchstone of enforcement of  fu ndamental rights, and it was 
declared that the measure of applicability of the said practice has to be 
judged in the light of the particular facts and circumstances of each 
case.  However, nowhere was the principle of practice given judicial 
recognition in  Ch. Manzoor Elahi ’s case ( supra ) overturned by this 
                                                        
2  Benazir Bhutto v The Federation of Pakistan and another PLD 1988 SC 461  SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  5
Court in Benazir Bhutto ’s case (supra). In fact , the Court was  very 
cautious, while invoking its jurisdiction under its original jurisdiction, 
as it was careful in making it clear that it was only distin guishing the 
case from the precedent set in Ch. Manzoor Elahi ’s case and not 
deviating from the principle set therein. The Court (as per Haleem J. 
as he was then)  observed,  
“It is regrettable to note that the High Court has surrendered the 
management of the case to the sweet will of the counsel who was 
taking dates at his convenience without making any serious effort to 
get the matter admitted to regular hearing, and the High  Court, in 
turn, acquiescing in it, dillydallying and shirking from its duty 
towards a pending cause by accommodating the counsel. Therefore, 
there was, for a period of a year and eight months, a failure on the 
part of the High Court to pass any order eith er admitting the petition 
to regular hearing or rejecting it in limine, and, for that matter, even 
on the date of hearing of this petition, it was not known as to whether 
it was admitted or not. On these facts, the learned Attorney General 
has invoked the principle of practice as to the choice of the forum and 
so also the vested right of the opposite party to come in appeal to this 
Court as material considerations for this Court to keep its hands off 
from hearing the petition. As the High Court was not lega lly seized of 
the dispute as a result of an order admitting it, it remains to be seen 
to what extent the practice can be followed which without doubt is 
salutary and of long -standing” 3  
 
This observation led to taking an exception to the principle recogni sed 
in Ch. Manzoor Elahi ’s case ( supra ), which it declared declared 
salutary and of long standing.  The judicial precedents that have since 
followed have recognised with respect, and maintained the ratio 
decidendi  of Ch. Manzoor Elahi’ s case ( supra ).4 
 
5. Given the promptness with which the single bench of the Lahore 
High Court proceeded with the petitions before it and decided the 
same, and that the judgment so rendered was under challenge in 
Intra-Court Appeals, surely distinguish the facts leading to the  present 
three proceedings when placed in juxtaposition with those leading this 
Court in Benazir Bhutto ’s case (supra), to take an exception to the 
settled principle of restraint recognised in Manzoor Elahi ’s case ( supra ). 
                                                        
3 Benazir Bhutto v The Federation of Pakistan and another PLD 1988 SC 461, page 
494  
4 Farough Ahmed Siddiqi v. The Province of Sindh and Wukala Mahaz Barai Tahafaz 
Dastoor v. Federatio n of Pakistan.  SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  6
The inordinate delay of one year and eight months in proceeding with 
the matters pending before the High Court was surely a justifiable 
reason to take exception to the general principle of restraint. However, 
the events which led to the present proceedings before this Court are 
starkly di stinguishable. Not only were the petitions proceeded with in 
an expeditious manner, but decided by the Singh Bench of the Lahore 
High Court, thus, the facts leading to the exception taken by this 
Court in Benazir Bhutto ’s case (supra) cannot be applied to the facts 
and circumstances of the present case. Accordingly, I am of the firm 
opinion that the principle of restraint in exercising original jurisdiction 
to safeguard the right of appeal of the parties should be respec ted and 
maintained, and the three proceedings pending before this Court 
should not be proceeded with at this stage, being premature and not 
maintainable. I am also sanguine that the High Courts would proceed 
expeditiously with the pending matters.  
 
6. Another crucial aspect of the present proceedings is that the 
matter in dispute, though in essence is constitutional, has developed 
into being peculiarly charged , with unflinching contested political 
stances being taken by the parties, which warrant this Court  to show 
judicial restraint. This would also bolster the principle of  propriety  and 
comity, so as to not offend the hierarchal judicial domain of the High 
Court envisaged under the Constitution, and disturb the judicial 
propriety that the High Court   deserves - lest it may reflect adversely 
on this Court’s judicial preemptive eagerness to decide.   
 
7. And thus, as I have decided to declare the present three 
proceedings  pending before this Court being premature as not 
maintainable,  I find my continuing to sit on the bench and hear the 
said petitions  would not be appropriate, as any findings passed or SMC. No. 1/2023, etc.  7
remarks made during the hearing of the present matters by me may 
prejudice the contested claims of the parties in the said 
petition s/appeal pending before the respective High Courts . However, I 
leave it to the Worthy Chief Justice  to decide my retention in the 
present bench hearing the said petitions.  
 
8. Accordingly, for the reasons stated hereinabove, I am of the firm 
opinion that the present proceedings pendi ng before this Court; Suo 
Moto 1. of 2023, Constitutional Petition 1. of 2023, and Constitutional 
Petition 2. of 2023 are not maintainable to be adjudicated at this stage 
by this Court in its original jurisdiction envisaged under Article 184(3) 
of the Cons titution, and thus are dismissed.   
  Judge  
 
 
 