The StateVersusI	a
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)
Present:
MR. JUSTICE SARDAR TARIQ MASOOD
MR. JUSTICE SAYYED MAZAHAR AL! AKBAR NAQVI
MR. JUSTICE JAMAL KHAN MANDOKHAIL
Jail Petition No. 42 of 2017
(On appeal from the judgment of the Peshawar High Court, Mingora
Bench (Dar ul Qaza) Swat dated 19.12.2016 passed in Cr. A. No.231-M of 2014)
Zafar Khan & another
Petitioner(s)P1
Respondent(s)
For the Petitioner:	Mr.	 Arshad 	 Hussain
Yousafzai, ASC
For the State:	Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi,
Addl. AG KP
Date of hearing:	1.1.02.2022
ORDER
Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J.- The prosecution caseP1
against the petitioners is that a vehicle was intercepted, which was
being driven by petitioner Zafar Khan and Taj Mir Khan was sitting
on the front seat. On search of the vehicle, secret cavities beneath
the switch board were surfaced, wherefrom 25 packets of alleged
Charas, each packet weighed one kilogram, wrapped in black
coloured plastic were found. The complainant Bakht Rehman, ASI
recovered the material through a recovery memo (Ex.PW4/ 1). Out
of each packet, five grams of Charas was separated for the purpose
of chemical examination and packed in separate parcels and the
rest were packed in another parcel. The complainant sent a
complaint to the police station, on the basis whereof, the case FIR
No. 272 dated 06.03.2014 registered under section 9(c) of the
Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 (CNSA) at Police Station
Ghaligai, District Swat against the petitioners. The Trial CourtI
Jail Petition No. 42 of201 7 	 2
convicted the petitioners under section 9(c) of the CNSA and
sentenced them to imprisonment for life, with fine of Rs.500,000/-
each, in default whereof to undergo SI for six months. Benefit of
section 382-13, Cr.P.C. was extended to them. Feeling aggrieved,
the petitioners filed a criminal appeal before the Peshawar High
Court, Mingora Bench (Dar ul Qaza), Swat, which stands
dismissed, hence, the instant jail petition for leave to appeal.
2.	 Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused
the record. In the cases of narcotic substances, recovery memo is a i
basic document, which should be prepared by the Seizing Officer,
at the time of the recovered articles, containing a list thereof, in 1
presence of two or more respectable witnesses and memo to be
signed by such witnesses. The main object of preparing the
recovery memo at the spot and with signatures of the witnesses is
to ensure that the recovery is effected in presence of the marginal
witnesses, honestly and fairly, so as to exclude the possibility of
false implication and fabrication. Once the recovery memo is
prepared, the next step for the prosecution is to produce the same
before the Trial Court, to prove the recovery of the material and
preparation of the memo through the Scribe and the marginal
witnesses. The complainant when appeared as PW4 before the
Trial Court, though stated that the contraband material was taken
into possession through the recovery memo Ex.PW.4/ 1, but did
not mention the name of the witnesses in whose presence, the
recovery memo was prepared nor did he mention their signatures
upon it. However, Rehmat Ali, Head Constable who appeared as
PW5, claimed to be the recovery witness and contended that he
signed the recovery memo, but did not give details about the
document, which he claims to have signed nor produced the same
in the Court. He did not refer the one, which was produced by the
complainant. Even, PW5 was not confronted with the Ex.PW4/ 1 at
the time of recording his statement to confirm the contents of the
same and his signatures upon it. The complainant and the only
witness of the recovery do not corroborate each other on material
points, therefore, their statements do not inspire confidence about
the reliability of the recovery memo (Ex.PW4/ 1), as such, the
Jail Petition No. 42 of201 7 	 3
prosecution has not been able to establish the recovery of the
contraband material from the petitioners.
3. Besides, the complainant alleged that beneath the
switch board of the vehicle, secret cavities were found. To the I
contrary, PW5 who claimed to be the recovery witness, stated
before the Trial Court that one packet of Charas was recovered
from beneath the switch board and upon opening the switch
board, secret cavities were found there and the remaining packets
were recovered therefrom. It has also come on the record that there
was a space only for the air conditioner under the switch board,
wherefrom the recovery of Chara.s has been alleged. The witnesses
are not certain about the exact location of the cavities and recovery
of the contraband material therefrom. It is also important to
mention here that the complainant did not say about the
signatures or identification mark of any of the recovery witness
upon any parcel allegedly prepared at the place of the occurrence.
The only recovery witness i.e. PW5 also did not utter a single word
with regard to the preparation of the parcels of the contraband
material in his presence at the spot nor did he mention signing or
putting mark of identification upon any of the parcels. It shows
that if any parcel was prepared by the complainant, it was not
witnessed by the recovery witness. Under such circumstances, it is
not safe to believe that the material contained in these parcels,
relied upon by the complainant is the same, which was alleged to
have been recovered from the petitioners.
4. Moreover, the complainant and rest of the witnesses
did not say anything about the custody of the parcels of the
contraband. The complainant in his cross examination, replied
that the recovered material remained at the place of the occurrence
for about 45 minutes, whereafter, he handed it over to a Moharrar,
present at the check post near the place of the occurrence, but did
not mention name of the said Moharrar nor explained as to what
happened to the parcels thereafter. Admittedly, the prosecution did
not produce the Moharrar to whom the contraband was allegedly
handed over, nor has it come on the record as to whether the same
was deposited in the Malkhana. The witness did not explain as to
Jail Petition No. 42 of2017  	 4
where the contraband material and the samples separated for
chemical analysis were lying before sending the same to the office
of the FSL. According to the complainant, he sent the sample of the
contraband material for chemical analysis through an application
(Ex.PA/ 1) but did not explain as to when he sent the same. Perusal
of the application (Ex.PA/ 1) would reveal that it was written on 6th
of March, 2014, but the report of the chemical expert reveals that
the contraband material was received on 10 th of March, 2014. Even
the person who delivered the sample to the office of Chemical
Examiner, has not been produced to prove the contention of the
complainant with regard to sending of the samples. The period
between 6 th March 2014 when according to the complainant, the
samples were sent and till its receipt by the FSL on 10 th March
2014 remained unexplained. It is the responsibility of the
prosecution to establish safe custody of the recovered material and
immediate transmission of its samples to the examiner to avoid
any possibility of substitution. The complainant did not give any
reason for sending the samples to the office of the FSL after the
delay of four days, therefore, it cannot be said with certainty that
the samples which were sent for chemical examination, were
actually the same, which were alleged to have been recovered from
the petitioners. Thus, it is evident that the alleged recovered
contraband material, including the pieces deducted for the purpose
of chemical analysis were not in a safe custody and transmission
of the samples to the examiner was doubtful, as such, possibility of
its tampering cannot be ruled out.
5. Keeping in view the gravity of the punishment provided
under section 9(c) of the CNSA, it is the bounden duty of the
prosecution to prove the recovery of contraband material from the
accused, its safe custody and sending the samples for chemical
analysis without undue delay. In this case, the needful has not
been done. In this behalf, reference to the cases of Imam
Bakhsh 1, Mst. Razia Sultana 2, Zahir Shah 3, and Mst. Sakina
Ramzan 4 is in order. The Courts below have failed to appreciate
'2018 SCMR 2039
22019 SCMR 1300
2019 SCMR 2004
2021 SCMR 451
-J
Jail Petition No. 42 of 201 7 	 5
the stated facts, the evidence, the relevant law and the guidelines
highlighted by this Court in the referred judgments, which is an
illegality. The judgments impugned are, therefore, not sustainable.
Thus, for the foregoing reasons, this jail petition is
converted into an appeal and is hereby allowed. The convictions
and sentences of appellants Zafar Khan and Taj Mir Khan awarded
through the impugned judgments dated 18.09.2014 and
19.12.2016 passed by the Trial Court and the learned High Court
respectively, are set aside. They are acquitted of the charge and be
released forthwith, if not required to be detained in any other case.
Islamabad,
1.02.2022
Approved For Reporting
K.Ances/-
