IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
  
PRESENT:  
 MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
 MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
 
 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 70 OF 2012  
(Contempt proceedings against weekly ‘ Pulse ’) 
 
 
For the Prosecution   Dr. Faqir Hussain, Registrar, SCP  
    Mr. Shahid Hussain, PRO, SCP  
    Mr. Umar Salman, DPM, SCP (witnesses)  
 
For alleged contemnor  Syed Zafar Abbas Naqvi, AOR  
Mr. Mohsin J. Baig, Editor -in-Chief  
    (weekly ‘P ulse’) 
    Samar  Rao, Editor Production, P ulse 
 
Date o f Hearing:   10.09 .2013 
 
ORDER  
 Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  We refer to our previous order dated 4.6.2013. The said 
order shows that numerous opportunities have been provided to the respondents and  
many  adjournments have been granted to them to ensure that  their right of defence 
remains protected. It was clearly noted that today’s hearing had been fixed on the asking of 
the respondents.  
2. In the above backdrop it is hard to appreciate  that the respondents have yet again 
made a request seeking an adjournment in t he case although today’s date had been “fixed at 
the express request of Mr. Mohsin J. Baig who sought the specific date after ascertaining the 
availability of his witnesses, including the IT expert he seeks to examine as his witness. As such 
further adjour nments will not be allowed” .  
3. It is stated by Mr. Mohsin J. Baig that Dr. A. Basit Sr. ASC has re turned the brief to 
him for reasons not explained to him. Keeping in mind the above reproduce d paragraph of 
our previous order dated 4.6.2013, we would have  been justified in proceeding with the 
matter. In this respect the witnesses PW1, PW2 and PW3 are present in Court for 
submitting to cross examination by the respondents. However, Mr. Mohsin J. Baig seeks 
time to engage another counsel and to produce the w itnesses for the respondents.  We note 
that Dr. A. Basit Sr. ASC had returned the brief to the respondents on the last date of 
hearing i.e. 4.6.2013. In these circumstances there was ample opportunity of more than 3 Crl Org P. 70/2012  2 
months available to the respondents to en gage counsel but they have ch osen not to do so. 
Today Mr. Mohsin J. Baig has sought another adjournment to enable him to engage 
counsel.  
4. The respondent has also stated that he had filed the affidavits of witnesses but  the 
same were returned by the O ffice with objections. Syed Zafar Iqbal Naqvi learned AOR 
states that he had informed the respondents of the requirements of the Supreme Court 
Rules, 1980 and the procedure prescribed therein for assailing the objections raised by the 
Office. The learned AOR s tated that the respondents, however, have not filed appeal 
against the objections as yet . The objections raised by the O ffice would have to be assailed 
through the appeal procedure set out in the Supreme Court Rules. Mr. Mohsin J. Baig states 
that the appl ications/documents filed by him were returned by the O ffice on 6.9.2013 and 
that within the next 2/3 days, an appeal will be filed against the order passed by  the O ffice.  
5. Let the matter now be listed for hearing on 24.9.2013 on which date the PWs shall  be 
present for the purpose of their cross examination and the respondents shall also produce 
their witnesses, if they so choose , failing which the matter shall proceed further.      
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
  Judge  
Islamabad  
10.09.2013  
A. Rehman  