IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
 
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Civil Miscellaneous Applications No.3577 of 2019 and 9219 of 2023 in 
Civil Review Petition Nil of 2019 and Civil Review Petition No.266 of 
2019 in Suo Motu Case No.7 of 2017.  
 
 
Review Petition by Sheikh Rasheed Ahmed, 
Chairman, Awami Muslim League  
(Civil Miscellaneous Application No.3577 of 2019)  
Review Petition by the Govt. of Pakistan through 
Secretary M/o Defence  
(Civil Miscellaneous Application No.9219 of 2023)  
  
 
 
 
 
....Applicants  
 
For the applicant :    
Mr. Abdul Raziq, ASC with Sheikh 
Rasheed Ahmed in -person.  
Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR.  
   
Date of Hearing:   15 November 2023  
ORDER  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . This Court vide judgment dated  6 February 2019 
(‘the Judgment ’) traced the history of orchestrated violent prote sts in 
Pakistan (paragraphs 20 -23), and sounded a warning for the future . 
However, the concerns expressed by us almost 5 years ago were 
disregarded by successive governments.  Review petitions and 
applications were filed and these were not fixed for hearing, which 
hindered the Judgment’s implementation. N o responsibility was affixed , 
nor was anyone held accountable  for the violence of  the past. It is not 
surprising that violenc e continued  to be  perceived as a  permissible  
means to attain one’s goals . Victims of those strivi ng for an independent 
judiciary,  an inclusive and tolerant Pakistan were disregarded without 
justice; the nation suffered the consequences, as evident from the  
recent events of 9 May 2023.  
2. CMA No.3577/2019 : The learned Mr. Abdul Raziq states that the 
applicant, namely, Sheikh Rasheed Ahmad, present in Court, does not 
press the instant application. We repeatedly asked the learned counsel 
why the application w as filed and then kept pending for four years and 
eight months, and were told that it was filed under a misapprehension. CMA No.3577 of 2019, etc .                                                                                                             2 
 
It is surprising that the leader of a political party, a longstanding 
parliamentarian and one who has held the high office of a Federal  
Minister filed the application on the basis of a misapprehension. 
Therefore, we enquired whether he had filed the application on 
someone’s behest, but it was reiterated that it had been filed under a 
misapprehension. A Commission has been constituted by t he Federal 
Government and its terms of reference  are proposed to be expanded to 
include this aspect too and we are confident that the Commission will 
attend to the terms of reference . Accordingly, this CMA is dismissed as 
not pressed.   
3. CMA No.9219/2023 : The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan 
(‘AG’) states that the Federal Government has constituted an Inquiry 
Commission under the Pakistan Commissions of Inquiry Act, 2017 vide 
Notification No.01/16/2023 -Lit-III, dated 15 November 2023, which has 
been published in the Gazette of Pakistan on the same date. He has 
read the said Notification and stated that one aspect has been missed 
from the terms of reference  which is to consider whether all the review 
petitions and applications filed in SMC No.7/2017 be fore this Court 
were coincidental or were filed pursuant to instructions from the same 
source. The learned AG stated that this will be added to the terms of 
reference  of the Commission, which will be notified and published in the 
Gazette of Pakistan within  a week.  
4. CMA No.9648/2023 : Mr. Absar Alam Haider has filed this 
application and has attached an order of this Court dated 3 October 
2022, dismissing CPLA No.2344/2018. From what we have been able to 
gather, Mr. Haider wants to restore the said petition , which had been 
dismissed. While he states that he is no longer interested in regaining 
the position of Chairman PEMRA, he still wants to challenge the 
findings recorded against him, therefore, Mr. Haider wants to withdraw 
the instant application, which i s dismissed as withdrawn.  
5. In this case, review petitions and applications were filed in early 
2019 but were not fixed for several years. In the interim the other 
signatory to the Judgment, namely Mushir Alam, J, retired on 17 
August 2021. The concerned officers of the Supreme Court were asked 
to submit a report regarding non -fixation of these matters in Court. The 
Additional Registrar (Fixture) and the Additional Registrar (Judicial) 
have jointly reported as under:  CMA No.3577 of 2019, etc .                                                                                                             3 
 
‘It is pertinent to mention here that usually the review 
petitions are fixed on priority before the same Bench or in 
which at least the Hon’ble Author Judge is a member. 
Furthermore, previously important cases used to be fixed 
before the Hon’ble Court after approval of former HCJs. 
Record show s that C.R.P.266/2019 etc. were added in draft 
of Final Cause List No.17/2019 for the first time on 
25.04.2019 at 01:12 P.M (CFMS Report is attached at Flag -
A) however, the same were removed from the draft list on 
25.04.2019 at 05:06 P.M. as per direction given by the then 
HCJ.’  
And, further that:  
‘It is also worth mentioning that the said cases were also 
repeatedly mentioned in List of Important Cases presented to 
former HCJs from time to time, however, these cases 
remained pending in office due to the reason that there were 
no direction from the then HCJs for fixation of the cases.’  
 
6. With humility, and setting an example for others to follow, this 
Court acknowledges the manipulation resorted to in the Supreme Court 
by not fixing the said petitions an d applications. The Supreme Court 
endeavours to regain the confidence of the people by acknowledging 
this, and will be demonstrating that the mistakes of the past will not be 
repeated. Truth sets one free and makes institutions strong. The people 
of Pakist an deserve nothing less.  
7. It is long overdue that every institution acts transparently and 
responsibly. And, when wrong is done it is incumbent to acknowledge 
it. Ignoring wrongdoing or offering a bare denial of it, when the facts 
suggest otherwise, is to have lived a lie, and perpetuated it; it is also 
against the interest of the public whose taxes fund all public 
institutions.  Lack of trust in public institutions engenders autocracy 
and threatens democracy. If individuals begin to overshadow the 
instit utions they work in, they cause irreparable harm, diminish their 
institution, and render them as their alter ego.  
8. It should not need reminding that every decision of the Supreme 
Court is binding and must be implemented by all executive authorities as 
stipulated in Articles 189 and 190 of the Constitution. Implementation 
however may be forestalled when review petitions and other applications 
are pending. However, all review petitions and applications have now 
been disposed of. It now needs to be consider ed whether we should 
invoke the constitutional power of contempt under Article 204 of the 
Constitution in case the Judgment is not implemented. T hose who    CMA No.3577 of 2019, etc .                                                                                                             4 
 
were in government when the Judgment was given are no longer in 
government and the composition of t he Election Commission has also 
changed. Therefore, it would not be appropriate to hold the present 
incumbents responsible for the actions/inactions of their predecessors, 
particularly when they have demonstrated that they want to implement 
the decision of  this Court.  
9. The Federal Government has also constituted a Commission and 
given it two months to do its task, and we expect that it will do so 
within the allotted time. The Election Commission of Pakistan had on 
the last date sought thirty days to do w hat it had undertaken and this 
period has not expired yet. The Election Commission of Pakistan should 
submit its report without waiting for the next date. To be fixed on 
Monday, 22 January 2024.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad:  
15 November 2023  
(Hassan K.W.)  
 
Approved for reporting  
 