IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
Suo Moto Case No. 4 of 2021   
AND 
Suo Moto Case No. 5 of 2021  
 
AND 
 
Constitution Petition No. 27 of 2022  
 
Syed Ibn -e-Hussain and others .    … Petitioner s 
     Versus  
Federation of Pakistan through its Ministry  
of Information, Islamabad and others .   … Respondent s 
 
For Petitioner s/Applicants : Mr. Aqeel Afzal, In -person.  
(In SMCs. 4 & 5/21)    President, Press Association of Supreme Court.  
     Mr. Abdul Qayyum Siddiqui, In -person.  
     Mr. Asad Toor, In -person.  
 
On behalf of Amir Mir:   Mr. Jehangir Khan Jadoon, ASC.  
 
On behalf of PFUJ:   Mr. Afzal Butt, President PFUJ.  
 
On behalf of PEMRA:   Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizwi, ASC.  
 
For the Petitioners:   Mr. Haider Waheed, ASC.  
(In CP. 27/ 2022) 
 
On Court’s Notice : 
 
Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Additional Attorney General for Pakistan.  
Malik Javed Iqbal, Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
Mr. Shehzad Shaukat, ASC (President, SCBA).  
Mr. Hassan Akbar, Advocate -General, Sindh.  
Mr. Ayaz Shaukat, Advocate -General, Islamabad.  
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Additional Advocate -General, KP.  
Mr. Waseem Mumtaz, Additional  Advocate -General, Punjab.  
Mr. Ayaz Swati, Additional Advocate -General, Balochistan.  
Mr. Waqar -ud-Din, Director Operation s/FIA Cyber Crime.  
Mr. Ayaz Khan, Additional Director Operations/FIA.  
Ch. Abid Mehmood, Section Officer, (Litigation).  
     
Date of Hea ring:   30.01.2024. 
 
ORDER  
 Mr. Abdul Qayyum Siddiqui points out that he had forgotten to 
mention the attack on Mr. Absar Alam, who was a journalist , and as such 
paragraph 2 of the order dated 29 January 2024 may be read to include his 
name as well. Order accordingly.  Report with regard to Mr. Absar Alam 
should also be submitted.   SMC No. 4/2021 etc.  
 
 2 
2. Mr. Afzal Butt, states that he is the President of Pakistan Federal 
Union of Journalists (‘PFUJ ’) which wants to become a party in these 
proceedings and PFUJ may also file a petition under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution . He may move an appropriate application in this respect and 
may also submit suggestions as to how to proceed further with these cases  
and/or file the said petition.  
 
3. The President of Press Association o f the Supreme Court states that 
they will be filing a petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution with 
regard to the freedom of press and difficulties being faced  by journalists 
and requests that in view of the urgency the office be directed to numbe r 
such petition .  
 
4. A number of concerns were addressed and the learned Attorney -
General for Pakistan reiterated the undertak ing given by him, incorporated 
in the order dated 29 January 2024 , and states that the notices issued to 
journalists by FIA will not be taken up or proceeded with till after the 
elections schedule for 8 February 2024 and that fresh notices will be issued 
for a date after elections.  
 
5. Mr. Haider Waheed, learned counsel representing the petitioner s in 
Constitution Petition No. 27 o f 2022 , made submissions. During the 
hearing a  number of questions arose and he stated that he need ed time to 
attend to them by filing concise statement and requested for two weeks 
time. Time granted.  
 
6. All present in Court stated that these cases may b e adjourned to a 
date after election s.  
 
7. If any petition as stated above is filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution it should be numbered and immediately placed before the 
Committee constituted under the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) 
Act, 2023.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
30.01.2024 
(M. Tauseef)   