  Athar Minallah, J. -The reasons in support of orders 
dated 23 .02.2023 and 24 .02.2023 respectively , whereby the  
petitions and the assumption of suo motu jurisdiction were 
dismissed are as follows : 
2.  There are t hree f undamental grounds for dismiss ing 
the petitions and the assumption of  suo motu  jurisdiction . Firstly, 
the ‘salutary principles ’ expounded by the Full Court regarding  
the assumption of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of  the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , 1973 
(“Constitution ”) are binding on this bench ; secondly, in matters 
which involve the interests of the political parties , utmost caution 
must be exercised so as not to prejudice the appearance of 
impartiality of th e Court , particularly  when jurisdiction is invo ked 
suo motu ; and lastly, the conduct and bona  fides of the p olitical 
stakeholder who has approached the Court . As will be discussed 
later, public trust and confidence is sacrosanct for the  ability of 
the judicial branch to perform its function s effectively as the 
guardian of the Constitution and the fundamental rights 
enshrined in it by its framers. The legitimacy of the Court’s verdict 
solely depends on the public’s belief that the Court is an 
independent , impartial , and  apolitical arbiter of disputes between 
political stakeholders. The matter placed before us has arisen 
from a dispute which is essentially political in nature and one of 
the High Court's has already adjudicated upon it. My learned 
brother Yahya  Afridi , J. has correctly observed i n his note, dated 
23.02.2023 , to show re straint so as to ‘’ avoid any adverse 
reflection on this Court ’s judicial pre-emptive eagerness to 2 
 
decide’’ . Preserving public trust and confidence in the Court ’s 
independence and impartiality  is crucial. This Court has been 
dragged into controversies of  a political nature for a third time in 
quick succession.  
3.  The petitions and ass umption of suo motu  jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3)  of the Constitution stem from an unceasing 
political turmoil . This Court has remained at the centre stage of 
an unprecedented charged and polarised political milieu . The first 
indulgence of this Court was when the voting on the resolution of 
no-confidence motion was stalled by the Deputy Speaker followed 
by dismissal of the National Assembly by the President . The latter 
had acted in pursuance to the advice tendered by the then-Prime 
Minister , Mr Imran Khan . The Chief Justice had assumed suo 
motu  jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution on the 
recommendation of twelve Judges of this Court  and the 
proceedings had culminated in  the rendering of the judgment 
reported  as Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians  v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2022 SC 574). The unanimous verdict handed 
down by a bench consisting of  five Judges had set aside the act of 
the Deputy Speaker and had declared the dissolution of the 
National Assembly as ‘extra -constitutional ’. The resolution of no -
confidence was revived and consequently the National Assembly 
was restored . The request of the Attorney General to continu e with 
the process of elections was turned down  and t he action of the 
Deputy Speaker was declared as biased . Subsequently, t he 
resolution was carried by a majority and resultantly the Prime 
Minister , Mr Imran  Khan , ceased to hold the office under Article 3 
 
95(4) of the Constitution. The political crisis escalated when , after 
losing the vote of confidence , Mr Imran Khan  chose not to take the 
exalted  seat of  leader of  the opposition and decided to resign from 
the membership of the National Assembly along with other 
members belonging to the political party  Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf. 
The resignations were tendered but their acceptance by the 
Speaker was delayed . The strategy had profound consequences for 
the political process and constitutional democracy  of Pakistan . 
This Court was called upon to become an arbiter in resolving yet 
another political quagmire created by the political stakeholders . 
The adv isory jurisdiction of th e Court was invoked by the 
President  who had sought  interpretation of Article 63A of the 
Constitution. By a majority of three to two, the bench  of this 
Court , in the judgment reported  as Supreme Court Bar Association 
of Pakistan  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2023 SC 42), 
interpreted Article 63A and , inter alia , held that “the vote of any 
member (including a deemed member) of a Parliamentary Party in 
a House that is cast contrary to any direction issued by the latter 
in terms of para (b) of clause (1) of Article 63A cannot be counted 
and must be disregarded ”. The political ramifications of this 
declaration were profound in a  highly  charged and polarised 
political atmosphere. A review against the judgment  was sought 
and the petitions are pending before this Court.  
4.  The effects of the interpretation of Article 63A on  the 
ensuing events were far -reaching for the  polarised  political 
stakeholders. After the government  was formed in the province of  
Punjab,  the major coalition partner , Pakis tan Tehreek -e-Insaf , 4 
 
decided  to dissolve the legislatures  of the provinces of Punjab and  
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  (KPK)  respectively. The Assemblies of the 
provinces of Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa ( “KPK”) stood 
dissolved on 14.1.2023 and 18.1.2023 respectively , pursuant to 
advice tendered by the respective Chief Ministers . In the case of 
the provincial Assembly of  Punjab , the Governor had chosen not 
to act upon the advice and , therefore , it stood dissolved upon the 
lapse of the period prescribed  under the Constitution , while the 
Governor of KPK  decided otherwise and, therefore, the assembly 
was dissolved  through his order passed on  18.1.2023.  
5.  While the competent authorities were yet to announce 
a date for elections , one of the political stakeholders, Pakistan 
Tehreek -e-Insaf , invoked the jurisdiction of the Lahore High 
Court , vested in it under Article 199 of the Constitution . Some 
other citizens had also filed petitions.  They were aggrieved 
because they felt that the inaction on  the part  of the competent 
authorit ies was likely to delay the elections , resulting in  a violat ion 
of the Constitution . They had urged the High Court to issue 
appropriate writs to compel the re sponsible authorities to hold the 
elections within the timeframe explici tly prescribed under Article 
224 of the Constitution. Likewise, petition s were also filed before 
the Peshawar High Court seeking appropriate writs with respect to 
the announcement of a date and the holding of elections in KPK.  
6.  The proceedings relating to the petitions filed before 
the Lahore High Court  were diligently concluded and they were  
adjudicated vide judgment dated 10.2.2023 passed in Pakistan 
Tehreek -e-Insaf through its General Secretary  v. Governor of Punjab 5 
 
and another  (Writ Petition No. 5851 of 2023 ), Munir Ahmad  v. 
The Governor of Punjab and others  (Writ Petition No. 6118 of 
2023 ), Zaman Khan Vardag  v. Province of Punjab and another  
(Writ Petition No. 6093 of 2023 ), and  Sabir  Raza Gill  v. Governor 
of Punjab  (Writ Petition No. 6119 of 2023 ). The High Court had 
allowed the prayers sought in the petitions and appropriate writs 
were granted  under Article 199 of the Constitution in the following 
terms: - 
“In view of the constitutional provisions 
mentioned above and the judgments of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, the prayer made in 
the “ consolidated petitions ” is allowed and the 
“ECP” is directed to immediately announce the 
“date of election ” of the Provincial Assembly of 
Punjab with the Notification specifying reasons, 
after consultation with the Governor of Punjab, 
being the constitutional Head of the Province, to 
ensure that the elections are held not later than 
ninety days as per the mandate of the 
“Constitution ”. 
7.  The above judgment was assailed by preferring i ntra 
court appeal s which  are pending before a Division Bench of the 
High Court. The appeals have been taken up  for hearing and they 
are being heard . Admittedly , the writ s granted by the single j udge 
of the High Court vide the aforementioned judgment have not 
been interfered with since no injunctive order  has been passed by 
the Division Bench. The judgment of the Lahore High Court is , 
therefore,  validly subsisting and binding on the public authorities 
who are saddled with the responsib ility to enforce  it. Petition(s) 
have also been filed seeking  implementation of the judgment by 6 
 
way of initiati on of contempt proceedings . This Court has no 
reason to doubt the ability and competence of the High Court to 
enforce its judgment because , by doing so , the comp etence and 
independence of a provincial constitutional court would be 
unjustifiably undermined. The enforceable writs granted by the 
High Court are binding and any attempt to imped e its 
implementation could expose the delinquent authorities to grave 
consequences. On the other hand, t he Peshawar High Court  has 
assiduously  taken up the petitions and there is no reason to  
assume that the proceedings and adjudication of the petitions 
would be delayed. The High Court has taken effectiv e steps  and 
any assumption regarding its competence or ability would be 
unwarranted  and unjustified . 
8.  While the Lahore High Court had already rendered an 
authoritative judgment and it was i n the process of being 
enforce d, petitions were filed before this Court urging assumption 
of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  regarding 
the same matter : holding of elections  within the time prescribed 
under the Constitution . One of the petition s was filed in the name 
of the Islamabad High Court Bar Association by its President  while 
the other by the Speakers of the two dissolved legislatures and 
former elected members. It is noted that the petitioners in the 
latter petition are associated with the same political party , 
Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf , which had invoked the jurisdiction of 
the Lahore High Court  and its prayers were granted by issuance of 
appropriate writs. Simultaneously, a  two-member  bench of this 
Court , while seized with a service matter relating to the transfer of 7 
 
a police officer , had summoned the Chief Election Commissioner 
and, after hearing him , had passed  the order dated 16.2.2023 in 
the case titled  Ghulam Mehmood Dogar  v. Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary Government of Pakistan and others  (Civil 
Petition No. 3988 of 2022 ). It was observed by the bench that 
election s to the P rovincial Assembly of Punjab w ere required to be 
held within the period prescribed under Article 224(2) of the 
Constitution . The learned Judges were of the opinion that “no 
progress ” had been made . It was further observed in the order 
that lack of progress had given rise to a “real and im minent 
danger of violation of a clear and unambiguous constitutional 
command ”. The bench also observed that since this question was 
not involved in the lis before it , therefore , it was fit to refer the 
matter to the Chief Justice for invoking suo motu  jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution on the touchstone of the 
principle highlighted in the judgment reported as Suo Motu Case 
No.4 of 2021  (PLD 2022 SC 306 ). The Registrar , acting pursuant 
to the order  passed by the two Judges , placed a note before the 
Chief Justice on 17.2.2023 , recommending fixation of the 
petitions and consideration of invocation of suo motu  jurisdiction . 
The Chief Justice , through the administrative order dated 
22.2.2023, constituted a bench consisting of nine Judges of this 
Court. The petitions  and suo motu  assumption of jurisdiction were 
ordered to be fixed before the special bench and the following 
questions were framed : 
“a) Who has the constitutional responsibility and 
authority for appointing the date for the holding 
of a general el ection to a Provincial Assembly  8 
 
upon its dissolution in the various situations 
envisaged by an d under the Constitution?  
b) How and when is this constitutional  
responsibility to be discharged ? 
c) What are the constitutional responsibilities 
and duties of the Federation and the Province 
with re gard to the holding of the general 
election? ” 
9.  The reasons recorded by the Chief Justice in his 
administrative order dated 22 .02.2022 , referred to the 
adjudication  of the petitions  by the Lahore High Court but  
apprehensions were recorded  regarding the likely delay in  the 
holding of the elections. The suo motu  invocation of jurisdiction 
along with the petitions w as fixed before the special bench on 
23.02.2023. In my opinion t he questions framed by the Chief 
Justice  had already been adjudicated upon by the Lahore High 
Court  and it was competent to enforce the writs granted by it. The 
legitimacy of the dissolution  of the Provincial Assemblies before  
the lapse of time prescribed under Article 107 of the Constitution  
was raised during the hearing held on 23 .02.2023 and the 
following questions were further framed : 
“(a) Whether the power of a Chief Minister to 
make advice for the dissolution of the Provincial 
Assembly is absolute and does not require any 
valid constitutional reason for its exercise?  
(b) Is a Chief Minister to make such advice on his 
own independent opinion or can he act in making 
such advice under the direction of some other 
person?  9 
 
(c) If such advice of a Chief Minister is found 
constitutionally invalid for one reason or another, 
whether the provincial assembly dissolved in 
consequence thereof can be restored?”  
10.   The written order relating to the hearing held on 
23.02.2023 included a separate note of Yahya  Afridi , J, who had 
dismissed the petitions on the ground of maintainability. The 
reason ing recorded in the short order  was persuasive  and I had no 
hesitation in concurring with the decision regarding dismissal of 
the petitions. I had reiterated my decision by recording my note in 
the order dated 24 .02.2023. I have had the privilege of reading the 
detailed reasoning recorded by my learned brothers, Syed 
Mansoor Ali Shah and Jamal Khan Mandokhail,  JJs and I agree 
with their opinion , particularly  regarding the final outcome of the 
petitions and the suo motu  assumption of jurisdiction  by a 
majority of 4  to 3 because this was the understanding in the 
meeting held in the anteroom  on 27 .02.2023 . It is noted that I had 
not recused nor had any reason to dissociate myself.  
JURISDICTION UNDER ARTICLE 184(3)  AND THE BINDING SALUTARY 
PRINCIPLES  
11.  The Supreme Court is the creation of the Constitution. 
Article 175(1) , inter alia , declares that  there shall be a Supreme 
Court. Article 17 6 explicitly provides that the Supreme Court shall 
consist  of the Chief Justice , to be known as the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan , and so many other Judges as may be determined by the 
Act of the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) or , until so determined , as 
may be fixed by the President. The Chief Justice and the Judges 
collectively constitute the Supreme Court.  The powers  exercised  10 
 
by the  Chief Justice have been conferred by the Supreme Court 
vide the rules made under the Constitution. Article 191 provides 
that, subject to the Constitution and the law, the Supreme Court 
may make rules regarding the practice and procedure of the Court  
and, pursuant to the power conferred there under , the Supreme 
Court has made the Supreme Court Rules , 1980 ( “Rules of 
1980 ”). The powers enjoyed by the Chief Justice as Master of the 
Roster are derived from these rules  and have been delegated for 
administrative convenience .  
12.  The framers of the Constitution have conferred three 
distinct c ategories of jurisdiction s on the Supre me Court : original, 
appellate , and advisory. The original jurisdiction is vested under 
Article 183(4) . It is extraordinary and its exercise is subject to two 
limitations ; firstly, that it must involve question s of public 
importance and secondly, that such a question must be with 
regard to  the enforcement of the fundamental rights  conferred by 
Chapter 1 of Part II  of the Constitution . This jurisdiction is not 
subject to the procedural trappings and limitations provided 
under Article 199. The exercise of jurisd iction under Article 
184(3), therefore, is not dependent on its invocation by an 
aggrieved party . The assumption of jurisdiction will be justified 
when both of the aforementioned conditions are met. This Court , 
in Manz oor Elahi  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1975 SC 66 ) set 
out the salutary principle s for the assumption of original 
jurisdiction vested in it under Article 184(3). These salutary 
principles were later re affirmed by a bench consisting of eleven 
Judges  of this Court  in the case Benazir Bhutto  v. Federation of 11 
 
Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416 ). It was explicitly observed that the 
power conferred under Article 184(3) of the Constitution must 
always be exercised with circumspection and utmost caution. It 
has been held that if t he two conditions stipulated  under Article 
184(3) are satisfied , even then this  Court  may not exercise the 
jurisdiction i f sufficient justification has not been shown for failing 
to invok e the wider concurrent jurisdiction vested in a High Court 
under Article 199 of the Constitution.  The jurisdiction  vested in 
the Supreme Court and the High Court s under Article 184(3) and 
Article 199, respectively , is coterminous  and concurrent. The  
deference shown by this Court is premised on the established 
principle that the lowest court or tribuna l must be approached in 
the first instance when the jurisdictions are concurrent. The High 
Courts have extensive j urisdiction and powers under Article 199 of 
the Constitution and a High Court is as competent as the 
Supreme Court to deal with matters of pub lic importance 
involving interpretation of the Con stitution and the enforcement of  
fundamental rights. The Judges of both the courts have sworn a  
similar oath to ‘protect, defend and preserve the Constitution ’. 
Moreover, when two courts have concurrent jurisdiction and one 
of them happens to be a superior court , to which a remedy of 
appeal lies , then normally the latter will not entertain a similar 
matter  pending before the lower court . No party can be deprived of 
its vested right of appeal provided unde r Article 185 of the 
Constitution. In the Benazir Bhutto  case, this Court held that 
although ordinarily the forum of the court  lower in the  hierarchy 
must be invoked but such a principle is not inviolable and 
assuming jurisdiction in exceptionally genuine cases  is not 12 
 
barred. In the case the jurisdiction was assumed because the High 
Court had not admitted the petition for regular hearing despite  the 
lapse of more than eighteen months. This Court , in that case , had 
therefore  assumed jurisdiction because of the inordinate delay 
and the fact that the High Court was not seized of the matter. In 
Suo Motu Case No. 7 of 2017  (PLD 2019 SC 318 ), this Court has 
stressed the need for taking all possible care before entertaining or 
making an order under Article 184(3) of the Constitution since 
there was no right of appeal against such an order. The salutary 
principles expounded in the Manz oor Elahi  case are binding since 
they were reaffirmed by a bench consisting of eleven judges of this 
Court in the Benazir Bhutto  case. In the case in hand , one of the 
High Court s has already adjudicated the matter wh ile the other is 
competently sei zed with it. It does not qualify to be an 
exceptionally genuine case so as to cross the bar set out in the 
Benazir Bhutto  case. The inde pendence a nd competence of the 
High Court s is likely to be undermined by assuming that the 
questions raised before us cannot  be resolved or answered by 
them.   
THE DUTY OF THE COURT TO PRESERVE PUBLIC TRUST WHEN 
ENTERTAINING AND EXERCISING POWERS CONFERRED UNDER ARTICLE 
184(3)  OF THE CONSTITUTION   
13.  The original jurisdiction vested in this Court under 
Article 184(3) is extraordinary and its language manifests that the 
framers of the Constitution had in tended that the authority will be 
exercised only when the two conditions expressly stated therein 
are met. The legitimacy of this monumental authority and the 
verdicts handed down pursuant thereto solely depends on public 13 
 
trust. Courts have no control over the sword nor the purse. Public 
trust and c onfidence canno t be taken for granted nor would 
judges  be justified in expecting others to have faith in their 
independence, fairness and impartiality without a continuous 
pursuit to earn it through judicial conduct , institutional 
standards , transparent procedures  and propriety. Appearances 
and public perceptions are as important as the reality because 
they give legitimacy to the proceedings and the verdicts of the 
courts. It is public trust which enables the courts to effectively 
discharge their functions.  Even unpopular decisions are respected 
when people have faith in the independen ce, fair ness and 
impartial ity of the  adjudicatory process . This Court has 
consistently held that it will not refuse to exercise judicial review if 
a question raised has  political content , provided that it involves a 
legal or constitutional issue. But in doing so , the Court will always 
be mindful of its duty to ensure that it is not only  an apolitical, 
independent, fair and impartial arbiter  but also appears to be so. 
This duty become s far more  challenging when the controversy 
brought before th e Court involves the interests of  the political 
stakeholders . Each one must believe that the court and j udges 
hearing the lis are fair, independent and impartial. The 
institutional p rocesses  and procedures, whether administrative or 
judicial, must appear to be transparent and based on decisions 
which are an outcome of  the exercise of structured discretion. No 
political stakeholder should have the remotest doubt regarding the 
impartiality, integrity and fairness of the adjudicatory process.  
Ironically, the frequent invocation of the jurisdiction under 184(3) 14 
 
in matters which were of a political nature must have had 
profound consequences in moulding public trust.     
14.  It is manifest from the language that t he framers of the 
Constitution had intended to confer the power under Article 
184(3) to be exercised for protect ing the fundamental rights of the 
vulnerable, marginalised and depressed classes of the society. The 
phenomena of enforced disappeara nces is probably one of the  
gravest and  most  atrocious example s of violation of fundamental 
rights  and it is no less than  a subversion of the Constitution.  The 
appeals against the Peshawar High Court judgment relating to 
extra -judicial detention in inter nment centres are pending before 
this Court.    The inhuman, harsh and life-threatening  conditions 
in prisons, custodial torture , extra -judicial killings, violence 
against journalists, and arbitrary restrictions on freedom of 
expression are other instances which should have had  priority in 
the context of the jurisdiction c onferred under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution.  The power  was intended and ought to have been 
exercised to alleviate  the plight and distress of such  sections of 
society.  The framers had inserted Article 184(3) intending that the 
jurisdiction shall be exercised to ensure that the fundamental 
rights of the weak, vulnerable and marginalised classes are 
protected. Instead, t he jurisdiction was exercised to legitimise  the 
remov al of elected Prime Minister s and endorse  military takeovers . 
This Court handed down the judgment in Begum Nusrat Bhutto  v. 
Chief of Army Staff and Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1977 SC 657 ) 
to validate  the imposition of Martial Law , based  on the doctrine of 
necessity , while exercis ing its original jurisdiction  and it lasted for 15 
 
a decade despite the time frame committed to it. The deposed 
Prime Minister was convicted and sent to the gallows after his 
appeal was dismissed by this Court by a majority of 4 to 3. During 
the trial the appellant had filed an application because he had 
reservations on the constitution of the Bench. The application was 
dismissed vide judgment reported as Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  v. The 
State  (PLD 1978 SC 125 ) and it was observed as follows  by the 
then-Chief Justice :  
“One other important aspect may also be 
mentioned. The appellant not only wants me not 
to sit on this Bench, but also wants me to refrain 
from nominating the Judges for hearing this 
case. Under the constituti on and the law 
regulating the practice of the Supreme Court, it 
is not only the privilege  but the duty and 
obligation of the Chief Justice to personally 
preside over all important cases, and to nominate 
Judges for hearing cases which come up before 
the Cou rt. No person has the right to ask me to 
abdicate this  responsibility, nor has he the right 
to demand a Bench of his own choice. This would 
be contrary to the well -established norms 
regulating the functioning of  the superior Courts 
of this country. Any obj ection, if raised, must be 
left to be decided according to my conscience and 
sense of duty in the light of all the  surrounding 
circumstances of the case, including any possible 
repercussions on the capacity of my other 
colleagues to continue on the Bench i f similar 
objections are raised against some of them as the 
appeal proceeds. ” 
It is a matter of record that o ne of the Judges on the bench had 
later publically indicat ed that the proceedings may have been 16 
 
influenced. The advisory jurisdiction of this Court  was invoked in 
2012 , questioning the legitimacy of the verdict and the reference 
has not been decided as yet.  
15.  The Constitution suffered another setback in 1999 
when the then Chief of Army Staff forcibly remov ed the elected 
Prime Minister and the legislatures  were dissolved . The 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) was invoked and the 
takeover was validated through the judgment in Zafar Ali Shah  v. 
General Pervez Musharraf  (PLD 2000 SC 869 ) despite having 
discarded the doctrine of necessity in  the case of Miss Asma Jilani  
v. The Government of the Punjab and another  (PLD 1972 SC 139 ). 
The power to amend the Const itution was also granted . When 
Judges of this c ourt were unconstitutionally remov ed on 3rd 
November 2 007 the act was validated through judgment titled 
Tika Iqbal Muhammad Khan  v. Pervez Musha rraf (PLD 2008 SC 
178). In a first, the usurper was tried and convicted by a special 
court for the offence of high treason. The conviction and sentence 
were set aside by a H igh Court and the verdict was challenged 
before this Court, but the petitions and appeals have not been 
heard as yet. In the meanwhile , the usurper has passed away. The 
original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) was exercised which 
disqualified two elected Prime Ministers and they were  removed 
from their office  vide judgments reported as Muhammad Azhar 
Siddiqui  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 774 ) and Imran 
Ahmed Khan  v. Muhammad Nawaz Sharif  (PLD 2017  SC 692 ) 
respectively . Several e lected representatives were disqualified for 
not being ‘sadiq ’ and ‘ameen ’ under Article 63(f)  while some were 17 
 
declared otherwise. The role  of the Court in the realm of politics  
has moulded public perceptions which were indeed not favourable 
for public trust and confidence. Public t rust can only be preserved 
when utmost restraint is exercised in entertaining questions and 
issues which involve political content. Public trust is er oded when 
the Court is perceived a s politically partisan and the j udges as 
‘politicians in robes ’.   
16.  The unregulated invocation of suo motu  jurisdiction 
has been a subject of debate and has invited criticism. The first 
reported case of suo motu  invocation was Darshan Masih  v. State  
(PLD 1990 SC 513 ). The Rules of 1980 are silent about suo motu  
jurisdiction  and only refer to Article 184(3). When the rules were 
framed the jurisdiction  in this mode had not been invoked  as yet . 
The cases of Steel Mills and Reko Diq were decided vide 
judgement reported as Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2006 SC 697)  and Abdul Haque Baloch  v. Government of 
Balochistan  (PLD 2013 SC 641) respectively. Both the cases were 
the outcome of the invocation of suo motu  jurisdiction and they 
were perceived to be  judicial overreach in the domain of economic 
policies of the State. The indulgence has had financial 
implications and in the latter case the State was exposed to 
international litigation . The collect ion of funds for building dam s 
through Zafarullah Khan  v. Federation of Pakistan  (2018 SCMR 
1621 ) had also raised public concerns.  This Court has recognised  
in Suo Motu Case No.4 of 2021  that “the suo motu  invoking the 
jurisdiction of the Court under Article 184(3) has over the years 
come in for its share of analysis, debate, discussion and , indeed, 18 
 
criticism. It must be acknowledged that this is not something 
confined just to the Bar but extends to the Bench also . But the 
time has come to recognise that there is certain imbalance, which 
ought to be corrected. ” Commentators, legal experts and 
representative bodies of the lawyers have been consistent in 
urging regulating the exercise of suo motu  powers conferred under 
Article 184(3).  This Court, in the case of Suo Motu Case No.4 of 
2021  has described how and by whom it is to be exercised. It has 
been held that the power exclusively vests in the Chief Justice 
who is the ‘Master of the Roster ’. 
17.  The Chief Justice enjoys the status of the Master of the 
Roster by virtue of the powers conferred under the Rules of 1980. 
The jurisdiction under Article 184(3) exclusively vests in the 
“Supreme Court ”, which collectively means the Chief Justice and 
the Judges  of the Court . The Chief Justice is first among equals. 
The Rules of 1980 have been made by the Supreme Court  i.e., the 
Chief Justice and the Judges  for administrative convenience . The  
power under Article 184(3) is inherent  and exclusively vests in the  
Supreme Court . The Chief Justice exerci ses the powers conferred 
under the Rules of 1980 as a delegatee, trustee or an agent . The 
Master of  the Roster , therefore, owes a fiduciary duty of care 
towards the Supreme Court. As a fiduciary it is the duty of the 
Master of the Roster to preserve good faith and exercise the 
discretion with utmost care and in the best interest  of the 
Supreme Court . The discretion under the Rules of 1980 is not  
unfettered nor can it be exercised arbitrarily. It is settled law and 
consistently affirmed by this Court that p owers conferring 19 
 
discretion , no matter how widely worded , must always be 
exercised reasonably and subject to the existence of the essential 
conditions required for  the exercise of such powers within the 
scope of  the law. The discretion ought to be structur ed by 
organising it and producing order in it. The seven instruments of 
structuring of discretionary power  – open plans, open policy 
statements, open rules, open findings, open reasons, open 
precedents and fair informal procedures – are by now embedded 
in our jurisprudence. Th ese principles are binding in discharging 
the functions and exercising jurisdiction under the Rules of 1980. 
The discretionary powers of the Master of the Roster are, 
therefore, not unfettered nor can be exercised arbitrarily or 
capric iously. As a corollary, it is the duty of the Master of the 
Roster to exercise discretion in a manner that preserves and 
promotes public trust and confidence. It is also an onerous duty of 
the Chief Justice to act in the best interest of the Supreme Court.  
Moreover , the Chief Justice and Judges are jointly and severally 
responsible to ensure that the jurisdiction under Article 184(3) is 
exercised to promote and preserve public trust. In case of breach 
of this duty  the responsibility would rest with the Chie f Justice 
and all the Judges , because they collectively constitute the 
Supreme Court. The Court is accountable to the Constitution, the 
law and the people of this country , who are our sole stakeholders. 
No one is above the law and every public office holde r is 
accountable for the authority exercised under the Constitution 
and the law. The ‘imbalance ’ referred  to in the aforementioned 
judgment requires review of the Rules of 1980 in order to protect 
judicial integrity and impartiality in relation to constitu tion of the 20 
 
benches and allocation of cases. The Basic Law, the constitution 
of the Federal Republic of  Germany, rec ognises the right to a 
'lawful  judge'. The right prevents ad hoc and personam allocation 
of cases. The selection of judges and allocation of cases is made 
on the basis of objective criteria . If public trust is to be restored, 
the Court has to assume that each litigant has a right to a lawful 
judge.                       
18.  In a nutshell, the invocation of jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) and  the exercise of discretion relating to  the 
constitution of benches and fixation of cases are crucial in the 
context of preserving public trust and confidence. The process of 
constitution of benches and allocation of cases must be 
transparent, fair and impartial.  The Court must  always  show 
extreme restrain t in matters which involve  the political 
stakeholders , having regard to the past practice and precedents as 
discussed above . The Court must not allow any stakeholder to use 
its for um for advancing its political strategy or gaining advantage 
over other competitors. It is the duty of the Court to ensure that 
political stakeholders are not encouraged to bring their disputes to 
the courts for judicial settlement  by bypassing the institu tions 
and forums created  under the Constitution. It weakens the Majlis -
e-Shoora (Parliament) and the forums meant for political dialogue 
and, simultaneously , harms the judicial branch of the State by 
prejudicing public trust  in its independence and imparti ality. It 
also encourages the political stakeholders to shun the democratic 
values of tolerance, dialogue and settlement through political 
means. This Court owes a duty to more than fifty thousand 21 
 
litigants whose cases on our docket are awaiting to be hear d and 
decided. They ought to be given priority over the political 
stakeholders who are under an obligation to resolve their disputes 
in the political forums through democratic means. This Court has 
a duty to preserve public trust and confidence and not to appear 
politically partisan. This is what the Constitution contemplates.  
Conclusion . 
19.  It is not disputed that the Lahore High Court has 
already allowed the petitions and rendered an authoritative 
judgment and its competence to have it implemented cannot be 
doubted. The Peshawar High Court is also seized of the matter. In 
the light of the bi nding 'salutary principles' discussed above, the 
petitions and the suo motu jurisdiction must not be entertained 
lest it may interfere with the implementation of the judgment of 
the Lahore High Court and the proceedings pending before th e 
Peshawar High Cou rt. The pre mature and pre -emptive 
proceedings before this Court at this stage is likely to delay the 
enforcement of the judgment of the Lahore High Court , leading to 
infringement of the Constitution by exceeding the time frame 
prescribed ibid. This is also  obvious from the opinions of my 
learned brothers Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, Yahya Afridi a nd Jamal 
Khan Mandokhel , JJs who have  also dismis sed the petitions and 
on this ground, i.e., pendency of the same matter before two 
competent High Courts. Moreover, any person who would be 
aggrieved from the judgments of the High Courts will have the 
option to exercise the right to invoke this Court's jurisdiction 
under Article 185 of the Constitution. In the facts and 22 
 
circumstances of the case in hand, it is not a 'genui nely 
exceptional' case to deviate from the binding salutary principles. 
By entertaining the petitions and suo motu jurisdiction, the Court 
would be unjustifiably undermining the independence of two 
provincial High Courts. The indulgence at this stage would  be 
premature and it would unnecessarily prejudice public trust  in 
the independence and impartiality of this Court . This Court has 
no reason to apprehend that the High Courts are less competent 
to defend, protect and preserve the Constitution.    
20.  The manner and mode in which these proceedings 
were initiated have unnecessarily exposed the Court to political 
controvers ies. It has invited  objections from political stakeholders 
in an already polarised political environment. The objections have 
also been su bmitted in writing . This obviously has consequences 
for the trust  the people ought to repose  in the impartiality of the 
Court. The Court , by proceeding in a premature matter , will be 
stepping into already murky waters of the domain of politics. It is 
likely to erode public confidence. The as sumption of suo motu 
jurisdiction  in itself may raise concerns in the mind of an 
informed outside observer. In the circumstances, the rights of 
litigants whose cases are pending before us would be prejudiced , 
besides eroding public trust in the independence and impartiality 
of the Court. This could have been avoided if a Full Court was to 
take up these cases. It would have ensured the legitimacy of the 
proceedings. The legitimacy of the judgment rendered in th e 
Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians  case was solely based on 
the invocation of the suo motu jurisdiction on the recommendation 23 
 
of twelve Judges of this Court. Every Judge has sworn an oath to 
defend, protect and preserve the Constitution. The constit ution of 
a Full Court, as was suggested in my note dated 23 .02.2023, was 
imperative to preserve public trust in this Court.  There is another 
crucial  aspect which cannot be ignored;  the conduct of the 
political stakeholders. The political climate in the cou ntry is so 
toxic that it is inconceivable that political parties will even agree to 
having a dialogue, let alone arriving at a consensus. As a political 
strategy , resignations en  mass e were  tendered from the National 
Assembly , rather than  discharging  their constitutional obligations 
as members  of the oppositio n. The constitutional courts were  first 
approached to compel the Speaker to accept th e resignations and 
when they were accepted the courts were  again approached to 
have the decision reversed. The disso lution of the provincial 
legislature as part of the political strategy of the stakeholders 
raises questions. Is such conduct in consonance with the scheme 
of constitutional democracy? Is it not in itself  a violation of the 
Constitution? Should this Court a llow its forum to be exploited for 
advancing political strategies or appear to be encouraging 
undemocratic conduct? Should this Court not take notice of 
forum shopping by political stakeholders by invoking the 
jurisdictions of High Courts and this Court si multaneously? This 
Court cannot a nd must not appear or be seen as advancing the  
political strategies of political stakeholders. The public trust will 
be eroded in the independence and impartiality of the Court if it 
appears or is seen to encourage undemocr atic norms and values. 
The Court would be unwittingly weakening the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) and the forums created under the Constitution by 24 
 
encouraging political stakeholders to add their disputes to our 
dockets. The political stakeholders must estab lish their bona  fides 
before their petitions could be entertained. The conduct of the 
stakeholders has created an unprecedented political instability by 
resorting to conduct that is devoid  of the democratic values of 
tolerance, dialogue  and debate . The con duct of the stakeholders 
does not entitle them to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution lest it is seen or appears to 
facilitate or promote undemocratic values and strategies.  
21.  Before parting with the above reasoning in support of 
my orders dated 23 .02.2023 and 24 .02.2023,  I feel it necessary to 
record my observations regarding the hearings. It is ironic and 
unimaginable for the political stakeholders to involve the Court in 
resolving political disputes which  ought to have been settled in the 
forums created for this purpose under the Constitution. It is also 
alarming that the conduct of the political stakeholders and their 
political strategies would create unprecedented political turmoil 
and instability in the  country. Political stability is a precondition 
for economic progress and prosperity of the people. The power 
struggle between the p olitical stakeholders is undermining  the 
welfare and economic conditions of the people of this country. The 
people of Pakist an have been made to suffer for a long time by 
depriving them of their fundamental rights. The long spells of 
undemocratic regimes validated by this Court have caused 
irretrievable loss to the country and its people. The institutions 
which represent the wi ll of the people were  not allowed to take 
roots. Even today, seventy -five years  after the creation of Pakistan, 25 
 
the institutions  remain weak. The country is on the brink of a 
political and Constitutional crisis and it is high time that all those 
responsibl e take a step back and resort to some introspection. All 
the instituti ons, including this Court, need  to set aside their egos 
and strive towards fulfilling their Constitutional obligations. 
Speaking for my institution, it is obvious that we may not have 
learnt any lessons from our past bleak history. We cannot erase 
the judgments from the law reports but at least endeavour to 
restore public trust and confidence so that the past is forgotten to 
some extent. When politicians do not approach the appropriate 
forums and bring their disputes to the courts, the former may win 
or lose the case, but inevitably the court is the loser.                   
              
       (Justice Athar Minallah)  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING                 
  
 