IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J.  
MR. JUSTICE GHULAM RABBANI  
MR. JUSTICE KHALIL -UR-REHMAN RAMDAY  
 
 
Suo Moto Case No. 14 Of 2010  
(Action taken on news regarding 
murder of two you ng brothers by a 
mob in Sialkot in presence of Police ) 
 
 
 
On Court Notice   Kh. Haris Ahmad, Advocate General Pb.  
Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser, Addl. AG Pb.  
a/w 
Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Sukhera, Addl. IGP,  
Maj. (R) Mubasharullah, Principal PTS  
Mr. Abdur Razzaq Cheema , S.P./PPO  
Malik Tassadaq Hayat, SP, Spl. Br. Gujranwala  
Malik Fayyaz Ahmed, DSP Sambrial  
Mr. Bilal Ahmed Kamyana, DPO Sialkot  
Mr. Nasir Qureshi, S.P. (Investigation)  
 
On Court’s Call   Hafiz Imran, District Reporter Sialkot, Dunya News  
 
Date of hearing   01.09.2010  
 
     
O R D E R  
 
  Mr. Kazim Ali Malik, D.G. Anti Corruption Establishment, 
Government of Punjab, who was directed to conduct inquiry  in the 
incident of brutal murder in reckless manner of two young boys Mughees 
Sajjad and Munib Sajjad, has subm itted a report.  A thorough inquiry  has 
been conducted and he formulated questions in the light of the available 
material and attending circumstances of the case.  After deliberation 
based on evidence recorded during process of inquiry  question -wise 
opinio n expressed by him is as follows:  
 
Question – I. Whether Shaukat Ali Bhatti, complainant put 
forward unadulterated version while lodging 
FIR No. 437/2010?   SMC No. 14/2010  2 
Answer:  For the aforesaid reasons I feel no difficulty in 
concluding that Shaukat Ali, complainant a nd 
the police reshaped the incident.  In case 
Mughees and Muneeb were armed with pistols 
with which they fired at Bill, deceased and his 
companions then what was the necessity to 
fabricate the recovery of pistols against them.  
Question – II. Whether Zarrar  Butt, complainant of cross 
case could justify presence of his nephews, 
Mughees Sajjad and Muneeb Sajjad at the spot 
at relevant time?  
Answer:  This issue can only be resolved by analyzing 
and scrutinizing the evidence of both the sides 
with the yard stick of trial court.  
Question – III Whether Mughees Sajjad and Muneeb Sajjad 
the two deceased brothers were robbers and 
criminals?  
Answer:  I am not in a position to certify that Mughees 
Sajjad (18) and his brother Muneeb Sajjad 
(15) possessed angelic character.   They might 
have committed some wrongs during their life 
time intentionally, unintentionally, innocently 
or even foolishly without realizing the 
enormity of their wrongs but in the given 
circumstances it can be safely said that they 
were not robbers/dacoi ts/hardened criminals, 
particularly when not a single case of mobile 
snatching or any other crime had ever been 
registered or reported against them during 
their life time.  SMC No. 14/2010  3 
 
Question – IV Whether the Sialkot police failed to discharge 
legal obligations and contributed towards the 
second part of the incident in which Mughees 
Sajjad and Muneeb Sajjad had been killed 
publically on highway?   
Answer:  I am of the considered view that all the police 
officers and officials present at the spot 
contributed towards the  killings of two 
brothers.  Whether the presence of the police 
officials at the spot like silent spectators 
amounts to an overt act on their part or an 
abetment of the offence is left to the judgment 
of the trial Court.  
Question – V. Whether Shehen Shah Bu khari, SI/first 
investigator of the incident and Dr . 
Mohammad Farooq, post mortem examiner 
destroyed and suppressed medical evidence 
about the murder of two brothers?  
Answer:  Shehen Shah Bukhari, SI/Investigator and the 
postmortem examiner concealed and 
suppressed the brutal violence and recorded 
their respective reports as if both the deceased 
persons suffered a few injuries.  The doctor 
and the investigator are liable to face the legal 
consequences for having destroyed and 
suppressed medical evidence in s upport of the 
charge of murder on two counts.  I propose 
that both the dead bodies of Mughees and 
Muneeb may be exhumed and re -examined by 
a board of senior doctors well versed in SMC No. 14/2010  4 
medical jurisprudence and enjoying good 
repute, failing which ocular account  furnished 
by eye witnesses would remain 
uncorroborated.  
Question – VI. Whether the rescue workers attached with 
rescue station located at the spot did not 
perform their duty qua the incident under 
inquiry?  
Answer:  The rescue workers initially discharged t heir 
duty honestly and passed on information of the 
incident to the police promptly.   Later on, they 
mortgaged their legal functions and duties to 
the crowd and the local police.  
2.  The above report was received in a sealed cover which has 
been opened in front of Advocate General, Punjab, and conclusion          
drawn by Mr. Kazim Ali Malik, author of the report has been reproduced 
hereinabove.  As the case relating to the incident of murders of two 
brothers in Sialkot seems to be of its own nature which  is evident from the 
contents of the report and other material, while exercising restraint, the 
question of involvement or otherwise of the accused persons we leave this 
issue for further investigation by the police.  Copy of the report has been 
handed over to the Advocate General.  Additionally , it being a report of 
importance which has highlighted all necessary aspects of the case, 
therefore, it is ordered to be made public.  In this behalf, the Home 
Secretary, Punjab, shall publish its important aspects in  the newspapers 
but it would not cause prejudice in any manner to the case of the accused 
persons.  
3.  D.P.O. has also submitted a report.  According to him the 
same is based upon the deliberations and considerations undertaken by a 
Joint Investigation Tea m (JIT) headed by Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Sukhera, SMC No. 14/2010  5 
Additional I.G. Police as Convener and Major (R) Mubashar DIG 
(Commandant PTS Shoongh), Mr. Abdur Razzaq Cheema SP, Special 
Branch, Gujranwala Region and Malik Fayyaz Ahmed, DSP, Sambrial, as 
Members of JIT, in response to direction of this Court, whereby police was 
allowed to continue with the investigation without being prejudiced by 
the present proceedings as well as the inquiry which has been ordered to 
be conducted.  Contents of report indicates that 17 pers ons, namely, Jamil 
alias Jeela Faqir s/o Allah Rakha, Qaiser @ Mooda s/o Ahmed Ali, Hassan 
Raza s/o Mukhtar Ahmad, Jamshed @ Cheeda  s/o Shaukat Ali, 
Muhammad Ikram s/o Muhammad Rasheed, Muhammad Asghar s/o 
Munir Ahmed, Rashid s/o Liaqat Ali, Nadeem Hussain  s/o Shukar Din, 
Muhammad Iqbal s/o Sardar, Sarfraz Ahmed s/o Muhammad Safdar, 
Amin s/o Muhammad Ashraf, Muhammad Waris s/o Muhammad 
Hussain, Asghar Ali s/o Ahmed Ali, Shams Ali s/o Ghulam Ali, Ali Peter 
s/o Altaf, Ateeb @ Nosha s/o Arshad, Awais s/o Abdur  Razaq being 
civilian and ten police officials including Waqar Ahmed Chohan, former 
DPO, Sialkot, prima -facie, seem to be involved, therefore, they have been 
arrested.  According to Mr. Sukhera i nvestigation is going on , and on 
completion of the same , chal lan shall be submitted before the Anti -
terrorism Court under the Anti -terrorism Act, 1997.  Four of the accused 
persons, namely, Rana Muhammad Ilyas, Inspector/former SHO, Waris 
Ali, ASI, Tariq Mehmood and Mubarik Ali, constables are said to have not 
been arrested so far  and that e fforts are being made to cause their arrest.  
D.P.O. Sialkot,   Mr. Bilal Ahmed Kamyana, is hereby directed to cause 
their arrest without any further delay and submit report tomorrow.  Let 
the police complete the investigation and  collect evidence and challan be 
submitted before the Court in accordance with law.  Report shall also be 
sent to the Registrar of this Court for our perusal .  The disposal of the case 
shall be ensured expeditiously in view of the judgment of this Court in  the 
case of sh. Liaquat Hussain and others  v. Federation of Pakistan through 
Ministry of Law  (PLD 1999 SC 504).  SMC No. 14/2010  6 
4.  Mr. Nasir Qureshi, SP Investigation, who, according to 
him, has recently been posted as In -charge of the Investigation of 
F.I.R. 437/2010,  when inquired about the nominated accused 
persons, could not answer satisfactorily except saying that no one 
was nominated as the accused in the commission of offence nor any 
supplementary statement was recorded by the complainant, that 
there is no mentio n in the case diary about the involvement of 
Mughees Sajjad and Muneeb Sajjad and according to him after 19 th 
August, 2010 no further case diary has been written by the I.O.   
This clearly indicates carelessness on his part knowing well the 
importance of t he incident which has brought bad name to the 
police department as well as in the civilized society of this country.   
Therefore, we direct learned Advocate General Punjab, who is 
present in Court, that he should take steps that the investigation of 
this c ase be also handed over, if permissible under the law, to the 
same Investigating Team which has been appointed to investigate the 
case F.I.R. No.449 of 2010.  In this behalf , he shall submit a report 
by tomorrow.  
 
5.  During hearing it trans pired that Haf iz Imran who had 
spread the infor mation/news about the incident is present in Court.  
He is District Reporter Sialkot of TV Channel “ Dunya News”  and ha d 
prepared the film of the whole incident .  On the basis of his 
information the news  of incident spread on all the TV Channels, and 
the matter also came in to the notice of th is Court .  Although the 
proceedings were initiated on the footage being shown by the “ Geo 
News” , it was on account of his bold acts and courage the footage  
was telecast  through  his channel  as well .  He has now been injured 
by unknown person s with injuries on his right arm as is evident SMC No. 14/2010  7 
from his presence in the Court.  We appreciate the courage which 
he has shown and at the same time we direct the DPO, Sialkot that 
necessary protection be pr ovided to his person and his family and 
the person s who are responsible for causing him injury and the one 
who has threatened  him, shall be dealt with in accordance with law.  
 
6.  It has also been informed that PPO Punjab at the same 
time has initiated  departmental action against the official/officers of 
police department , prima -facie, who are involved in th e incident . 
Adjourned to 2nd September, 2010.  
 
        Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
01.09 .2010  
Zulfiqar    