IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction) . 
 
  PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
  Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal  
  Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan  
  Mr. Justice Khalil -ur-Rehman Ramday  
  Mr. Justice Mian Shakirullah Jan  
  Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani  
  Mr. Justice Nasir -ul-Mulk  
  Mr. Justice Raja Fayyaz Ahmed  
  Mr. Justice Ch. Ijaz Ahmed  
  Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
  Mr. Justice Sarmad Jalal Osmany  
  Mr. Justice Muhammad Sair Ali  
  Mr. Justice Mahmood Akhtar Shahi d Siddiqui  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja.  
 
 
CONSTITUTION  PETITION NO. 09 OF 2009  
 
Sindh High Court Bar Association  through its Secretary.  
 
        ….PETITIONER   
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 08 OF 2009  
 
Nadeem Ahmed Advocate  
        ….PETITIONER   
 
     VERS US 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary,  Ministry of Law  
and Justice, Islamabad and others.    
        ….RESPONDENTS  
 
For the petitioner:    Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
(Const.P.09/2009)    Mr. Rashid A. Razvi, ASC.   
     Mr. M. S. Khattak , AOR  
     Assisted  by 
     M/s Waqar Rana, Waheed Khalid Khan  
     & Haq Nawaz Talpur, Advocates.  
 
For the petitioner:    Mr. Muhamm ad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC.  
(Const.P.08/2009)    Assisted by  
     Barristers Ms Natalya Kamal &  
     Syed Shehryar, Advocates  
       2 
 
For responde nt No.1    Sardar Muhamm ad Latif Khan Khosa   
     Attorney General for Pakistan.  
     Agha Tariq Mehmood Khan, DAG  
     Mr. Shah Khawar, DAG.  
Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR.  
 
For respondent  No.2. Mr. Muhammad Yousaf Leghari, A.G.Sindh.   
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR.  
     
For respondent  Nos.3 & 4.   Nemo.  
Respondent No.5.    Not represented.  
Date s of hearing:    20th to 24th and 27th to 31st July, 2009 . 
   
    JUDGEMENT  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ.- The above 
Constitutional Petitions bearing Nos. 9 of 2009 and 8 of 2009  involve 
common questions of facts and law and are disposed of by this single 
judgment.  
2.  In the first mentioned petition, the petitioner while referring 
to several provisions of Constitution and the case law, b eside making 
other contentions, legal and factual, has stated, in para No.5 , that:  
“The removal of Judges of Supreme Court and High Courts 
on 3.11.2007 was not only violative of Article 209 of the 
Constitution, 1973 but was against the rule laid down by 
the bench of twelve (12) Judges of Supreme C ourt in the 
case of Syed Zafar Ali Shah (PLD 2000 SC 869). The 
subsequent validation in the case of Tika Iqbal Khan (PLD 
2008 SC 178) a smaller bench of the Supreme Court is per -
incuriam and in any event, is not by a Supreme Court that 
is de  jure. It is re spectfully submitted, that Justice Abdul 
Hameed Dogar could not be treated as Constitutional head 
of the Supreme Court even after the decision in the case of 
Tika Iqbal Khan (supra) as he himself was the real 
beneficiary of the said Judgement and contrary to one of 
the cardinal principles of Natural justice, “no person should 
be judge in his own cause” had headed the Bench. Hence, 
in view of the facts and reasons stated above Justice  3 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry is still the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan as per C onstitution and all appointments and re -
appointments made in the Supreme Court and High Courts 
without consultation of de  jure Chief justice of Pakistan are 
unlawful, illegal, ultra -vires of the Constitution as well as 
malafide”.  
 
 
3.  Having made above a verments, the petitioner has, i nter-alia, 
sought a declaration to the effect that the respondents Nos. 3 and 4 namely 
Justice Zaffar Ahmad Khan Sherwani and Justice Abdul Rashid Kalwar 
are and continue to be Judges of High Court of Sindh and that they woul d 
continue as Additional Judges till 25.8.2010 and that their term of 
appointment has not expired as opined by Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed 
Dogar , as then he was called.  During the course of his submissions, 
learned counsel appearing for him prayed further tha t following 
declarations be also granted:  
 
i) that the purported acts done by General Pervez Musharraf , 
(Rtd)  between 3.11.2007 to 16.12.2007  aimed at  to suspend 
and amend the Constitution through several instruments  are 
unconstitutional, invalid and witho ut any legal consequence ; 
ii) that on account of his acts taken during 3.11.2007 to 
15.12.2007 relating to superior judiciary , General Pervez 
Musharraf (Rtd) became a usurper ; 
iii) all the appointments of Judges of superior judiciary on or 
after 3.11.2007 up ti ll 22.3.2009 which were without 
consultation of de -jure Chief Justice of Pakistan are/were 
unconstitutional, invalid and without any legal consequence ;  4 
iv) that the two (so called) Judgments  dated 23.11.2007 and 
15.2.2008 on Constitutional Petitions No. 87 and  88 of 2007 
filed by Tika Iqbal Muhammad and WATAN Party and the 
Review Petition No.7 of 200 8 filed by the former are/were 
nullity in law, being decisions per incuriam, corum -non-
judice, without any legal basis  and based on mala -fide 
proceedings  rendered b y biased persons of Tribunal  (then 
calling themselves as Judges of this Court)  fraudulently , 
collusively and lacking in bona -fides ; 
 
4.  In the other petition No. 8 of 2009 which has been filed  by 
Nadeem Ahmad, a practicing Advocate, while criticizing the  judgement 
delivered in case of Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan  versus Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2008 SC 178), the petitioner has, inter -alia, averred as 
follows:  
“All the persons who were not judges on 3rd November 2007 
but who were brought into Supreme Cour t and High Courts as 
‘judges’ despite the fact that the Honourable Chief Justice of 
Pakistan was never consulted before their appointment which 
meant that they were never appointed under the Constitution.”  
     AND  
“On the night of 22 March 2009, issuance of cause lists 
comprising persons who have not been appointed in strict 
adherence to Article 177 and who are therefore complete 
strangers to the Supreme court, is a serious matter and it is 
incumbent on the Honourable Chief Justice, before proceeding 
with any other judicial work, to forthwith stop all these persons 
from hearing any cases till such time that he, along with other  5 
validly appointed judges, are able to look into and judicially 
determine validity of their appointments as judges. ” 
 
5.  The petiti oner has, among others, sought a declaration that all 
those persons, both in Supreme Court and High Courts, regardless of 
whether they have taken oath under PCO or the Constitution, who have 
been appointed without ‘consultation’ of Honourable Chief Justice  of 
Pakistan as not judges and therefore, not entitled to function as such.  
6.  On 22.7.2009 a  notice was issued to General Pervez 
Musharraf (Rtd) on his available address intimating him about the 
proceedings in this case and 29.7.2009 as the date fixed  therein  before this 
Court . The Process Serving Officer reported on the same day that he had 
gone to the residential place viz: C -1, B Park Road,  Chak Shahzad, 
Islamabad where a person identifying himself as Muhammad Hussain son 
of Amir and that on formers o ffer the latte r refused to receive the notice. 
The factum of issuance of the afore -referred notice was widely televised 
through National and International T.V. channels. Also, it was widely 
published in National and International print media , but, on the d ate so 
fixed no one enter ed appearance .  
 
7.  We have heard learned counsel for petitioner s and learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan.   
8.  Before dilating upon the pleas taken in the arguments by 
learned counsel for the parties, in our view, some of the f acts/events 
which took place before 3rd November, 2007 touching the very basis of 
the issues involved in the matter are brought on record.   6 
9.  In our country, during sixty years of its independence after 
partition, to the misfortune of people , several time s, the Constitutions 
framed  by Legislative Bodies  were desecrated.  Sovereignty of people was  
not allowed to flourish   and get deep -rooted in the polity of our country.  
Prior to 3rd November, 2007, the Constitutions were either abrogated or 
put in abeyance  and the democratic system of governance was put to an 
end. For the first time , Constitution of 1956 was abrogated on 7th October, 
1958 and Martial Law was imposed by the then President, Sikandar Mirza 
who dismissed the Central and Provincial Governments; dissolved the 
Parliament and Provincial Assemblies and abolished all Political Parties 
and appointed General Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then Commander  in 
Chief as Martial Law Administrator. Sikandar Mirza was soon, within 
few days, replaced by the latter . On 25th March, 1969, again the then head 
of Army, General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, abrogated the 
Constitution of 1962 and by proclamation (PLD 1969 Central Statutes 42)  
Promulgated Martial Law followed by Provisional Constitution Order 
(Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary 4th April, 1969). On 5th July, 1977 
once again Martial Law was imposed throughout the country by the then 
head of Army Chief viz. former General Muhammad Zia -ul-Haq, who , 
vide Proclamation of Martial Law (PLD 1969 F ederal Statutes 326 ) 
dissol ved the National Assembly, the Sen ate, the Provincial Assemblies 
etc. and put the Constitution of 1973 in abeyance followed by Laws 
(Continuance in Force) Order, 1977 . When the Constitution was revived,  7 
it was undeniably, in a mutilated form by the notorio us Eighth 
Amendment.  
10.  Later, there was another onslaught on the ongoing 
democratic system of governance. On 12th October, 1999, the then Chief 
of Army Staff,  General Pervez Musharraf, now retired, once more, put 
the Constitution in abeyance and the w hole of Pakistan was brought under 
the control of Armed Forces. The National Assembly, the Senate and the 
Provincial Assemblies were suspended, so also, the Chairman and Deputy 
Chairman of Senate, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the National 
Assembly and  the Provincial Assemblies were suspended and it was 
declared that the Prime Minister, Federal Ministers, Parliamentary 
Secretaries , the Provincial Governors, the Provincial Chief Ministers and 
the Advisor to the Chief Ministers would ceased to h old office s, followed 
by issuance of Provisional Constitution Order and the Oath of Office  
(Judges) Order 2000 . General Pervez Musharraf  (Rtd) , self styled himself 
as Chief Executive and started ruling the country under the new 
dispensation. Later, he, unceremonious ly, occupied the office of President 
and in the coming years revived the Constitution with Seventeenth 
Amendment.   
11.  Again, on 3rd November, 2007 the General Pervez  
Musharraf, (Rtd), in his capacity as Chief of Army Staff, in the garb of 
declaration of emergency, put the Constitution in abeyance, issued 
Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 2007 followed by the Oath of 
Office (Judges) Order, 2007, making as many as sixty one (61) Judges of  8 
superior judiciary including Chief Justice of Pakistan and Chief  Justices 
of three Provinces dysfunctional for many of them either did not agree to 
take or were not given the oath. Of them were; from Supreme Court 1 3 
out of 1 8 (17 permanent and one ad -hoc) Judges including Chief Justice  
of Pakistan , 18 out of 31 Judges  of the Lahore High Court, 24 out of 28 
Judges including Chief Justice of High Court of Sindh, 6 out of 13 Judges 
including Chief Justice of Peshawar High Court. It is quite saddening that 
all the five Judges including the Chief Justice of Balochistan High  Court 
took oath  under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007 .  
12.  An independent and strong judiciary is a back bone of viable 
democratic system all over the world. The time tested experience has 
proved that independent and strong judiciary provides st rength to the 
institutions running government particularly, those who roll on the wheels 
of democracy. Equally the independent and strong judiciary acts as an 
arbiter striking  balance among various segments of Democratic system. It 
helps State organs, such , as, Legislature, Executive and the judiciary itself 
to function smoothly maintaining balance inter se. The constitution of 
Pakistan, of 1973, too, provides the judiciary guarantees enshrined in it 
and states that the judiciary shall be fully secured , but, unfortunately, to 
its great dismay, this organ of State has, all along been under the wrath of 
adventurers imposing their dictatorial terms obviously for their ulterior 
designs. The history of this country witnessed that in a set up of one 
government tenure of a Chief Justice of Pakistan was curtailed with 
ulterior motives and was restored to its original position when the design s  9 
were stood achieved. Likewise, through various instruments, the 
favourites and pliant  members of superior judiciary were out r ightly given 
underserved benefits while the others were shown doors.  This happened 
during the era of the then Martial Law Administrator General Zia -ul-Haq 
and following the same foot steps, General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) did 
the same in the year 2000. Many  judges of superior judiciary who 
declined to toe his line of action were unceremoniously sacked.   
13.  General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) through his 1999/2000 
action, declared that the national Assembly, the provincial Assemblies, 
Senate, Chairman and Deputy  Chairman of Senate, Speaker of National 
Assembly and the Provincial Assemblies were suspended and the Prime 
Minister, Federal Ministers, Parliamentary Secretaries, the Provincial 
Governors and the provincial Chief Ministers and the Advisors to the 
Chief M inisters, to have ceased to hold offices. However, his November, 
2007 action was a singular in nature, in that, the onslaught was on 
judiciary alone. All other institutions were in tact. The independence of 
judiciary was given a serious blow . In order to s ave the judiciary from 
being destroyed, for the first time in the history of this Country, a seven 
member bench of this Court headed by the de jure Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, passed an order, inter -alia, restraining the President and Prime 
Minister of Paki stan from undertaking any such action, which was 
contrary to the Independence of Judiciary. So also the Judges of this 
Court and that of the High Courts including Chief Justice (s) were 
required not to take oath under the Provincial Constitution Order or a ny  10 
other extra Constitutional step and on the same day viz: 3.11.2007, the 
order was served on the members of superior judiciary through the 
respective Registrar s of the Courts by way of Fax. It was also sent to all 
the relevant Executive functionaries.  
14.  The action of General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) was, 
undeniably, taken to prevent the 11 member Bench of this Court which 
was hearing the Petition No. 73 of 2007 filed by Mr. Justice (Rtd) 
Wajihuddin Ahmad and others in which the qualification of the Gener al 
was in question, and perhaps, he was not expecting a  favourable decision. 
The reasons shall, in that behalf be found in the detailed judgement. Be 
that as it may, Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, as then he was  called , 
alongwith four other Judges of this Cou rt took oath in pursuance of 
unconstitutional Provisional Constitution Order and the Oath of Office 
(Judges) Order, 2007 and by that he also violated the order of seven 
member Bench of this Court which was headed by de jure Chief Justice of 
Pakistan. Mr. J ustice Abdul Hameed Dogar took the oath of Chief Justice 
of Pakistan, although, the office was not vacant. Some of High Courts 
Judges too took oath likewise violating the constitution and the order of 
seven member Bench, legally and lawfully passed. Beside s, many other 
Judges in this Court and in the High Courts were appointed and they took 
oath in violation of constitutional provisions and the order of seven 
member Bench of this Court.  
15.  Subsequently, in order to dilute the effect of afore -referred 7 
member Bench order, Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, the CJP, as then  11 
was called, constituted a Bench of 8 Judges including those appointed 
afresh in pursuance of  Provisional Constitution Order and  took up CMA 
bearing No.2874 of 2007 in Constitution Petition  No.73 of 2007 and by 
their order dated 6.11.2007  illegally and unlawfully, without the mandate 
of the Constitution ,  declared the order dated 3.11.2007 to be illegal and 
without jurisdiction. Later, a 10 member Bench was also constituted 
which was headed by Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, as then he was called. This Bench again illegally and unlawfully 
took up and dismissed the petition No.73 and Original Criminal Petition 
No.51 of 2007 filed by Justice (Rtd) Wajihuddin Ahmad cal ling in 
question the eligibility of General Pervez Musharraf to contest elec tion to 
the office of President  although, it already stood dismissed for want of 
instruction. Further details in this behalf shall be given in the detailed  
judgment .  
 
16.  Also su bsequently, an other 7 member bench headed by Mr. 
Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, Chief Justice of Pakistan, as then he was 
called, took up hearing the case of Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan and 
WATAN Party and decided the same on the principle of ‘ Salus Populi 
Supreme Lex’ and granted that relief which was even not prayed by the 
petitioner. This judgement is /was, ex-facie, per incuriam , corum -non-
judice illegal and unlawful.  Later, a time barred Review  Petition was filed 
by Tikka Iqbal Khan  which was heard by 13 m ember Bench and was 
dismissed , palpably to give impression that  a larger Bench decided the  12 
matter  to dilute the effect of a previous judgment handed down in case of 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah (PLD 2000 SC 869) .     
 
17.  It may be noted that t he chosen representa tive of the time, 
too, did not extend validation to the unconstitutional acts taken upto 3rd 
November, 2007  as is universally known. It is, however, quite  heartening 
that, for the first time, in the history of our beloved country,  the chosen 
representati ve of people, who took their offices as a result of election 
taking place on 18th February, 2008  have, commendably, stayed their 
hands off and have not sanctified the unconstitutional acts, such as, the 
Declaration of Emergency, the Provisional Constituti on Order No.1, the 
Oath of Office (Judges), Order, 2007, the Constitution (Amendment) 
Order, 2007 (President’s Order No.5 of 2007), the Constitution (Second 
Amendment) Order of 2007 (President’s Order No.6 of 2007) and many 
other instruments made and decla red by General Pervez Musharraf  (Rtd) . 
In this, their restraint not extending validity to all these unconstitutional 
and illegal instruments and other steps taken by retired General are 
laudable. Evidently, this was done by the present representative s of 
people believing firmly that the prosperity of the country   lies in the 
strong and independent democratic system which can   alone   flourish   
and survive   with   democratic   steps  to  be  taken in the better interest 
of people always apt and keen to ch oose them in such a viable system of 
governance. We are sanguine that the current democratic dispensation 
comprising of the President, the Prime Minister, Ministers and the  13 
Parliament shall continue to uphold  the Constitution, its institutions and 
sacred v alues . 
   
18.  From above, the conclusions drawn are that:  
 
i) The General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) in the garb of 
Emergency Plus  and  the Provisional Constitution 
Order made amendments in the Constitution by self-
acquired the powers  which all are unconstitut ional , 
unauthorized, without any legal basis, hence, without 
any legal consequences ; 
 
ii) Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, took oath as CJP in 
violation of the order dated 3.11.2007 passed by a 7 
member Bench headed by de -jure Chief Justice of 
Pakistan  and in p ursuance of unconstitutional 
instruments introduced by General Pervez Musharraf  
(Rtd) , additional ly knowing well that the office of 
Chief Justice of Pakistan was not lying vacant ; 
 
iii) Also, t he Judges who were either retired or were not 
holding any judicial o ffice, beside those in High 
Courts took fresh oath on their appointment  on and 
after 3.11.2007 till 15.12.2007 in Supreme Court 
where the full strength of Judges alongwith an Ad -hoc 
Judge appointed under the Constitution were already 
working and thus there  was no vacancy. Similarly, 
many Judges took oath in Provincial High Courts. All 
of them did so in  violation of order dated 3.11.2007 
passed by 7 member Bench headed by de-jure Chief 
Justice of Pakistan . Four incumbent Judges already  14 
functioning in the Sup reme Court  took fresh oath 
under the influence  of and in pursuance of 
unconstitutional steps of General Pervez Musharraf  
(Rtd) ; 
 
iv) The Petition No.73 of 2007 filed by Mr. Justice (Rtd) 
Wajihud din Ahmad challenging the eligibility of 
General Pervez Mushar raf (Rtd) to contest for the 
office of President in uniform was dismissed 
purportedly on merits although the record maintained 
in the Supreme Court revealed otherwise;  
 
iv) The decisions in the cases of Tikka Iqbal Muhammad 
Khan granting validity to the action s of General 
Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) were per incuriam, corum -
non-judice, without any legal basis   hence, of no legal 
consequences;  
 
vi) The amendment s in the Supreme Court (Number of 
Judges) Act, (XXXIII , 1997 ) 1997 by way of Finance 
Act, 2008 raising the str ength  of Judges in Supreme 
Court from 17 (1+ 16) to 30 (1+29) seemingly aimed 
at providing  allocation of funds for increasing the 
strength of Judges is unconstitutional because the 
strength s of Judges of Supreme Court is be increased 
by Parliament as defin ed in Article 50 to be read with 
Article 260 of the Constitution which defin es the acts 
of Parliaments ; 
 
vii) Surprisingly, in the past the Courts of the time used to 
extend favours empowering the adventurers to amend 
the Constitution in actual effect were to a chieve their  15 
overt and covert agenda but this time, such powers 
were acquired by the General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) 
himself through the PCO and brought a host of 
unconstitutional amendment s for his own benefits ; and 
 
viii) The present representative of people fi rmly belie ve in 
strong and independent  judiciary and the democratic 
system which is evident that the deposed Judges of 
Supreme Court , High Courts and the de -jure Chief 
Justice of Pakistan were restored with effect from 3rd 
of November, 2007 implied that  the present 
representatives of people denied the validity of the 
actions of General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd) taken from 
3.11.2007 to 15.12.2007 during which the Constitution 
remained suspended.   
 
19.  Considering the above, in the light of submissions of lea rned 
counsel for the parties and on examination of the material brought before 
us and for the detailed reasons to be recorded, we dispose the above 
petitions as follows.  
20.  The judgment purported to have been delivered in 
Constitutional Petitions bearing  No: 87 and 88 of 2007 in the case titled 
as TIKA IQBAL MUHAMMAD KHAN VS. GENERAL PERVEZ 
MUSHARRAF AND OTHERS  (PLD 2008 SC 25 and PLD 2008 SC 178) 
and the judgment dated 15.2.2008, purported to have been passed in 
C.R.P.No.7 of 2008  titled as TIKA IQBAL M UHAMMAD KHAN VS. 
GENERAL PERVEZ MUSHARRAF AND OTHERS  and any  other 
judgment/judgments passed on the strength of the said two judgments are 
hereby declared to be void ab initio .  16 
21.  The Proclamation of Emergency issued by General Pervez 
Musharraf as the Ch ief of Army Staff (as he then was) on November 3, 
2007; the Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 2007 issued by him on 
the same date in his said capacity; the Oath of Office (Judges) Order of 
2007 issued by him also on the same date though as the Preside nt of 
Pakistan but in exercise of powers under the aforesaid Proclamation of 
Emergency and the Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 2007; The 
Provisional Constitution (Amendment) Order, 2007 issued by him like -
wise on 15.11.2007; the Constitution (Amendm ent) Order, 2007 being 
President’s Order No.5 of 2007 issued on November 20, 2007; the 
Constitution (Second Amendment) Order, 2007 being the President’s 
Order No.6 of 2007 issued on 14th December, 2007; the Islamabad High 
Court (Establishment) Order 2007 d ated 14th December 2007 being the 
President’s Order No.7 of 2007; the High Court Judges (Pensionary 
Benefits) Order, 2007 being Presidents Order No.8 of 2007; the Supreme 
Court Judges ( Pensionary  Benefits) Order, 2007 being President’s Order 
No.9 of 2007 d ated 14th December, 2007 are hereby declared to be un -
constitutional, ultra -vires  of the Constitution and consequently being 
illegal and of no legal e.  
22.  As a consequence thereof: - 
i)  the Chief Justice of Pakistan; the 
Judges of the Supreme Court of Pa kistan; 
any Chief Justice of any of the High Courts 
and the Judges of the High Courts who were 
declared to have ceased to hold their 
respective offices in pursuance of the afore - 17 
mentioned alleged judgments or any other 
such judgment and on account of the 
instruments mentioned in para 21 above, 
shall be deemed never to have ceased to be 
such Judges, irrespective of any notification 
issued regarding their reappointment or 
restoration;  
ii)  it is declared that the office of the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan never fell vacant 
on November 3, 2007 and as a consequence 
thereof it is further declared that the 
appointment of Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed 
Dogar as the Chief Justice of Pakistan was 
un-constitutional; void ab initio  and of no 
legal effect;  
Provided that subject to whatever 
is contained hereinafter, the said un -
constitutional appointment of Mr. 
Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar as the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan shall not 
affect the validity of any administrative 
or financial acts performed by him or 
of any oath made befor e him in the 
ordinary course of the affairs of the 
said office;  
iii)   since Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed 
Dogar was never a constitutional Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, therefore, all 
appointments of Judges of the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan, of the Chief Justices of 
the High Courts and of the Judges of the  18 
High Courts made, in consultation with 
him, during the period that he , un -
constitutionally , held the said office from 
3.11.2007 to 22.3.2009 (both days 
inclusive) are hereby declared to be un -
constitutional, void  ab initio  and of no legal 
effect  and such appointees shall cease to 
hold office forthwith ; 
Provided that the Judges so un -
constitutionally appointed to the 
Supreme Court while holding the 
offices as Judges of any of the High 
Courts shall revert back as Ju dges of 
the respective High Courts subject to 
their age of superannuation  and like -
wise, the Judges of the High Courts, 
who were District and Sessions Judges 
before their said un -constitutional 
elevation to the High Courts shall 
revert back as District and  Sessions 
Judge subject to limitation of 
superannuation ; 
iv)  the Judges of the Supreme Court 
of Pakistan, if any, the Chief Justices of the 
High Court, if any, and the Judges of any of 
the High Courts, if any, who stood 
appointed to the said offices prior  to 
3.11.2007 but who made oath or took oath 
of their respective offices in dis -obedience 
to the order passed by a Seven Member 
Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan on 
3.11.2007 in C.M.A.No.2869 of 2007 in  19 
Constitution Petition No.73 of 2007 , shall 
be pr oceeded against under Article 209 of 
the Constitution. The Secretary of the Law 
Division of the Government of Pakistan 
shall take steps in the matter accordingly;  
  Provided that nothing hereinabove 
shall affect those Judges who though had 
been appointed a s Judges/Chief Justices of 
any of the High Courts between 3.11.2007 
to 22.3.2009 but had subsequently been 
appointed afresh to other offices in 
consultation with or with the approval of or 
with the consent of the Constitutional Chief 
Justice of Pakistan;  
v)  any judgments delivered or orders 
made or any decrees passed by any Bench 
of the Supreme Court or of any of the High 
Courts which comprised of or which 
included the afore -described Judges whose 
appointments had been declared void ab 
initio,  are protecte d on the principle laid 
down in MALIK ASAD ALI’S CASE  (PLD 
1998 SC 161);  
vi)  since the Constitution 
(Amendment) Order, 2007 being the 
President’s Order No.5 of 2007 and the 
Islamabad High Court (Establishment) 
Order being President’s Order No.7 of 2007 
establishing Islamabad High Court for the 
Federal Capital Territory, have been 
declared to be un -constitutional and of no 
legal effect, therefore, the said Islamabad  20 
High Court shall cease to exist forthwith. 
All judicial matters pending before the said 
High  Court before the passing of this order 
shall revert/stand transferred to the courts 
which had jurisdiction in the said matters 
before the promulgation of afore -mentioned 
President’s Order No.5 of 2007 and 
President’s Order No.7 of 2007 
promulgated on 14th December, 2007. The 
Judges of the said Court shall, as a 
consequence thereof, cease to be Judges 
except such Judges or the Chief Justice of 
the said court, who prior to their 
appointments in the said Islamabad High 
Court, were Judges of some other High 
Court who shall revert to the court of which 
they were originally the Judges, subject to 
their age of superannuation. The officers 
and employees of the said Court shall also 
cease to hold their respective appointments 
and shall become part of the Federal 
Government Surplus Pool for their further 
appointments. However, if any such officer 
or employee was an officer or an employee 
of some other court or department or office, 
such officers or employees shall revert to 
their respective courts, departments or 
offices to which they belonged before 
joining the service in the Islamabad High 
court, subject again to their age of 
superannuation;   21 
we would like to mention here 
that establishment of a High Court 
or a Federal Court for the Federal 
Capital Territory might be a 
desirable act but it is unfortunate 
that such a step was taken in an 
un-constitutional and a highly 
objectionable manner. We may, 
therefore,  add that 
notwithstanding what has been 
declared and ordered above, the 
relevant and competent authorities 
may ta ke steps to establish such a 
court in accordance with the 
Constitution/the law.  
vii) the Ordinances promulgated by 
the President or a Governor of a Province 
before 3.11.2007 which were given 
permanence by the Provisional Constitution 
Order No.1 of 2007 as  also the Ordinances 
issued by the President or a Governor 
between 3.11.2007 and 15.12.2008 (both 
days inclusive) which were also, like -wise 
given permanence through the same 
instrument and which legislative measure s 
alongwith the said Provisional Constitu tion 
Order had been validated by the afore -
mentioned judgment delivered in TIKA 
IQBAL MUHAMAD KHAN’S CASE , stand 
shorn of their purported permanence on 
account of our afore -mentioned 
declarations. Since on account of the said  22 
judgment in TIKA IQBAL MUHAMMA D 
KHAN’S CASE  purporting to be a judgment 
of this Court, the presumption that the said 
Ordinances were valid laws not requiring 
approval of the Parliament or the respective 
Provincial Assemblies in terms of Article 
89 or 128 of the Constitution and since i t is 
today that this Court has attributed  
invalidity to the said legislative 
instruments, therefore, the period of 120 
days and 90 days mentioned respectively in 
the said Article 89 and the said Article 128 
of the Constitution , would be deemed to 
commence to run from today  and steps may 
be taken to place the said Ordinances 
before the Parliament or the respective 
Provincial Assemblies in accordance with 
law; 
viii) since the Constitution, through 
its Article 176, authorises only the 
Parliament to determine t he number of 
Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan 
and since the Parliament had so done 
through the Supreme Court ( Number of 
Judges) Act XXXIII of 1997, therefore, the 
increase in the strength of the Judges 
through the Finance Act of 2008 which 
Act was not passed by the Parliament but 
was passed only by the National Assembly 
would be deemed to be valid only for 
financial purposes and not for the purposes 
of Article 176 of the Constitution. It is  23 
resultantly declared that the number of 
Judges of the Suprem e Court for purposes 
of the said Article 176 shall continue to 
remain sixteen.  
ix)  in the Code of Conduct 
prescribed for the Judges of the Superior 
Courts in terms of Article 209(8) of the 
Constitution, a new clause shall be added 
commanding that no such Judge shall, 
hereinafter, offer any support in whatever 
manner to any un -constitutional 
functionary who acquires power otherwise 
than through the mode s envisaged by the 
Constitution and that any violation of the 
said clause would be deemed to be 
misconduct  in terms of the said Article 209 
of the Constitution;  
x)  in view of our findings above 
regarding Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed 
Dogar not being a constitutional and a 
valid consultee, the notification dated 
26.8.2008 and the notification dated 
15.9.2008 extend ing the term of office of 
Mr. Justice Abdur Rashid Kalwar and of 
Mr. Justice Zafar Kalwar Khan Sherwani 
as Additional Judges of the High Court of 
Sindh are declared to be un -constitutional 
and of no legal effect.  
xi)  that the court acknowledges and 
respec ts the mandate given by the 
sovereign authority i.e. electorate to the 
democratically  elected Government on 18th  24 
February, 2008  and would continue to 
jealously guard the principle of tricotomy 
of powers enshrined in the Constitution, 
which is the essence o f the rule of law. 
Any declaration made in this judgment 
shall not in any manner affect the General 
Elections held and the Government formed 
as a result thereof i.e. the President, the 
Prime Minister, the Parliament, the 
Provincial Governments , anything do ne by 
these institutions in the discharge of their 
functions. These acts are fully protected in 
terms of the age old of principle of S alus 
Popul i Est Suprema Lex reflected in PLD 
1972 SC 139.  
xii) Before parting with the 
judgment, we would like to reiterat e that to 
defend, protect and uphold the Constitution 
is the sacred function of the Supreme 
Court.  The Constitution in its preamble, 
inter alia, mandates that there shall be 
democratic governance in the country, 
“wherein the principles of democracy, 
freedo m, equality, tolerance and social 
justice as enunciated by Islam shall be 
fully observed;  .................  wherein the 
independence of judiciary shall be fully 
secured.” While rendering this judgment, 
these abiding  values have weighed with us. 
We are sang uine that the current 
democratic dispensation comprising of the 
President, Prime Minister and the  25 
Parliament shall equally uphold these 
values and the mandate of their oaths . 
 23.  A copy of this judgment shall be sent to the Secretary Law 
and Parliamentar y Affairs, Government of Pakistan, for compliance.  
 
 
 
  CHIEF JUSTICE   
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE   
Islamabad,  
July 31, 2009 . 
 
    APPROVED FOR REPORTING  