IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.33 OF 2013  
 
Asaf Fasihuddin Khan Vardag.  Petitioner(s)  
 
VERSUS  
Government of Pakistan and others.  Respondent(s)  
 
For the Petitioner(s)  : Mr. Asaf Fasihuddin Khan Vardag, ASC  
(in person)  
   
For Respondents No.1 & 2  
(Govt. of Pakistan thr. 
Secretaries Defence & 
Establishment Division)  : Mr. Muneer A. Malik, AGP  
Mr. Shah Khawar, Additional A.G.P.  
Qari Abdul Rashid, AOR with  
Mr. Shahbaz Kirmani, S.O. Estt. Div.  
( On Court’s call )  
   
For Respondent No.3  
(Air Marshal (R) Khalid Ch.)  : Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gilani, Sr. ASC  
Syed Safdar Hussain, AOR with  
Air Marshal ® Khalid Chaudhry, DG, CAA  
 
   
For Respondent No.4  
(Ch. Muhammad Munir)  : Mr. Shahid Hamid, Sr. ASC  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
   
For Respondent No.5  
(M/s. Louis Berger)  : Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari, ASC  
   
For CAA   Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC  
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
Mr. Obaid ur Rehman Abbasi, Sr. Law Officer  
   
For Aviation Division  : Nemo  
   
For Technical Associates  : Mian Gul Hassan Aurangzeb, ASC  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
   
For LTH (JV)  : Kh. Haris Ahmad, Sr. ASC  
   
For M/s. China State  
Construction Engineering  : Syed Ali Raza, ASC  
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR  
   
For FWO  : Mr. Asad Rajpoot, ASC  
   
For M/s. Sambu 
Construction & Sachal  
Engineering  : Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR.  
   Const. P.33 of 2013  2
For Hussain Construction  : Dr. Tariq Hassan, ASC  
 
For Habib Construction  : Syed Ali Zafar, ASC  
 
   
For M/s. Al -Tariq 
Construction  : Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
 
   
For M/s. Ciemens  : Mr. Imtiaz Rasheed Siddiqui, ASC  
 
   
For M/s. Xinjiang Beixin  : Mr. Shahid Kamal Khan, ASC  
   
For M/s. Gammon Pakistan  : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, Sr. ASC  
   
For M/s Izhar (Pvt) Ltd  : Mr. Babar Ali, ASC  
   
For M/s Jaffer Brothers   Syed Ishtiaq Haider, ASC  
   
Remaining Contractors  : Nemo  
   
Date of Hearing  : 12.09.2013.  
 
 
    O R D E R  
  The learned Additional Attorney General for 
Pakistan, during course of his arguments, stated that CAA 
is one of the attached department of the Defence Ministry 
and the then Secretary Defence vide letter dated 12.6.2012 
in response to the decision taken in  the 140th  meeting  of 
the CAA Board dated 14.6.2012 constituted a Committee 
headed by Lt. General (Retd.) Shahid Niaz, Member 
Implementation and Monitoring, Planning Commission, to 
probe into the matter. Subsequent thereto, Civil Aviation 
Division was se parated from the Defence Ministry and as 
an independent Division (Aviation Division) was created 
and Mr. Muhammad Ali Gardezi was appointed as 
Secretary on 27.6.2013 and now he has been transferred 
and acting charge has been handed over to Ms. Nargis 
Sethi , Secretary Economic Affairs Division. In the instant 
case, we inquired form the learned Additional Attorney Const. P.33 of 2013  3
General as to whether transfer of the Secretary Muhammad 
Ali Gardezi has not been made in violation of directions 
made in our judgment in the case of Syed Mehmood 
Akhtar Naqvi and another Vs. Federation of Pakistan, 
generally known as Anita Turab’s Case. Paragraph 22 of 
the same reads as under: -  
22. The principles of law enunciated hereinabove can be 
summarized as under: - 
i) Appointments, Removals a nd Promotions: 
Appointments, removals and promotions must be 
made in accordance with the law and the rules made 
thereunder; where no such law or rule exists and the 
matter has been left to discretion, such discretion must 
be exercised in a structured, tran sparent and 
reasonable manner and in the public interest.  
ii) Tenure, posting and transfer: When the ordinary 
tenure for a posting has been specified in the law or 
rules made thereunder, such tenure must be respected 
and cannot be varied, except for compel ling reasons, 
which should be recorded in writing and are judicially 
reviewable.  
iii) Illegal orders: Civil servants owe their first and 
foremost allegiance to the law and the Constitution. 
They are not bound to obey orders from superiors 
which are illegal  or are not in accordance with 
accepted practices and rule  based norms; instead, in 
such situations, they must record Const. Ps. 23/2012 
etc their opinion and, if necessary, dissent.   
iv) OSD: Officers should not be posted as OSD except 
for compelling rea sons, which must be recorded in 
writing and are judicially reviewable. If at all an 
officer is to be posted as OSD, such posting should be 
for the minimum period possible and if there is a 
disciplinary inquiry going on against him, such 
inquiry must be com pleted at the earliest.”  
He sought time for instructions and later on confirmed that 
vide two separate notifications dated 10th September, 2013 Const. P.33 of 2013  4
Mr. Muhammad Ali Gardezi, BS -22 officer, has been 
posted as Secretary, Inter -Provincial Coordination Division 
whereas Mr. Faridullah Khan, Secretary of the said 
Division has been posted as Secretary Capital 
Administration and Development Division. He has placed 
on record two documents i.e. a summary for the Prime 
Minister dated 6.9.2013 contents whereof reads as und er:- 
 “On retirement of Mr. Shaigan Shareef Malik, A 
BS-22  officer of Secretariat Group, the post of Secretary 
Capital Administration and Development Division has 
become vacant and is required to be filled in by posting 
suitable BS -22 officer;  
2. In this connection, Establishment Division proposes 
a panel of the following BS -22 officers of Secretariat Group  
for consideration and posting of any one of them as 
Secretary, Capital Administration and Development 
Division: - 
a)  Mr. Faridullah Khan, presently po sted as Secretary  
Inter -Provincial Coordination Division.  
b) Mr. Amjad Ali Khan, presently posted as Secretary, 
Privatization Division Commission.  
c) Mr. Muhammad Ahsan Raja, presently posted as 
Chairman, Prime Minister’s Inspection Commission 
(PMIC)  
 (The Individual Career Planning Charts of the 
Officers are annexed)  
 3. Approval of the Prime Minister is solicited to the 
 proposal contained at para -2 above.  
  
      (Shahid Rashid)  
      Establishment Secretary. ” 
 
It may be noted that in the above summary no proposal 
was sent for transfer of Mr. Muhammad Ali Gardezi, 
however, a transfer/posting order has been signed by Mr. Const. P.33 of 2013  5
Nasir Mehmood Khosa, Secretary to the PM, contents 
whereof reads as under; - 
 “ The Prime Minister has approved the following: - 
(i) Posting o f Mr. Faridullah Khan, 
presently posted as Secretary, Inter -
Provincial Coordination Division as 
Secretary, Capital Administration and 
Development Division.  
(ii) Posting of Mr. Muhammad Ali Gardezi, 
presently posted as Secretary, Aviation 
Division as Secretary, Inter -Provincial 
Coordination Division, in view of his 
varied experience having served in the 
provincial governments of Punjab, 
Sindh and Balochistan and currently 
serving in the Federal Government, and 
his knowledge of and expertise in Inter -
Provincial ma tters.  
(iii) Assigning of additional charge of 
Secretary, Aviation Division to Mrs. 
Nargis Sethi, Secretary, Economic 
Affairs Division.  
 
(Nasir Mehmood Khosa)  
            Secretary  
  to the Prime Minister  
 09.09.2013”  
It is important to note that in absence of any summary as is 
evident from the summary reproduced hereinabove Mr. 
Muhammad Ali Gardezi was transferred and Secretary 
Faridullah Khan was also transferred. We have inquired 
from the learned Attorney General as to how the Secretary 
who has recently taken over the charge as the Secretary 
(Aviation Division) without allowing him to serve his 
complete tenure and without assigning any exceptional 
reasons inasmuch as without moving any summary to the Const. P.33 of 2013  6
PM, has been tran sferred. The learned Additional Attorney 
General could not answer satisfactorily and seeks some 
time to seek instructions in this behalf. He is allowed to do 
so. In the meanwhile, we would be hearing the case on 
merits and after the receipt of his statemen t, further 
proceedings shall be held in this context.  
2 The learned Attorney General appeared at 4 p.m. 
alongwith Mr. Shah Khawar, Additional Attorney General 
and stated that he has taken up the matter with the high -
ups. He assures that the matter will be  settled in 
accordance with law and to the satisfaction of this Court. 
He requests for adjournment of the case till tomorrow 
which is allowed. Re -list tomorrow i.e. 13.9.2013.  
         
           Chief Justice  
 
               Judge  
 
               Judge  
Islamabad , 
12.09.2013  
M. Azhar Malik  
        