IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE AMIR HANI MUSLIM  
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
 
C.M.A. 7679 OF 2013 IN  
C.R.P. NO. 191 OF 2012 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 87 OF  2011 
(Application on behalf of Mr. Saifullah Nyazee, Additional 
Secretary PTI for recount of votes in 4 constituencies, after 
verification of thumb impressions)  
 
Workers Party Pakistan through Akhtar Hussain  
… Petitioner  
VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan and other s 
… Respondents  
 
For the Petitioner:   Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
    Mr. Imran Khan, Chairman, PTI  
 
For the Respondents:  N.R. 
 
Date of Hearing:   16.12.2013  
 
ORDER  
 
  TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ.- Through this 
application , applicant who h eads a political party makes a 
grievance that the direction s given by this Court  in the judgment 
reported at Workers Party Pakistan Vs. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2012 SC 681) have not been complied with ; that in the said 
judgment this Court had made  certain declarations /observations 
and issued certain directions /instructions to ensure that the 
General Elections are free, fair and transparent; that there had 
been massive rigging in elections held on 11.5.2013 and the major 
victim of the said rigging h as been applicant’s party  while . While 
arguing the application, l earned counsel in particular referred to 
various incidents / irregularities in four constituencies and 
submitted that a direction be issued  for recounting of the votes CMA No. 7679/2013 in CRP  No. 191/2012 in Constitution Petition No. 87/2011  2
cast as it would give a  broad / general idea  as to the extent of 
rigging, which according to him has eroded the sanctity of the 
Elections . 
2.  On Court query with regard to the maintainability of 
this application in view of the bar contained in Article 225 of the 
Constitution an d in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
under which this application has been filed, learned counsel for 
the applicant referred to para 32 at page 719 of the afore -
mentioned judgment wherein this Court inter alia  adverted to the 
jurisdiction of th is Court in terms of Article 184(3) and had 
observed that the Court  would have jurisdiction if the issue raised 
(a) relates and affects the Fundamental Rights  provision s of the 
Constitution which in the instant case are Article s 17 & 25, (b) if it 
is publi c interest litigation ; and (c)  the proceedings are not 
adversarial rather are more than in the nature of being 
inquisitorial.  
  At this stage Mr. Imran Khan sought permission to 
speak . However, this Court apprised him of the practice of this 
Court and the  fact that he is represented by an able Member of the 
Bar. He requested for a few minutes and was allowed to speak . 
According to him the issue  raised is not party specific rather it 
relates to the functioning of democracy which under the 
Constitution is no t possible unless  the electoral process is free, fair 
and transparent and the allegations leveled, according to him, 
indicate that there was massive rigging. He, however, added that 
he is conscious and appreciate s the concern of this Court qua its 
jurisdic tion but only prays that the Election Petitions pending 
before various Tribunals qua constituencies subject matter of this CMA No. 7679/2013 in CRP  No. 191/2012 in Constitution Petition No. 87/2011  3
application be directed to be decided expeditiously  as 
notwithstanding the mandate of law that Election Petitions are to 
be decided within 120 days, those have not been decided. Mr. 
Hamid Khan referred  to two cases in which despite  direction of this 
Court the Tribunal  did not decide the Election Petition  and in yet 
another case  the Tribunal did not comply with the  order of the 
Election Commission  wherein direction was issued  to decide the 
application for comparison of thumb impressions within a certain 
period.  
3.  We would not like to comment at this stage on the 
merits of the issues raised. However, in the interest of justice, we 
direct the Secretary, Election Commission of Pakistan  to submit 
parawise comments. A report shall also be called from Election 
Tribunal s Lahore and  Multan to  report about the non -compliance 
of the orders  to which reference has been made in constituency 
numbers NA-125 (Lahore) and NA -154 (Lodhran). The report shall 
be submitted within a fortnight and the case shall be listed 
thereafter.  
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
JUDGE  
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
16th of December, 2013  