IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
 
CMA No. 490/2021 in Const. P. No. 20/2013  
 
 
On Court’s notice:    Mr. Khalid Jawe d Khan,  
     Attorney -General for Pakistan  
 
Date of Hearing:    03.02.2021  
 
ORDER  
 It has been widely reported, including in a responsible newspaper, 
daily Dawn  of 28 January 2021, under the title, ‘ Rs500m uplift grant for 
each lawmaker okayed ’ and quotes a minister that, ‘ The prime minister 
announced Rs500m  for each MNA and PMA so that they can initiate 
development schemes in their constituencies ’. On 1 February 2021 the 
same newspaper wrote an editorial titled, ‘ Development funds ’ and 
questioned ‘ the decision by Prime Minister Imran Khan to hand out half a 
billion rupees in development funds to each federal and provincial 
lawmaker of his party for carrying out schemes in their respective 
constituencies… ’. Apparently, neither the news report nor the subsequent 
editorial comment were denied or contradicted by the Government or by 
the Prime Minister.  
 
2. This Court in the case of Action against Distribution of Development 
Funds by Ex -Prime Minister  (PLD 2014 Supreme Court 131) , after a 
detailed consideration of the different articles of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) and the applicable rules 
observed, that:  
 ‘… it is obligatory upon the Federal Government to lay before 
the National Asse mbly the supplementary Budget Statement 
so that it is subjected to the same scrutiny and procedure as 
is applicable to the Annual Budget Statement in terms of 
Articles 80 to 83 ibid. ’ (paragraph 31)  
 ‘… under the Constitution there is no provision whatsoeve r 
that permits to use allocation of funds at the discretion of the 
Prime Minister/Chief Ministe r.’ (paragraph 40)   
 
 
 2
 ‘In other words, item -wise estimate of the grant is required to 
be placed before the National Assembly for discussion in 
terms of rule 186 ibi d.’ (paragraph 42)  
 ‘… to leave or earmark any amount of money to be 
used/allocated at some subsequent stage during the 
financial year at the discretion of the Prime Minister/Chief 
Minister is also repugnant to the very concept and 
connotation of the Annual  Budget Statement. ’ (paragraph 
45) 
 ‘In fact, expenditure envisaged to be incurred under the 
Constitution is not “person specific ”, rather it is “grant 
specific ’…’ (paragraph 46)  
 ‘… the language employed in the above referred provisions 
of the Constitution i.e. Articles 80 to 84 ibid, implicitly 
excludes such person -specific allocations. ’ (paragraph 49)  
 
 ‘… the allocation of funds for development schemes has to 
be made following the procedure provided in Articles 80 to 
84 of the Constitution and the rules/in structions noted 
hereinabove. ’ (paragraph 51)  
 
The Judgment of this Court concluded and held (paragraph 52) as under:  
“(1) The National Assembly, while giving assent to a grant 
which is to be utilized by the Executive at its 
discretion, has to follow the procedure provided in 
Articles 80 to 84 of the Constitution as well as the 
Rules of Procedure, 2007. However, such discretio nary 
grant can not be spent at the absolute discretion of the 
Executive and the discretion has to be exercised in a 
structured manner;  
 
(2) The Constitution does not permit the use/allocation of 
funds to MNAs/MPAs/Notables at the sole discretion 
of the Prime Minister or the Chief Minister. If there is 
any practice of allocation of funds to the 
MNAs/MPAs/Notables at the sole discretion of the 
Prime Minister/Chief Minister, the same is illegal and 
unconstitutional. The government is bound to 
establish proc edure/criteria for governing allocation of 
such funds for this purpose;  
 
(3) Though funds can be provided for development 
schemes by way of supplementary grant but for that 
purpose procedure provided in Articles 80 to 84 of the 
Constitution and the rules/i nstructions noted 
hereinabove has to be followed strictly;  
  
 
 
 3
(4)  Funds can be allocated by way of re -appropriation but 
the procedure provided in the Constitution and the 
rules has to be followed in its true perspective;  
 
(5) No bulk grant can be made in t he budget without 
giving detailed estimates under each grant divided into 
items and that every item has to be specified . 
 
(6) The amounts as approved in the budget passed by the 
National Assembly have to be utilized for the purpose 
specified in the budget statement. Any re -
appropriation of funds or their utilization for some 
other purpose, though within the permissible limits of 
the budget, are not justified. In such circumstances, 
the supplementary budget statement has to be place d 
before the Parliament fo llowing the procedure provided 
in Articles 80 to 84 of the Constitution and the 
rules/instructions noted hereinabove.”  
 
The equivalent to Articles 80 to 84 of the Constitution with regard to 
the provinces of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan is Articles 120  to 124 
respectively of the Constitution.   
 
3. Clause (2) of Article 5 mandates that, ‘ Obedience to the Constitution 
and the law is the inviolable obligation of every citizen ’, clause (2)(a) of 
Article  204 empowers this Court to take action against any person who 
‘disobeys any order of the Court ’ and the oath of office of Judges requires 
them  to ‘preserve, protect and defend the Constitution ’.  
 
4. In view of the aforesaid position , we sent for the learned Attorney - 
General for Pakistan (‘Attorney -General’ ) and seek his opinion and advice 
as to (a) whether the said distribution of public funds  accorded with the 
Constitution and the cited precedent and (b) whether the Federal and 
provincial governments had handed over or intended to hand over monies 
to the l egislators and/or carry out development works identified by them. 
The learned Attorney -General states that he needs time to ascertain the 
facts, however, states that he will not countenance anything against any 
provision of the Constitution and the cited p recedent of this Court.  
 
5. Therefore, before proceeding further with this matter, in view of the 
statement of the learned Attorney -General , we want to ascertain the 
answers to the questions (a) and (b) posed in the aforesaid paragraph. 
Office is directed  to issue notices to the Federal Government through the  
 
 
 4
Cabinet Secretary/Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, Secretary 
Ministry of Finance, Government of Pakistan and to all the provincial 
governments through their  respective  Chief Secretaries and Secretary 
Finance Departments.  Notices also to be issued to the learned Attorney -
General and to the Advocate Generals of Balochistan, Sindh, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and of the Islamabad Capital Territory. Copy of this 
order to accompany the notices and  the recipients are directed to submit 
their respective responses/replies.  
 
6. Depending on the responses/replies , this matter may either b e 
conclude d or if the responses/replies are considered by us to not accord 
with the Constitution and the cited prece dent, the same may be required  
to be taken further ; and if we come to the la tter conclusion , to refer the 
matter to the Hon’ble Chief Justice for the constitution of a bench for 
determination thereof.  
 
7. To come up on 10 February 2021 . 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 Judge  
Bench -IV 
Islamabad  
03.02.2021  
(Farrukh) 