IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE SYED MANSOOR ALI SHAH  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMAD  
 
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 540-L OF 2021  
(Against the order  dated 31.03.2021 passed by t he Lahore High 
Court of  Lahore in Crl. Misc. No.19186 -B/2021 ) 
 
 
  
Syed Husnain Haider  
  
 
 
…Petitioner (s) 
                                        VERSUS  
  
The State  and another   
 
…Respondent (s) 
 
 
  
For the Petitioner (s): Syed Tayyab Nasir Mehmood, ASC  
(video link at Lahore)  
along with Syed Husnain Haider, in 
person ( at Islamabad ) 
  
For the  Respondent(s) : Ch. Muhammad Maqsood Butter, ASC  
 
  
Date of Hearing:  14.07.2021  
 
         O R D E R  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- In a family breach, the 
petitioner has been  blamed by th e complainant,  no other than  a close 
relative,  to have issued him two bank cheques , to the tune of rupees one 
crore forty -seven lac , towards fulfillment of a financial obligation, arisen out 
of a botched  sale transaction  relating  to some piece of land , bounced upon 
presentation; avoiding  arrest for a considerable span of time, he has finally  
been declined judicial protection by a learned Judge -in-Chamber of Lahore 
High Court vide order dated 31.3.2021  to argue before us  that in th e 
absence of any subsisting ‘ financial obligation’  he had  handed over  the 
cheques  to his brother  Syed Zulqarnain  as security instrument  for the 
settlement of family feud , fraudulently taken over by the complainant , 
cancellation whereof, is being pursued th rough a declaratory suit , sub judice  Criminal Petition No.540 -L OF 2021  
 
in a Civil Court at Chunian  till date , a position vehemently contested by the 
learned Law Officer with the assistance of counsel for the complainant.  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  The impugned instruments admittedly b elonged to the 
petitioner ; these carry  a wording  on the ir back as “shorty” , however, the 
learned counsel despite his best attempt has not been able to point out, even 
obliquely, any clause of contract/agreement or any portion thereof , in 
performance where of, the petitioner purportedly stood surety . Supported by 
statutory presumption  of being a valid instrument,  a drawer  cannot ward off 
the consequences of its failure  through bald plea of being an unsuspecting  
surety . Even otherwise, within the family fold  in a close degree , the petitioner 
has not been able to point out any mala fide  or animus , possibly lurking 
behind his long due arrest in a  non-bailable/ cognizable offence , a sine qua 
non to diver t the usual course of criminal law. View concurr ently taken by  
the courts below being well within the remit of law calls for no interference. 
Petition fails. Leave declined.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
  
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
14th July, 2021  
Azmat /* 
“Not approved for Reporting”   
 Criminal Petition No.540 -L OF 2021  
 
  