Athar  Minallah , J.- I have had the privilege of carefully reading 
the order. With great respect , I have not been able to persuade myself 
to endorse paragraphs 1 to 12  at this stage . The question  whether t he 
Prime Minister can be called  on the administrative or judicial side 
and whether in the facts and circumstances of the case before us, 
particularly the nature of the complaint, the constitution of the 
commission  by the executive branch of the State in exercise of its 
powers conferred u nder the Pakistan Commissions of Inquiry Act, 
2017  would have been in breach of the principle of independence of 
judiciary are yet to be considered by the full Court . Moreover, larger 
benches of this Court , while exercising the extraordinary jurisdiction 
under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (' Constitution '), have already exercised the power of 
constitut ing commissions  and, therefore, this question is also open to 
be decided in this case on the judicial side by the full Court. All these 
questions are likely to be considered by the full Court in the present 
proceedings and, therefore, pro priety requires that I restrain  myself 
from commen ting on these issues. It was for this reason that I could 
not persuade myself to endorse para graphs 1 to 12  at this stage , 
while I concur with the remaining order . In order to appreciate the 
gravity and the extent of public importance  involved in the matte r 
brought before us I deem it appropriate to briefly record some 
preliminary observations.  
2. Six judges of a constitutional court , the Islamabad High Court, 
have brought to the attention of the Supreme Court grave and 
serious interference in judicial proc eedings and intimidation of judges 
by the executive branch of the State and its organs. They have 
recorded specific instances of such interference and intimidation. 
They have stated that they were compelled to seek guidance because 2 
SMC 1/2024  
 
 
certain questions have b een left open by this Court while deciding the 
case of Justice Shaukat Siddiqui1. It is obvious from the le tter that 
they had raised the issue before all the relevant forums but , despite 
the seriousness of matter , there was no institutional response. The  
matter  was also promptly brought to the attention of the former Chief 
Justice of Pakistan , who at that time had the exclusive power to 
invoke suo moto proceedings under Article 184 (3)  of the 
Constitution . The matter was serious and its implications in th e 
context of  the independence of judiciary were so grave that there 
could not have been any conceivable justification for the then pater 
famili as of the institution to ignore it and , instead , choose to look the 
other way. The institutional insensitivity is manifest from the letter. It 
also reflects a culture of accepting the practice of manipulation of 
judicial proceedings by the executive branch of the State through 
interference and intimidation. The  institutional response relating to 
the most serious and grave acts of interference in judicial 
proceedings and intimidation of judges could have been justifiably 
understood as  an acceptance of practices, standards and norms 
which have profound consequences for the independence of  the 
judiciary. The letter by the six judges, therefore, raises questions 
regarding the institutional commitment to uphold  the Constitution 
and the independence of  the judiciary. The interference and 
intimidation , as reported in the letter , is in relation to certain 
'politically consequential matters' and , in support , instances have 
been described in the letter.  The Attorney General has referr ed to the 
political engineering in 2018 by organs of the executive branch to 
manipulate and interfere with judicial proceedings in ' politically 
consequential matters'  then. This Court was also perceived to be 
                                                             
1 Shaukat  Aziz Siddiqui v. Federation of Pakistan and others (Const.P.No.76 of 2018 decided on 
22.3.2024)  3 
SMC 1/2024  
 
 
complicit , rather seen as a willing partner . Though not every judge 
could be influenced or pressurised at that time and the ir judgments 
speak for themselves but the culture of dev iancy was accepted as a 
norm  because the institution was perceived to be complicit . The 
phenomenon of interference  with and manipulation of 'politically 
consequential matters' has remained an acceptable norm which is 
manifested from the unflattering role o f the ju dicial branch for the 
past seventy six  years. This phenomenon has, prima facie, relegated 
the principle of independence of judiciary to a mere platitude. This is 
what has been highlighted by the six judges in their letter. The 
normalisation of the culture of deviancy profoundly erodes and 
undermines the independence of judiciary. The assiduous 
entrenchment of such normalisation has made unacceptable 
practices, standards and norms as acceptable within the institution. 
The six judges have drawn the at tention of this Court to a matter 
which definitely is of paramount public importance , having profound 
consequences in the context of safeguarding the fundamental rights 
of the citizens.  
3. The six judges of the Islamabad High Court have sworn oaths 
under the Constitution and , therefore,  a presumption of credibility 
and truth is attached to what they have highlighted in the letter  
unless it is rebutted . They  have done what every judge is bound by 
the oath to do; uphold the Constitution and the indepe ndence of  the 
judiciary. There is no conceivable justification to doubt their 
intention in bringing on record a matter of  the highest public 
importance. It is noted that the letter was in the nature of an internal 
institutional correspondence and it was no t meant to be made public. 
The judges had reasonable grounds to seek guidance and that is 
what they had explici tly sought. They had blown a whistle internally 4 
SMC 1/2024  
 
 
and as whistle  blowers they were required to be dealt with carefully 
because the whistle blowing was in public interest. This Court in the 
present proceedings also has to consider evolving jurisprudence 
which does not deter internal whistle blowing because of the public 
importance associated with it. No one within the institution must fear 
that blowin g whistle internally could lead to unimaginable 
consequences having the effect of being thrown to the wolves. Such 
an approach would profoundly undermine the internal independen ce 
of judiciary. It was, in my opinion, premature for the executive to 
constitu te a commission  and, prima facie , in breach of the 
independence of judiciary . The matter is now subjudice  before the full 
Court. The full Court will consider whether an inquiry is required 
and, if so, the nature of the inquiry is also likely to be determined  on 
the judicial side  having regard to safeguarding the independence of 
judiciary. It is noted that in Air Marshal Asghar Khan 's case2 the 
factual aspects were determined by this Court  on the basis of 
affidavits while in Dharna  case3 credible print media reports and 
other material placed on record were relied upon. This crucial aspect 
has yet to be consider ed by the full Court in these proceedings. The 
judges are not complainants but they had solicited advice and 
guidance. Nonetheless, they have referred to instances of intimidation 
and interference. The onus is on the State and the executive to 
demonstrably  satisfy the full Court that there has been no 
interference nor attempt to manipulate judicial proceedings in 
specific 'politically consequential matters'. What has been highlighted 
in the letter as a phenomena appears to be a continuation of the 
unaccepta ble practices and norms that have been made acceptable in 
the past seventy six years. The judges have highlighted the 
                                                             
2 M.Asghar Khan v. Mirza Aslam Baig (PLD 2013 SC 1)  
3 Suo Motu action regarding Islamabad -Rawalpindi Sit in/ Dharna  (PLD 2019 SC 318)  5 
SMC 1/2024  
 
 
institutional insensitivity . The Attorney General has referred to 
political engineering in specific politically consequential matters in 
the past while it appears from the letter of the six judges that it 
continues unabated even today. The impunity against intimidation of 
the judges and interference in judicial proceedings in politically 
consequential matters cannot be denied , rather it has been affirmed 
by this Court repeatedly. The recent opinion by a larger Bench in 
Reference No.1,  relating to the  trial and appeal proceedings which 
had sent a n illegally deposed Prime Minister , Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto , to 
the gallows is an acknowledgment of the worst form of manipulation 
of judicial proceedings. It is a blemish on the institution which 
cannot be removed. Air Marshal Asghar Khan’s case is enough to 
demonstrate the extent of interference. What could have been a more 
atrocious form of interferen ce than the reference proceedings against 
the present Chief Justice of Pakistan which was declared as 
unconstitutional and based on malafide  by a larger bench of this 
Court  in Justice Qazi Faez Isa case. The recent judgment of this 
Court in the Dharna  case has also unequivocally affirmed 
interference by the executive and its organs. This Court has observed  
as follows: - 
“Pursuant to the judgment in Air Marshal Asghar 
Khan’s  case the involvement of  ISI and of the member 
of the Armed Forces in politics, media and other 
“unlawful  activities” should have stopped. Instead 
when TLP’s dharna  participants received cash  
handouts from men in uniform , the perception of their 
involvement gained traction. The  Director General of 
the Inter -Services Public Relations (“ISPR”) has also 
taken to  commenting on political matters : “history will 
prove the 2018 general elections were  transparent ”. The 
Armed Forces, and all agencies manned by the 
personnel of the Armed  Forces, including ISI, Military 6 
SMC 1/2024  
 
 
Intelligence (“MI”) and IS PR serve Pakistan, and thus 
all its citizens. They must never be perceived to support 
a particular political party, faction  or politician. If any 
personnel of the Armed Forces indulges in any form of 
politicking or  tries to manipulate the media he 
undermin es the integrity and professionalism of the  
Armed Forces. The duties of the Armed Forces are 
clearly spelt out in the Constitution,  they, “ shall under 
the direction of the Federal Government defend Pakistan 
against  external aggression or threat of war, and , 
subject to law, act in aid of civil power when  called upon 
to do so ”. We must no t allow the honour and esteem 
due to those who lay  down their lives for others to be 
undermined by the illegal actions of a few.”  
4. The letter of six judges confirms that the cases of Asghar khan 
and the Dharna  could not stop interference in judicial proceedings 
and that the judgment s are being brazenly violated. The letter 
manifests the phenomena of normalisation of deviancy culture within 
the institution and outside which  has profound consequences for  the 
independence of  the judiciary. No one has ever been held 
accountable , which has created impunity for the worst form of 
mutilation of independence of judiciary. The public trust in the 
judicial system is eroded when the co urts are perceived to be 
compromised. The flagrant violation s of fundamental rights of the 
citizens and perceived failure of the courts to safeguard individual 
freedoms and rights severely undermines public confidence in the 
institution. The citizens would , therefore, be justified in raising 
questions regarding the independence of judiciary. As judges of the 
highest constitutional court we cannot turn a blind eye and ignore 
the grave abuse of powers by the executive which have consequences 
for individual fr eedoms and rights. We all know the reality but 
pretend to be ignorant. The six judges have raised the crucial 7 
SMC 1/2024  
 
 
question  of 'whether there exists a continuing policy on part of the 
executive branch of the State, implemented by intelligence operatives 
who report to the executive branch, to intimidate judges, under 
threat of coercion or blackmail, to engineer judicial outcome in 
politically consequential matters'.  The other crucial question that has 
arisen from the letter, as already discussed, is regarding 
normalisation of the culture of deviancy. B oth these critical questions 
erode and undermine  the independence of judiciary. The onus is on 
the Federal Government to establish before this Court that it is not so  
and to assist in resolving the questions raise d in the order.  
 
       (Justice Athar Minallah)  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING    