I	IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)
PRESENT:
MR. JUSTICE SAJJAD AL! SHAH
MR. JUSTICE JAMAL KHAN MANDOKHAJL
Civil A ppeals No. 290 to 297 of 2022
(On appeal from the judgnents oft/ic Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Service Tribunal dated
1 7.11.2020 in Service Appeal Nos. 126, 127,
129, 131 of2019 and 805 of 2018)I
Badshah Zarnin & others	(in all appeals)
Appellant(s)
VERSUS
Siraj Khan & others
lnayat or Rehman & others
M. Rail and others
Gold Ayub & others
Dust Muhammad & others
Zarif Shad & others
Jamal ud Din & others(in CA 290)
(in CA 291)
(in CA 292)
(in CA 293)
(in CA 294)
(in CA 295)
(in CA 296)
Respondent(s)
For the Appellant(s)
For Private Respondents
For KPK
Date of HearingMr. Muhammad Shoaib Shaheen, ASC
(in all appeals)
Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir, ASC
Mr. Zahid YousafQureshi, AddI, AG
Shahid lqbal, L.O. (KPPSC)
02 .06.2022S
JUDGMENT
Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J. We intend to dispose
of all these appeals through this judgment as the
question of law in all the appeals is common and these
are directed against a consolidated judgment dated
17.11.2020 passed by the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Service
Tribunal, Peshawar.
2.	 Facts in brief are that the respondent No.1
was appointed as Subject Specialist on contract basis in
Chill Appeals No. 290 to 297 of2022 	 2
the Education Department o Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP),
in the year 2005. The KP government promulgated the
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Employees (Regularization of
Services) Act, 2009 (the Act), on 24th October 2009.
Pursuant to the Act, the services of employees of KP
government appointed on contract or ad hoc basis, holding
the posts on 31st December 2008 till the promulgation of
the Act were regularized, consequently, services of the
respondent No.1 were also regularised.
3. It is important to mention here that before
promulgation of the Act, the education department KP
invited applications from suitable candidates for
appointing them against different posts of Subject
Specialist. The process was started by the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Public Service Commission (the KPPSC). In
view of the fact that the candidates were large in number,
therefore, it could not be possible to recommend all the
candidates at one go. Consequently, the KPPSC on 15th
September 2009 recommended the first batch for their
appointment. The process of recommendation was
continued and ultimately it was completed when the last•
batch was recommended on 11th June 2010. The official
respondents issued a seniority list, whereby the
appellants were placed senior to the respondent No.1 and
1 others, vide seniority list dated 13.12.2017. The
respondent No.1 feeling aggrieved, filed a departmental
appeal, which remained un-responded, as such, he
approached the learned Peshawar High Court because of
the fact that by that time, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Service Tribunal (the Tribunal) was not functioning. When
the Tribunal started functioning, the learned High Court
referred the matter to it for adjudication and decision. The
Tribunal asked the respondent No.1 to file proper memo
of appeal, which he did and the appeal was registered
-J
Civil Appeals No. 290 to 297 of 2022
accordingly. After hearing the parties, the Tribunal
allowed the appeal of the respondent No.1 in the following
terms:
"10. In view of the situation appeals are accepted,
the impugned Seniority list dated 13.12.2017
stands set aside with directions to respondent
department to correct/modify the impugned
seniority list and the persons whose services were
regularized vide notification dated 31052010
we.!. 2409.2009 under the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Employees (Regularization of Services) Act, 2009
shall be placed senior to all those persons
recommended by the Commission after the
commencement of the Act ibid as per provisions
contained in Section 4 of the Act ibid. No order as
to costs. Filed be consigned to the record room."
4. The appellants filed civil petitions which were
converted into appeals, by means of the order dated
10.03.2022, which is reproduced herein below:
"After hearing the learned counsel for the parties,
and in the facts and circumstances of the case, we
find it appropriate to grant leave to appeal in the
instant petitions to examine the question as to
what, in terms of section 4 of Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Employees (Regularization of
Services) Act, 2008, and the other relevant law
and regulation, would be the point of initiation of
recommendations by the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
Public Service Commission ('KPPSC"), and as to
when in fact such initiation commenced in respect
of the petitioners.
2. At this point in time, Mr. Muhammad Shoaib
Shaheen, the learned counsel for the petitioners
requests to the Court to allow him to implead
-, KPPSC in this case. The request is allowed. The
amended memo of petition be accordingly filed
within a week, so that notices be issued to KPPSC
for a date after four weeks."
Heard the learned counsel for the parties and
have perused the record. The controversy between the
parties revolves around Sections 3 and 4 of the Act, which
are reproduced herein below:
"3. Regularization of services of certain
employees.--- All employees including recommendees
of the High Court appointed on contract or adhoc basis
and holding that post on 31 December, 2008 or till the
CnAL Appeals No 290 to 297 of 2022	4
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have
been validly appointed on regular basis having the
same qualification and experience for a regular post:
Provided that the service promotion quota of all
service cadres shall not be affected.
4. Determination of seniorit y.---(l) The
employees whose services are regularized under this
Act or in the process of attaining service at the
commencement of this Act shall rank junior to all civil
servants belonging to the same service or cadre, as the
case may be,who are in service on regular basis on the
commencement of this Act, and shall also rank iunior to
such other persons, if an who in pursuance of the
recommendation of the Commission made before the
commencement of this Act, are to be appointed to the
respective service or cadre, irrespective of their actual
date of appointment
(2) The seniority interse of the employees,
whose services are regularized under this Act within the
same service or cadre, shall be determined on the basis
of their continuous officiation in such service or cadre:
Provided that if the date of continuous officiation
in the case of two or more employees is the same, the
employee older in age shall rank senior to the younger
one"
(Emphasis supplied)
6. Perusal of the above provisions of the Act
would reveal that the contract and adhoc employees,
holding the post on 31 st December 2008 till , the
commencement of the Act shall be deemed to have been
appointed on regular basis w.e.fi 24th September 2009,
i.e. the date of the promulgating of the Act. The issue
between the private parties in the appeals is with regard
to the determination of their seniority. According to
section 4 of the Act, the employees whose services are
regularized pursuant to the Act, "shall also rank junior to
such other persons, if any, who, in pursuance of the
recommendation of the Commission made before the
commencement of this Act, are to be appointed to the
respective service or cadre, irrespective of their actual
date of appointment." Through this section, the . law-
makers have given preference to those employees, who
—J
Crrq! Appea's No. 290 to 297 of 2022	 5
were recommended by the KPPSC for their appointment,
before the promulgation of the act, irrespective of their
actual date of appointment.
7. The first batch of the employees was
recommended by the KPPSC on 15 th September 2010,
before the commencement of the Act, whereas, because of
bulk of the candidates, the recommendations of rest of
the candidates were made on different dates, after the
commencement of the Act. The question before us is that
rest of the candidates, who were recommended by the
KPPSC for their appointments, after the commencement
of the Act, would get the benefit of section 4 of the Act or
otherwise? The relevant provisions of the Act are required
to be read aiongwith Section 35(3)(a) and (b) of the Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Public Service Commission Regulations,
2003 (the Regulations), which are reproduced herein
below:
"35. RECOMMENDATIONS.
(1)
(2)
(3)(a) Where a large number of subjects/ specialties
are included in all advertisement, recommendations
may not be pended till the finalization of the entire
batch but instead zonal allocation be worked out
subject-wise and recommendation conveyed to the
Department without indicating to them the zonal
allocation and the inter-se-seniority. In
recommendations to the Department it shall be
14 made clear that the inter-se-seniority of the
recommendee is linked with other subjects and the
overall merit position and zonal adjustment will be
intimated on the completion of interviews in all
subjects.
(b) The combined merit list shall be against a
particular advertisement where by the posts were
advertised collectively but recommendations were
staggered due to interview schedule or any other
reason."
8.	 In clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 35 of
the Regulations, it has been clarified that where a large
Cid Appeals No. 290 to 297 of2022	6
number of candidates apply for a large number of posts,
the recommendations may not be pended till the
finalization of the entire batch. In case the
recommendation of any batch is made, in the first
instance, following by recommending other batches of the
candidates for their appointment, the inter se seniority
shall be on the basis of their merits, determined by the
KPPSC, without taking into account the dates of
recommendations. The intention of the law-makers is very
much clear that in case of more than one candidate, if the
recommendation of the commission is withheld or delayed
in respect of one or more candidates, for want of
completion of the process or for any other reason, beyond
the control of the candidates, the recommendations of the
commission made subsequently on different dates, are to
be considered to have been made by the commission on
the dates, when first recommendation was made. Under
such circumstances, the date of the recommendations of
the first batch, sent to the competent authority for the
appointment shall be considered as the date of
recommendation for all.
9. Admittedly, the recommendation of the first
batch amongst the appellants were made by the KPPSC to
the competent authority on 15.09.2009, whereas the Act
was promulgated on 24.10.2009, therefore, the
recommendations of all the appellants shall be deemed to
have been made to the competent authority prior to the
commencement of the Act, irrespective of the subsequent
recommendations and dates of their appointments.
Hence, the services of those employees, which were
regularized pursuant to the Act, shall rank junior to those
candidates, whose recommendations were made by the
KPPSC, prior to the commencement of the Act. The
department while constructing the seniority list was right
001 Appeals No 290 to 297 of 2022	ii
in placing the appellants senior to those who were
regularized pursuant to the Act. The list has wrongly been
reversed by the Tribunal, which amounts to mis-
interpretation of the relevant provisions of law, which is
an illegality, on the basis whereof, the judgment
impugned is not sustainable.
These are the reasons for our short order
dated 02.06.2022, which is reproduced herein below:
"For the reasons to be recorded separately, all
these appeals are allowed and the orders of the
Khyber PakhtunkhWa Service Tribunal,
Peshawar are set aside."
B-V
Islamabad,
02 .06.2022
eel APPROVED FOR REPORTING"
KArtees/-
U
