IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Original Jurisdiction)
PRESENT:
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CU
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik
Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed
CONST. PETITIONS No.34 AND 38 OF 2022
Rana Tahir Saleem
(in Const. P.34/2022)
Muhammad Javaid
(in Const. P.38/2022) 	 ...Petitioner(s)
Versus
Province of Punjab through Chief Secretary to
the Government of Punjab Lahore and others
(in Const.P.34/2022)
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary
Establishment Islamabad and another
(in Const.P.38/ 2022) 	 ...Respondent(s)
For the Petitioner(s) Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shoukat, ASC
(in Const. P.34/2022, via video link, Lahore)
Barrister Haris Azmat, ASC
(in Const, P.38 /2022, via video link, Lahore)
Ch. Akhtar All, AOR
On Court's notice
For the Federation:
For the ICT
For the Govt. of
Bajochistan
For the Govt. of KPCh. Aamir Rehnian, Addl. A.G.P.
Mr. Jahangir Khan Jadoon, A.G.
Mr. Muhammad Ayyaz Khan Swatti,
Addl. A.G.
Malik Akhtar Hussain Awan, Addl. A.G.
For the Govt. of Punjab 	 Barrister Qasim Ali Chohan, Add!. A.G.
Sheikh Asif, AIG (HRC)
Muhammad Al zal Bashir, DS (Home)
Iram Shahzadi, LO
For the Govt. of Sindh 	 Muhammad Ghaffar, DSP(L) on behalf of
CPO Karachi
(via video link, Karachi)
Date of Hearing 	 1512.2022
ORDER
C.M.A. No.10077 of 2022 providing information
regarding frequency of transfer and average tenure of police
officers from the level of the Inspector General of Police to theConst, P34 of 2022, etc.-
Station House Officers in the Province of pup-jab has been
filed by the Provincial Government The report (C.M.A.
No.9845 of 2022) filed by the AIG/Estab1ishmt for
Inspector General of Police, Islama bad is more detailed and
informative, it gives the names of officers and the period of
their service in their respective posts. The reports (C.M.A.
Nos,985 2 & 9968 of 2022) filed by the Government of Sindh
and the Government of Balochistan respectively, have given
figures of average tenure of police officers in the said
Provinces. We would be better informed with detailed
information in the manner provided by the lOT police
Establishment for the officer holding the posts of DPO
upwards to PPO (IGP) and likewise for the police investigation
hierarchy. Let that be done by all the Provincial Governments.
The Government of KP has not filed any report. The
Additional Advocate General KP regrets and seeks time.
Allowed. Concise statement to be filed in the format indicated
above.
2. The basic principles of law etched fl the
provisions of the Police Order, 2002 with respect to postings
and transfers of police officers are: firstly, that a minimum
observed; secondly, if a
statutory tenure in the post should be 
premature transfer has to be made, the same should be done
with the consultation of the concerned superior officer in the
police establishment; and thirdly, the reasons for such
transfer should be duly recorded. These principles expressed
by the Statute are derived from the jurisprudence On goodConst. P34 of 2022, etc.	 n
governance laidlaid down by this Court in furtherance of the
requirements under the Constitution. We expect that all the
Provincial Governments shall abide by these principles
faithfully. In any event, for the provinces in which the Police
Order, 2002 is in force, we invite the comments of such
governments on why the provisions thereof are not being
implemented. On a parity of reasoning in the other provinces
and taking guidance from the wisdom of the Constitution, we
issue notice as to why its principles of good governance
should not be implemented on postings and transfers made in
their police departments. Re-list in the month of January,
2023 thong with Const. P. No.38 of 2022.
Islamabad 	
15.12.2022
Mm a t+ N aseer
