IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed  
 
Constitution Petition  No.13 of 20 23  
(Setting Aside Show Cause  Notices Dated 
12.4.2023 issued by Pakistan  Bar Council to 
Muqtedir  Akhtar Shabbir, Secretary and  Malik 
Shakeel -ur-Rehman,  Additional Secretary, 
Supreme  Court Bar Association)  
 
Supreme Court Bar Association, through  
its Vice -President, Islamabad and 
others       
         …Petitioner s 
 
Versus  
 
Pakistan Bar Council, through its  
Secretary, Islamabad and another  
…Respondents  
 
For the Petitioners : 
Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Abid S. Zube ri, ASC 
Mr. Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir, ASC  
Malik Shakeel ur Rehman, ASC  
Mr. Shoaib Shaheen ASC  
Malik  Ghulam Musta fa Kandwal , ASC  
Sh. Ahsan -ud-Din, ASC  
Mr. M. Ikram Chaudhry, ASC  
Mr. Niaz ullah Khan Niazi, ASC  
Mr. M. Saim Chaudhry, ASC 
Mr. Jave d Ahmad Chattari, ASC  
Mr. Shafqat Mehmood Chauhan, ASC  
Mr. M. Ma qsood Butta r, ASC  
Mr. Muhammad Aslam Zar, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Hu ssain Yousafzai, ASC  
Mr. Munawar Iqbal Gondal, ASC  
Ch. Hafeez Ullah Yaqub, ASC  
Mr. Tahir Faraz Abbasi, ASC  
Rana Zia Abdul Rehman, ASC  
Mian Muhammad Ismail Thaheem, ASC  
Mr. Shamim ur Rehman Malik, ASC  
Mr. Ali Hassan Bugti, ASC  
Mr. Taufiq Asif, ASC  
Ms. Shazia Bilal, ASC  
Ms. Bushra Qamar, ASC  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
Ms. Amna Khalili, Advocate  
Mr. Arif Ansari, Advocate  
Agha  Ali Durrani, Advocate  
 
For the Respondents:  Mr. M. Ahsan Bhoon, ASC  
(via video link from Lahore)  
Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, ASC  
(for Execut ive Committee PBC)  
Ms. Hifza Bokhari, ASC  
Ms. Shireen Imran, ASC  
Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR  Const.P. No. 12/23  2 
 
 
On Court notice:   Mr. Mansoor Awan, AGP  
 
 
Date of Hearing:    09.05.2 023 
 
ORDER  
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar , J. This constitution petition has been brought 
by the Supreme Co urt Bar Association (“SCBA ”) and others under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(“Constitution ”) for challenging the show cause notices dated 12.4.2023, 
issued by Pakistan Bar Council (“PBC”) to Muqtedir Akhtar Sh abbir, 
Secretary, SCBA  (petitioner No.2) and Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, 
Additional Secretary, SCBA  (petitioner No.3). The petition was fixed for 
preliminary hearing on 05.05.2023 when Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, learned 
ASC, referred  to Rule 118 and 125 of the Pakis tan Legal Practitioner s & 
Bar Council Rules, 1976 and argued that , after filing this petition, the 
notification of de -seating was also issued which is illegal and without due 
process of law. The learned counsel was also directed to satisfy  this 
Court  on th e maintainability of this petition under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution , which predominantly relates to the question of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the fundamental 
rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part -II of the Consti tution.  
 
2.  In response to the notices issued to the respondents , as well as the 
learned Attorney General fo r Pakistan  (“AGP”), Mr. Mansoor Awan, 
learned AGP is present, whereas Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, learned ASC 
representing the PBC, appeared via video link fr om Lahore .  
 
3. The learned representatives of PBC argued that the petition under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution is not maintai nable. It was further 
averred that the action of de -seating was taken in accordance with the 
law. They have  also expressed  discomfort due to some derogatory 
remarks and language allegedly used by the SCBA against the PBC in 
some letters or correspondence. The Court then  asked all the learned 
representative s of the PBC  and the SCBA  whether there is any possibility 
to find a  middl e way for the amicable resolution of the disputes cropped 
up between the two eminent and distinguished  Bars of th is country . In 
response, Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, learned Chairman  of the Executive 
Committee , PBC, inform ed us that  a meeting was convened with Mr. 
Abid S. Zuberi, learned  President of SCBA , with the proficient endeavors 
and mediation of Mr. Shamim -ur-Rehman, Ex-President SCBA and Syed Const.P. No. 12/23  3 
 
Qalb-e-Hassan, learned ASC and all the participants  of the meeting made 
their best possible efforts in good faith  for the settlement  of the dispute s 
between the two representative bodies of the legal fraternity. Mr. Hamid 
Khan, learned Sr. ASC, and Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, learned ASC also 
confirm ed the statement made by Mr. Hasan Raza Pasha, learned ASC, 
Syed Qalb -e-Hass an, learned ASC  and Mr. Haroon -ur-Rashid, learned 
ASC/ Vice Chairman PBC . The learned AGP is also of the view that it 
would be in the interest  of both the representative  bodies of lawyers to 
resolve the dispute s in a friendly way rather than litigating in t he Courts.  
 
4. The elected representative s of PBC and SCBA have conveyed their 
proposals in Court for agreement/ settlement and, after due 
deliberation and thoughtful  consideration , they consensually reached 
to an amicable settlement  with certain decisions  in the following 
terms:  
 
i. The show cause notices dated 12.04.2023 issued by PBC to 
Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir, Secretary , SCBA  (petitioner No.2) 
and Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, Additional Secretary,  SCBA  
(petitioner No.3) are withdrawn with immediate  effect. As a 
consequence thereof, the de -seating notifications of aforesaid 
two petitioners dated 04.05.2023  are also withdrawn 
forthwith . 
 
ii. As a reciprocal gesture, Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, the President 
SCBA, undertakes that , within one week, an application 
under Order XXIII, Rule 1 , Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  
shall be moved with an urgent motion for the withdrawal of 
Suit No.346/20 23, -872/2023 and -873/2023  filed by the 
SCBA against the PBC and its m embers in the Sindh High 
Court and certified  true cop ies of the orde rs of withdrawal  of 
the above suits  shall be provided with covering letter to the 
PBC Sec retariat  for information  and record . 
 
 
iii. The minutes of both meetings dated 24.02.2023 , convened 
at 11:30 a.m. and 7:00 p.m , are hereby cancelled . However, 
both the elec ted bodies of SCBA and PBC are at liberty to 
convene their meetings in accordance with the relevant 
Rules/byelaws .  
 
iv. The President of SCBA  also inform ed us that Ms. Hifza 
Bukhari, Finance Secretary , SCBA made a request  in 
writing to Habib Bank limited, Supreme Court Branch, 
Islamabad, for freezing the bank accounts  of SBCA . She 
undertakes that she will withdraw the letter by 10.5.2023 
and a copy of withdrawal  letter with the acknowledgment of 
Bank shall be provided in the SCBA  Secretariat  for 
information an d record .  
 
v. Our attention was also invited to a R esolution dated 
04.05.2023, circulated by Ms. Hifza Bukhari, Acting 
Secretary/Finance Secretary SCBA, whereby  the 
membership s of seven Members of the SCBA was Const.P. No. 12/23  4 
 
suspended. Since the matter has been resolved , therefore 
the representative s of both the parties , as well as all the 
Members of SCBA  who passed the resolution and are 
present in Court have agreed to withdraw  the aforesaid 
resolution  with immediate effect.  
 
vi. The letter dated 05.05.2023, issued by the Off ice Secretary  
of PBC to Mr. Ashfaq  Ahmed Raja, Admin Officer, Mr. 
Husnain, Assistant Admin Officer, and Mr. Ghalib  Hussain, 
Accountant  (all employees of SCBA ) is also withdrawn.  
 
vii. The letter dated 04.05.2023, issued by the Secretary SCBA, 
whereby the member ship of ten Members of the Executive 
Committee  was suspended is also withdrawn forthwith.  
 
viii. The elected representatives of PBC and SCBA  all have 
assured each other that they will follow this settlement  and 
the mutually agreed decisions contained in paragrap hs (i) to 
(vii) in letter and in spirit , without committing  any breach 
thereof.  
 
 
5. The Constitution P etition is disposed of in the above terms .  
 
6.  In the end, we must appreciate  the elected representatives of PB C 
and SCBA , along with  their well -wisher s from both sides , who made 
sincere efforts in good faith with sanity to find out the ways and 
means for proper resolution  of the disputes and finally resolved it 
prudently . We expect that in future also, both renowned associations 
will maintain a cordial relationship and perform their duties and 
responsibilities in accordance with the law and the applicable 
rules/byelaws for safeguarding and advocating the interest s of their 
members and the betterment of the legal fraternity as a whole , in a 
congenial environment , during the  pleasure of their offices and 
elected mandate . 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
9th May, 2023  
Approved for reporting  
Mudassar /                                           