IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
                (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
    Present:  
    Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, HCJ  
    Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
    Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
   
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.1532  OF 20 22 
(Against the judgment dated 27.04.2022  of the Baluchistan 
Service Tribunal , Quetta  passed in Service Appeal No.62 of 
2022)  
 
 
Dr. Muhammad Saleem     … Petitioner  
      
       Versus  
 
Government of Baluchistan, and others  … Respondent(s)  
 
For the petitioner :  Mr. Kamran Murtaza , Sr.ASC  
For respondent  No.1: Mr.M.Ayaz Swati, Addl.AG Baluchistan . 
For Respondent No. 3: Ms. Gulzar Butt, ASC  
 
Date of hearing:   20.01.2023  
 
    ORDER   
 
Athar Minallah , J. - Dr. Muhammad Saleem 
(‘petitioner ’) has sought leave against judgment , dated 27.4.2022 , of 
the Baluchistan Service Tribunal ( ‘Tribunal ’). 
 
2.  The controversy stems from  the transfer order of Dr. 
Shamsullah Bazai ( ‘respondent ’) from the post of Principal, Loralai 
Medical College ( ‘College ’). The respondent was posted as Principal of 
the College vi de notification , dated 04.12.2020. The competent 
authority , vide notification  dated 17.10.2021 , directed the respondent 
to report to the Specialized Healthcare and Medical Education 
Department , but the notification was later withdrawn vide 
notification , dated 26.10.2021 . He was  transferred from the post of 
the Principal of the College and to the post of Professor (B -20) and 
Head of Ophthalmology Department, Bolan Medical College , vide 
notification dated 11.02.2022 , while the petitioner replaced him as CP 1532/22  2
Principal of the College. The respondent filed a departmental appeal 
and it was rejected by the competent authority vide order dated 
17.2.2022. He then preferred an appeal before the Tribunal which 
was allowed vide the impugned judgment dated 27.4.2022.  
  
3.  We have heard the learned counsels for the parties and 
the Add itional Advocate General o f Baluchistan.  
 
4.  The respondent had challenged his posting/transfer 
order s. He had taken the stance in his departmental representation 
that allowing him to continue to hold  the post of the P rincipal of the 
College  was in  the public interest . Likewise, the Tribunal had 
concluded that the transfer of the respondent from the latter post 
was not in  the public interest . The Tribunal had raised concerns 
regarding the status  of governance , besides placing reliance o n the 
judgment s of this Court , so as to justify interference with the 
executive functions in connection with posting/transfer of employees. 
The judgments relied upon were distinguishable , while the principles 
enunc iated in the context of the executive domain with respect  to 
transfer and postings of employees/civil servants appears to have 
been excluded from consideration.    
 
5.  This Court has already highlighted the scope of 
interference with the executive functio n of posting s and transfer s of 
government officials.1 It has been held that the transfer of a 
government official from one place or post to another to meet the 
exigencies o f service was within the exclusive d omain  and 
competence of the competent authorit ies of the executive organ of the 
State and , ordinarily , it is not amenable to interference except in 
extraordinary circumstances. This principle is subject to the 
                                                
1 Fida Husain Shah and others v. Government of Sindh and others ( 2017 SCMR 798 ) CP 1532/22  3
condition that the terms and conditions of service are not adversely 
affected. Moreover, an of ficial has no vested right to claim to be 
posted/transfer red to any particular place of his choice , nor is there 
a vested right to continue to hold a particular post at a particular 
place. The transfer and posting of a government servant is limited to 
the given tenure , if any,  or at the pleasure of the competent 
authority. The question of whether the posting and transfer made by 
the competent authority  was in the public interest  is not open to 
judicial review by a tribunal or court  and utmost caution and 
restraint ought to be exercised in interfering with or encroaching 
upon the exclusive domain of the executive authorities. The decisions 
in connection with posting and transfer  of government servants must 
not be subjected to judicial scrutiny unless a law ha s been clearly 
violated or mala fide and malice is established without the need for  
making a n inquiry. The interference of the Tribunal or court s in 
matters relating to posting s and transfer s is, therefore , an 
encroachment upon the executive domain and in breach of the 
seminal principle of separation of powers embedded in the 
Constitution . The Tribunal  was not justified in interfering with the 
posting/transfer orders of the respondent nor was it in  consonance 
with the settled principles relating thereto. The impugned judgment  
is, therefore, set-aside and with leave of this Court the petition is 
converted into  an appeal and allowed.     
  
                          Chief Justice   
 
 
   Judge  
 
   Judge  
Islamabad  the, 
20th January, 2023  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  
(Aamir Sh.)  