 
 SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Bench -V: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokh ail 
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
Civil Petition s No.688 & 689 of 20 20. 
(Against the judgment of the Federal Service Tribunal , Islamabad  
dated 10.01.2020, passed in Appeals  No.2061 & 2062  (R)CS of 201 9) 
 
 
Muhammad Yasin (In CP-688/20)  
Mehboob Khan  (In CP-689/20)  
... Petitioner s 
Versus  
The Director General , Pakistan  Post Office, Islamabad & another   
(In both CPs)  
… Respondents  
For the p etitioners : Malik Matee Ullah, ASC.  (In both cases)  
For the r espondent s: N.R. 
Date of hearing:   09.01.2023 
ORDER  
  Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. – The petitioner s seek leave to 
appeal against a  consolidated judgment of the Federal Service Tribunal, 
dated 10.01.2020 (“impugned judgment”),  whereby their  appeal s filed 
against the decisions of the departmental  authority  have been dismissed.  
The departmental authority had declined  the petitioners'  request for 
perm ission to appear in the departmental competitive exam for 
appointment to the po sts of Assistant Superintendent.   
2.  Briefly, the facts of the case are that the petitioners,  
Muhammad Yasin and  Mehboob Khan, are serving  in the Pakistan Post 
Office Department  as Clerk  and Postmaster , respectively. They applied to 
the departmental authority for permission to appear in  the departmental 
competitive exam for appointment to the posts of Assistant  
Superintendent, which was declined to them on the ground th at they 
were above 45 years of age  and as such were  not eligible for appointment 
to the said post under the relevant r ules. The petitioners made  appeals in 
the Tribunal, which were dismissed by the impugned judgment. He nce, 
they have filed these  petitions for leave to appeal.  C.P. No. 688/2020, etc. 2 
 
 3.  The petitioners concede  that as per the relevant r ules,1 
which prescribe the method, qualifications and other conditions for 
appointment to the posts of Assistant Superintendent,  the officials 
applying for that appointme nt must not be more than 45 years of age on 
the last date fixed for receipt of the applications. Their only contention, 
before us, is that some othe r official  was allowed to appear in an earlier 
exam for the same post , despite that he was also above 45 yea rs of age at 
that time; therefore, they are entitled  to equal treatment and same relief 
as per Article 25 of t he Constitution of the Islamic R epublic of Pakistan 
1973  (“Constitution”) . 
4.  We have considered the contention of the petitioners, read 
the rele vant rules and examined the record of the case.  
5.  Article  25 of the Constitution guarantees the equal 
protection of law, not the equal protection of lawlessness, by declaring 
that al l citizens are equal before law and are entitled to equal protection 
of law. An unlawful act, therefore, cannot be made a standard for 
enforcing the right to equality guaranteed by the Constitution. One 
illegality cannot be allowed to be compounded by applying the right to 
equality.  The extension of the right to equality to the acts done in 
violation of law would amount to perpetuating previous unlawful acts 
and motivating the commission of further illegalities. Article 25 of the 
Constitution has no application to a claim based upon other unlawful 
acts and illegalities. It come s into operation when some persons are 
granted a benefit in accordance with law but others, similarly placed and 
in similar circumstances, are denied that benefit. Such other persons 
cannot be discriminated against to deny the same benefit, in view of thei r 
right to equality before law and equal protection of law guaranteed by 
Article 25 of the Constitution. But where a person gains, or is granted, a 
benefit illegally, other persons cannot plead, nor can the court accept 
such a plea, that the same benefit m ust be allowed to them also in 
violation of law.2 
6.  If some other person ineligible for the appointment to the 
post of Assistant Superintendent, whose case is not before us, had been 
permitted to appear in an earlier exam for the said post in violation o f 
                                                             
1 Rules for Recrutiment to the Post of Assistant Suprintendedant of Post Offices/Assistant  Suprintendant of 
Railway M ail Service (BPS -11) under the Pakistan Post Office,  published in  Post Office Manual, Volume 
IV (Establishments), 2nd Edition (2004), Appendix No.18.  
2 Abdul Wahid v. C.B.R. 1998 SCMR 882; Govt. of Punjab v. Zafar Iqbal 2011 SCMR 1239; Yar 
Muhammad v. Govt. of Punjab 2011 SCMR 1537; Shahid Ahmed v. O.G.D.C. 2014 SCMR 1008; Govt. of 
KPK v. Hidayat Ullah 2021 SCMR 1904.  C.P. No. 688/2020, etc. 3 
 
 law (the relevant rules), this fact does not confer any right on the 
petitioners to claim the similar permission by repeating the violation of 
law. As the proverb goes: “Two wrongs don’t make a right”. One 
wrongdoing cannot be permitted , defended or cond oned by citing the 
example of another wrongdoing.  If unlawful acts are allowed or 
acknowledged on the basis of the right to equality and non -
discrimination, it would negate the rule of law mandated by Articles 4 
and 5 of the Constitution. The one who wants  the court to grant him the 
relief prayed for must base his claim on his own legal right, not on the 
wrongful gains of others. Any person aspiring for the appointment to a 
post has to pass the eligibility criteria prescribed in the rele vant law  for 
that po st and cannot be absolved from fulfilling those criteria on the 
ground that some other person who was allowed to compete for or 
appointed to such post also did not meet  the prescribed  criteria. The 
petitioners, thus, cannot dispute  the decision of the depa rtmental 
authority, declining to them the permission sought, on the ground of 
their right to equal treatment and non -discrimination .  
7.  For the above reasons, we find that the contention of the 
petitioners is absolutely misconceived. The departmental aut hority and 
the Trib unal have correctly decided  the present matter in accordance 
with law. These petitions are meritless; they are, therefore, dismissed 
and the leave to appeal, declined.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
09th January , 2023. 
Approved for reporting  
Sadaqat  Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
  