IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE MUSHIR ALAM  
MR. JUSTICE SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI  
 
CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 1029/2020  
(Against the judgment  of the 
Peshawar High Court (Bannu Bench ) 
dated 06.08.2020 passed i n Cr.MBA 
No.381 -B/2020 ) 
 
Sajid  :  
 … Petitioner (s) 
Versus  
Samin ur Rehman (deceased) through his 
father Gul Jawab Khan and others  :  
 … Respondent (s) 
 
For the Petitioner (s)  : Pir Liaqat Ali Shah, ASC  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
   
For the Respondent (s)  : Gul Jawab Khan, Respondent No.04 in 
person  
   
For the (State)  : Ms. Tehmina Mohibullah, ASC/State 
Counsel  
Mr. Muham mad Nauroz SI,  
Loyi Daraz Khan (Complainant)  
   
Date of Hearing  : 21.10.2020  
  …. 
  ORDER  
 
SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR N AQVI, J: - Criminal petition for leave 
to appeal under Article 185(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 against the judgment dated 06.08.2020 passed by 
Peshawar High Court (Bannu Bench ) in Cr.MBA No.381 -B/2020 with the 
prayer to gra nt leave against the order and to release the petitioner on bail 
in the interest of justice.  
2.  The petitioner was nominated in case bearing FIR 
No.22/2020 dated 23.05.2020 offence u/s 302/324/34 PPC, registered 
with Police Station Razmak , Tribal District  North Waziristan . 
  As per allegation  contained in the crime report, it is alleged 
that petitioner alongwith 05 others attacked the complainant party causing  Criminal Petition No.1029/2020  
Sajid Vs, Samin ur Rehman (decea sed) & others  2 
 
death of Samin -ur-Rehman and Jameel -ur-Rehman  whereas Ashiq -ur-
Rehman, Shafi -ur-Rehman, Ihsan Ull ah, Amin and Gul Jawab sustained 
injuries. The motive behind the occurrence is previous enmity between the 
parties. The petitioner was taken into custody by the police. He applied for 
post arrest bail before the learned trial court which was dismissed vide  
order dated 20.07 .2020. The same was agitated before learned Peshawar 
High Court (Bannu Bench ) through Crl. MBA No.381-B/2020 which too met 
the same fate vide order dated 06.08 .2020. Hence, the instant petition.  
3.  The crux of the arguments advanced by th e learned counsel 
for the petitioner  are that admittedly, the complainant is not eye -witness of 
the occurrence and even no specific allegation mentioned by the 
complainant while lodging crime report. Contends that one of the 
deceased Jameel -ur-Rehman has d ied of natur al death . The findings 
recorded by the doctor while conducting post -mortem examination , he has 
categorically stated that no apparent sign of wound over the body of the              
deceased was observed . However GCS (Glasgow Coma Scale) was 
scored to be 7/15 . Contends that other co -accused sustained stab wound 
which is not specifically ascribed to any person nominated in the crime 
report. Contends that all the injured PWs sustained minor injuries. 
Contends that the petitioner himself sustained injuries during the 
occurrence but this aspect has been suppressed by the prosecution.  
4.  On the other hand, learned law officer appearing on behalf of 
the State has argued that the instant occurrence has taken place in a 
Tribal Area however the matter wa s reported to the police within half an 
hour. Contends that the promptness qua recording of FIR , vanish any 
chance of deliberation and consultation. Contends that the statement of 
petitioner was recorded by the Investigating Officer as counter version  and 
further proceedings were carried out in response to his version . The  Criminal Petition No.1029/2020  
Sajid Vs, Samin ur Rehman (decea sed) & others  3 
 
learned State Counsel however frankly conceded that solitary injury 
caused to one of deceased is not ascribed to any accused in the crime 
report. Finally argued that co -accused of the pet itioner are still at large, 
therefore, petitioner is not entitled for the concession of bail.  
5.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and gone 
through the record.  
  Although, it is an admitted fact that the petitioner is 
nominated in the crim e report which is lodged with promptitude . As per 
contents of the crime report, two persons were done to death whereas five 
sustained minor injuries. The mode and manner of commission of offence 
is generalized in nature . It does not specify any accused of causing any 
injury either to any deceased or injured PWs . Even the weapons used by 
the accused is not described in the crime report. The statement of 
prosecution witnesses were recorded on 23.05.2020. The perusal of 
statement s of all the prosecution witnes ses, it reflects that those are 
recorded in the same pattern as in the crime report .  Even during the 
course of investigation, nothing was brought forth contrary to earlier 
stance of the complainant and other prosecution witnesses. As far as 
medical report s are concerned, p erusal of the post -mortem report to the 
extent of one of the deceased  Jameel -ur-Rehman , the doctor has 
specifically given the finding that the deceased had no visible injury on his 
person which could have been observed by the doctor at th e time of 
conducting autopsy , even against the column of “cause of death ” the 
above observation is incorporated. However d octor has specifically 
mentioned that GCS ( Glasgow Coma Scale ) was 7/15 which otherwise 
shows very poor response of consciousness of said Jameel -ur-Rehman 
who ultimately expired. The o ther deceased Samin -ur-Rehman had 
sustained only one stab wound  at the epig astric region . While the rest of  Criminal Petition No.1029/2020  
Sajid Vs, Samin ur Rehman (decea sed) & others  4 
 
PWs sustained minor injuries that too without any specification. The 
petitioner himself claimed th at he was given beating by Gul Jawab and 
Amin. The Investigating Officer recorded his statement u/s 161 Cr.PC on 
26.05.2020. He was further examined by the Magistrate u/s 164 Cr.PC  on 
25.06.2020 . Police recorded counter version of the accused however it 
has been pointed out before us that pre -arrest bail of both accused (Gul 
Jawab & Amin) nominated by the petitioner  were granted pre-arrest bail 
vide order dated 20.07.2020 by the learned ASJ -I, North Waziristan at 
Bannu. The aforesaid aspect bring the case o f prosecution squarely a 
case of two version s attracting provision of section 497(2) Cr.PC . Even  
during course of investigation, nothing was recovered being incriminating 
to strengthen the prosecution version. The contention raised by the 
learned law offic er that co -accused of the petitioner are still still 
absconder, has no legal sanctity. It is now settled by this Court that the 
criminal liability cannot be shifted from one person to another merely on 
the ground that co -accused are fugitive from law other wise basic law is 
bail not jail.  
6.  Keeping i n view the facts and circumstances  narrated above  
and law on the subject , we are of the considered view  that the case of the 
petitioner is of further inquiry fully covered by section 497(2) Cr.PC 
entitling for  concession of bail. As a consequence , leave to appeal is 
granted in the instant petition  while converting it into appeal and the same 
is allowed . The petitioner shall be released subject to his furnishing bail 
bonds in the sum of Rs.5,00,000/ - with one su rety in the like amount to the 
satisfaction of the learned trial court/Duty Judge.   
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the /21.10.2020  
Approved for reporting  
*Syed Rashid Maqsood*  