IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
      
 
PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ    
  Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
  Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar  Ali Akbar Naqvi  
  Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
    
Constitution Petition No.24 to 26 of 2023  
(Trials of Civilian under the Army Act, 1952 is violative of  the 
Constitution)  
And  
C.M. Appeal No. 80 of 2023 in Const. Petition Nil of 2023   
(Declaration of trial of civilians under the Army Act, 1952 as unconstitutional, void 
and of no legal effect.)  
 
                 And 
 
Constitution Petition No. 27 and 28 of 2023  
(Trials of Civilian s under the Army Act, 1952 is violative of  the 
Constitution)  
 
 
Jawwad  S. Khawaja  
(in Const.P.24/2023)   
  
Aitzaz Ahsan  
(in Const.P.25/2023)   
  
Karamat Ali and others  
(in Const.P.26/2023)   
  
Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi  
(in C.M. Appeal 80/2023)   
  
Zaman Khan Vardag   
(in Const.P.2 7/2023)  
  
Junaid Razzaq  
 (in Const.P.2 8/2023)  
   Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
(in Const.P.24  & 27/2023)                
  
  
Federation of Pakistan through the 
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, 
Islamabad and others  
(in Const.P.25 -26 & 28/2023)  
  CONST. P. 24 OF 2023 ETC.  
  
   2
Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of 
Defence through its Secretary and others  
(in C.M. Appeal 80/2023)   
  
 …Respondent(s)  
 
 
For the Petitioner(s)  : Sardar Muhammad Latif Khan Khosa, 
Sr. ASC  
(in Const.P.2 5/2023)  
 
Kh. Ahmad Hosain, ASC  
(in Const.P.24/2023)  
 
 
Mr. Faisal Siddiqi, ASC  
(in Const.P.26/2023)  
 
Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC  
Mr. Ajmal Ghaffar  Toor, ASC  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
(in C.M. Appeal 80/23)  
 
Mr. Zaman Khan Vardag, In -person  
(in Const.P. 27/2023)  (V.L. Lahore)  
 
Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
(in Const.P. 28/2023)  
  
   
For the Federation  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
   
For Govt.  
of Balochistan  : Mr. Muhammad Ayaz Swati, Addl.  AG 
   
For Govt. of K P  : Mr. Aamir Javid, AG  
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Addl.AG  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Khalid Ishaq, AG  
Mr. Sana Ullah Zahid, Addl. AG  
   
For Govt. of Sindh  : Mr. Akbar Hussain, AG  
Mr. Saif Ullah, Addl. AG  
with Mr. Mohsin Shah,  
Focal Personal to Chief Secretary  
(Via video link from Karachi)   
   
For Ministry of Defence  : Nemo  
   
For Imran Ahmed Khan 
Niazi : Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari, ASC  
   
Date of Hearing  : 26.06.2023  (09:30 am)  
 
 
* * * * * * * * *  
 CONST. P. 24 OF 2023 ETC.  
  
   3
O R D E R  
 At the start of the hearing  today , learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan came to the rostrum and stated on 
instructions that the Federal Government has raised an objection 
to the presence of one of us ( Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J ) on the 
Bench on account of his relationship  with Justice Jawwad S. 
Khawaja, Former Chief Justice , the petitioner in Const. Petition 
No.24 of 2023. Mr.  Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah has considered 
the objection and has decided to recuse himself from the Bench.  
2.  Since the case is a part heard mat ter, the remaining 
Members of the Bench have requested the HCJ to reconstitute the 
Bench.  
 
              
 
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
 Sd/- 
Judge   
 
 
 I have attached my 
separate note.  
Sd/- 
Judge  
 Sd/- 
Judge   
 
 
  
 Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
 Sd/- 
Judge   
  Sd/- 
Judge  
 
Islamabad  
26.06.2023  
Naveed/*    
   
 CONST. P. 24 OF 2023 ETC.  
  
   4
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J.   ‘It is not merely of some 
importance but is of fundamental importance that justice should 
not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen 
to be done.’1 I strongly believe in this dictum of Lord Hewart and 
have expressed similar views in several cases that the 
‘foundations of the judicial institution stand on, and its real 
strength lies in, the public trust which gives to its decisions 
legitimacy and publ ic acceptance’.2 Anything which undermines 
or even tends to undermine the public trust in the integrity, 
impartiality and independence of the judiciary must be 
circumvented.  
2.  The petitioner in one of these petitions, namely, 
Jawad S. Khawaja, the forme r Chief Justice of Pakistan, is my 
relative.  The legal fraternity, I believe, knew it and for those who 
did not I disclosed this fact at the first hearing of these petitions 
in open court on 22 July 2023 and asked whether anyone had 
any objection to my hea ring these petitions including the learned 
Attorney -General for Pakistan. Counsel for the petitioners in all 
these petitions and the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan 
replied that they had no objection.  
3.   Article IV of the CODE OF CONDUCT TO BE 
OBSERVED BY JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT OF 
PAKISTAN AND OF THE HIGH COURTS OF PAKISTAN3 mandates 
that a “ Judge must decline resolutely to act in a case involving 
his own interest, including those of persons whom he regards and 
treats as near relatives or c lose friend. ” The said petitioner has , 
however, filed the petition in the public interest, not involving any 
interest of his own as he is not to be personally affected by the 
decision of these cases in either way. I, therefore, was of the view 
that the sai d Article was not applicable in this case, still I thought 
it right to ask the parties, at the start of the hearing, whether they 
                                                
1 Rex v. Sussex Justices . McCarthy, Ex parte.  [1924] 1 KB 256, per Lord Hewart.  
2 Justice Isa v. President of Pakistan 2022 SCP 140 (CMA.1243/2021 for livestreaming court 
proceedings); Justice Isa v. President of Pakistan PLD 2021 SC 1 (Const.P.17/2019 challenging 
consti tutionality of Presidential Reference); SMC.1/2023 Regarding Elections in Punjab and 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 2023 SCP 87; Nusrat Yasmeen v. Peshawar High Court PLD 2019 SC 719 
and Hasnain Raza v. Lahore H igh Court  PLD 2022 SC 7.  
3 Dated 2nd September 2009 .  
 CONST. P. 24 OF 2023 ETC.  
  
   5
had any objection to my sitting on the Bench and hearing these 
petitions. Further , I did not recuse myself from hearing these 
petitions on my own, as I thought that my recusal without any 
objection from any of the parties may amount to abdication of my 
duty to ‘preserve, protect and defend the Constitution’ in a matter 
of constitutional significance  and public importance  involvin g the 
question of enforcement of the fundamental rights to life, liberty, 
dignity, due process and fair trial. With this understanding, 
despite having serious reservations about non -constituting the 
Full Court Bench of all judges of this Court presently av ailable in 
Pakistan for hearing these petitions4, I remained part of the 
Bench and continued hearing the case.  
4.  Today, at the very outset, the learned Attorney -
General for Pakistan  came up to the rostrum and stated that 
though personally he has no objection as expressed by him on the 
first day of hearing, but on instructions of the Federal 
Government which he has obtained now, he submits that I may 
consider recusing from hearing these petitions.   
5.  Although in a c onstitutional court, it is only for the 
judge concerned to decide according to  his own conscience 
whether to recuse himself from hearing a case or not, he must in 
so deciding consider that his decision should not undermine the 
public trust in the impartial ity of the court. For the appearance of 
his partiality would not only demean his reputation but also that 
of the institution of which he  is a part. The  insistence on the 
appearance of impartiality in the dispensation of justice ‘is not 
some artificial atte mpt to mask imperfection in the judicial 
process, but rather an essential means of ensuring the reality of a 
fair adjudication. Both the appearance and reality of impartial 
justice are necessary to the public legitimacy of judicial 
pronouncements and thus to the rule of law itself.’5 Judicial 
impartiality upholds p ublic trust, engenders predictability in the 
law, ensures fair trial , upkeep s the rule of law , and safeguards 
democra cy. The principle of judicial impartiality, therefore, is not 
                                                
4 See my  note dated 22.06.2023 in this case.  
5 Williams v. Pennsylvania 579 U.S. 1  (2016)  per Justice Anthony Kennedy (Majority view).  CONST. P. 24 OF 2023 ETC.  
  
   6
merely a moral imperative but a practical necessity to ensure 
justice, uphold democratic values, protect citizens' rights, and 
maintain societal order.  
6.   It may, however, be underlined here that judges 
should not readily accede to the request for their recusal from 
hearing a case and decide the matter of their recusal after 
properly weighing the ground agitated for making such request. 
Where it is appar ent that the perception of impartiality is being 
created for some ulterior motive without any sound basis, the 
judge m ust not yield to such strategy and abdicate performance 
of his duty. But if such a request is based on some reasonable 
ground which may genuinely raise doubt in the mind of a 
common person about the impartiality of the judge, the safest 
course for the judg e is to accept such request in the larger 
interest of upholding public trust in the integrity and impartiality 
of the Court. In the present case, as the said petitioner is 
admittedly my relative, a common person may not understand the 
difference between a petition filed in the public interest and a 
petition filed for personal interest. I, therefore, in the present 
case, find it preferable to accept the request and recuse myself 
from hearing the case.    
7.   Keeping in view the above principles and reasons,  in 
order to safeguard the public trust in  the i ntegrity  and 
impartiality  of the Court , I recuse myself from hearing these 
petitions on the objection raised by the learned Attorney -General 
for Pakistan on instructions from the Federal Government.  
 
Sd/- 
Judge   
Islamabad,  
26th June, 2023.  
Approved for reporting.  
Sadaqat  
 
 
  
 