In the Supreme Court of Pakistan  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present  
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
 
Civil Appeals No.1498 & 1499 of 2018  
(On appeal under section 9(5) of the Election Act, 2017 
against the  order dated 1.10.2018 passed by the 
Commission  of Pakistan in Cases No..30(26)/2018 - Leg 
& 1(19)/2018)  
And  
Civil Petitions No.972 -L & 973 -L of 2019  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 26.2.2019 passed by 
the Lahore High Court, Multan Bench in WP 
Nos.14893 /18 & 16234/18 ) 
 
Muhammad Salman (in all cases )   Petitioner(s)  
 
vs.  
   
Naveed Anjum, etc.  
Shoaib akmal qureshi Hashmi etc.  
Commission  of Pakistan etc.    ...Respondent (s)  
 
   
For the  
appellant/petitioner  (s) : Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukat, 
ASC (in  call cases ) 
 
For respondent No.1  
(in CA 1498/18)  : Mr. Tahir Munir Malik, ASC  
Kh. Waseem Abbas, ASC  
Mr. Imran Humayun Cheema, ASC  
 
For respondent No.4  
(in CA 1498/18)  : Mr. Waqar Ahmed Rana, ASC  
 
For respondent No.1  
(in CA 1499/18  : Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr.  ASC 
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
For respondent No.5  
(in CP 972 -L, 973 -L/18)  : Mr. Sajeel Shehryar Swati, ASC  
On Court Notice  : Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
On 28 & 29/1/2020  
 
Dates of hearing  : 28th and 29th January  & 3rd February, 
2020  
 
    JUDGME NT 
Munib Akhtar, J. : The four cases (being two appeals and two leave petitions)  
before us relate to an election dispute arising out of the General Election of 2018 CAs 1498/18 etc.  2
in respect of a seat in the Punjab Assembly, PP -217 (Multan -VII). All of these 
cases  have be en filed by Mr. Muhammad Salman who was the winning  candidate  
(and who is herein after referred to as “the appellant”) . The issues at hand involve , 
inter alia,  a consideration of  s. 9 of the Elections Act, 2017 (“2017 Act”)  and the 
powers and jurisdiction of the Election Commission  of Pakistan  (“Commission”)  
in terms thereof , as well as, more generally, under  clause (3) of Article 218 of the 
Constitution . 
2. It appears that after the appellant was declared the winner  one Mr. Shoaib 
Akmal Qureshi  (“Mr. Qureshi” ) filed a petition before the Commission  under 
Article 218(3) read with ss. 4, 8 and 9 of the 2017 Act, alleging that the appellant 
was underage (being less than 25 years old) on the date of the filing of his 
nomination papers. It was claimed that the reco rd had been manipulated to show 
that he was eligible  to contest the election . Certain other allegations were also 
made,  and it was prayed that his election be set aside  under two paragraphs of 
clause (1) of Article 62 of the Constitution . In the petition, Mr. Qureshi identified 
himself as being resident in, and  a registered voter of, the constituency. At around 
the same time, one Mr. Naveed Anjum  (“Mr. Anjum”) , who also identified 
himself as a registered voter of the constituency, filed a constitutional pet ition in 
the Lahore High Court (WP 11388/2018) on 07.08.2018 making substantially the 
same allegations against the appellant. It was stated in the petition that the 
Commission  had been approached under ss. 8 and 9 of the 2017 Act, but no action 
was forthco ming. It was prayed that the appellant’s election be set aside. On this 
petition, an order was made on 08.08.2018 in the presence of counsel for Mr. 
Anjum and the Commission  (though in the absence of the appellant, who was 
respondent No. 4 there in) that th e petition  filed by Mr. Anjum before the 
Commission  be heard and decided.  
3. The Commission  clubbed the two matters and after notice to the appellant 
and others and hearing the parties, made the impugned order dated 01.10.2018. 
The petitions were allowed and the election of the appellant was set aside. The 
operative part of the impugned order was in the following terms  (emphasis 
supplied) : 
 
“16. In the light of the entire discussion above, the Commission holds that 
the respondent Muhammad Salman, on the date o f filing nomination 
papers on 6.6.2018 was not eligible to contest election being below the age CAs 1498/18 etc.  3
of 25. That his date of birth throughout shown as 28.1.1994, was correct 
and the one now changed to 1.2.1993, is a result of manipulations and 
interpolations. The election of Muhammad Salman returned candidate 
from PP -217 Multan -VII is hereby declared void, under section 9 of the 
Election Act, 2017 and all enabling provisions of the Constitution and the 
law. His notification as returned candidate is withdrawn and  it is hereby 
directed that re -election be conducted in the whole constituency PP -217 
Multan -VII.”  
4. The appellant the reupon  filed two constitutional petitions in the Lahore 
High Court. WP 14893/2018 was filed on or about 11.10.2018 , and was in 
relation to t he petition filed before the Commission  by Mr. Qureshi. WP 
16234/2018 was filed on or about 27.10.2018 and was in relation to the petition 
that had been filed by Mr. Anjum. In both  the appellant assailed the aforesaid 
order of the Commission  dated 01.10.20 18. The learned High Court heard  the 
petitions together , and b y judgment dated 26.02.2019 dismissed them. Against 
this judgment the appellant has filed the two leave petitions now before us.  Along 
with filing petitions before the High Court, the appellant also filed two appeals, 
under s. 9(5) of the 2017 Act, directly in this Court assailing the order of the 
Commission . As before, one appeal related to the petition filed by Mr. Qureshi 
and the other to the one filed by Mr. Anjum. These are the two appeals t hat are 
before us. Learned counsel for the appellant explained  that this two -track 
approach was taken only out of abundant caution, since (as we will see) the 
principal part of the appellant’s case is that the Commission  had no jurisdiction 
under s. 9 to d eclare the appellant’s election as void , and hence it was unclear 
whether an appeal lay under subsection (5) thereof. Be that as it may, all four 
matters now fall to be decided . 
5. Before proceeding further, we may note that both before the Commission  
and the  High Court, the matter was contested also by Mr. Makhdoom Shah 
Mehmood Qureshi  (“Mr. Makhdoom Qureshi”) , who had been one of the 
candidates in the constituency (and who had, of course, lost the election , although 
garnering the next highest number of votes ). Indeed, one of the objections taken 
by learned counsel for the appellant was that both Mr. Anjum and Mr. Qureshi 
were nothing but men of straw, being merely nominees of Mr. Makhdoom 
Qureshi. In the event, the principal submissions before us for the priv ate 
respondents were made by learned counsel who appeared for the latter . CAs 1498/18 etc.  4
6. It will  presently  become clear that  along with the provisions of the 2017 
Act, we will also have to consider certain provisions of (one of) the predecessor 
statutes , the Representati on of the People Act, 1976 (“1976 Act” , commonly 
referred to as “ROPA” ). In particular, s. 103AA thereof , which was the provision 
corresponding to s. 9 of the 2017 Act , will have to be looked at . It will be 
convenient to set out  at the outset  (to the exten t material) some of the  provisions 
from the two statutes in tabular form:  
 
2017 Act  1976 Act  
9. Power of the Commission to 
declare a poll void. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, if, from facts apparent on the  
face of the record and after  such 
enquiry as it may deem necessary, the  
Commission is satisfied that by reason 
of grave illegalities or such violations 
of the provisions of this Act or the 
Rules as have materially affected the 
result of the  poll at one or more polling 
stations or in the whole constituency 
including  implementation of an 
agreement restraining women from 
casting their votes, it  shall make a 
declaration accordingly and call upon 
the voters in the concerned polling 
station or stations or in the whole 
constituency as the ca se may be, to  
recast their votes in the manner 
provided for bye -elections.  
 
Explanation. —If the turnout of women 
voters is less than ten percent of  the 
total votes polled in a constituency, the 
Commission may presume that the  
women voters have been restrai ned 
through an agreement from casting 
their votes and may declare, polling at 
one or more polling stations or election 
in the  whole constituency, void.  
 
… 
(3) Notwithstanding the publication of 
the name of a returned  candidate under 
section 98, the Commiss ion may 
exercise the powers conferred  on it by 
sub-section (1) before the expiration of 103AA. Power of Commission to 
declare a poll void .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, if, from facts apparent on the 
face of the record and after such 
summary inquiry as it may deem 
necessary, the  Commission is satisfied 
that, by reason of grave illegalities or 
violation of the provisions  of this Act 
or the rules, the poll in any 
constituency ought to be declared void, 
the Commission may make a 
declaration accordingly and, by 
notification in the official  Gazette, call 
upon that constituency to elect a 
member in the manner provided for in  
section 108.  
 
(2) Notwithstanding the publication of 
the name of a returned candidate  under 
sub-section(4) of section 42, the 
Commission may exercise the powers  
conferred on it by sub -section (1) 
before the expiration of sixty days after 
such publication; and, where the 
Commission does not finally dispose of 
a case within the  said period, the  
election of the returned candidate shall 
be deemed to have become  final, 
subject to a decision of a Tribunal.  
(3) While exercising the powers 
conferred on it by sub -section (1), the  
Commission shall be deemed to be a 
Tribunal to which an election petition  
has been  presented and shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in 
Chapter VII, regulate its  own 
procedure …. CAs 1498/18 etc.  5
sixty days after such publication;  and, 
where the Commission does not finally 
dispose of a case within the said  period, 
the election of the returned candidate 
shall be deemed to have become  final, 
subject to the decision of an Election 
Tribunal on an election petition, if  any. 
(4) While exercising the powers 
conferred on it by sub -section (1), the  
Commission shall be deemed to be an 
Election Tribunal to which an election  
petition has been presented and shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in  
Chapter IX, regulate its own 
procedure …. 
4. Power to issue directions. —(1) The 
Commission shall have the  power to 
issue such directions or orders as may 
be necessary for the performance  of its 
functions and duties, including an order 
for doing complete justice in any  matter 
pending before it and an order for the 
purpose of securing the attendance  of 
any person or the discovery or 
production of any document.  
 
… 
 
(3) Anything required to b e done for 
carrying out the purposes of this  Act, 
for which no provision or no sufficient 
provision exists, shall be done by  such 
authority and in such manner as the 
Commission may direct.  104. Directions of Commission in 
certain matters .—Anything required  
to be done for carrying out the purpose 
of this Act, for which no provision or 
no sufficient provision exists shall be 
done by such authority and in such 
manner as the  Commission may direct.  
 
 We may note that subsection (1) of s. 4 of the 2017 Act corre sponds to s. 
6(1) of the Election Commission  Order, 2002  (“2002 Order”) . This Order, along 
with the 1976 Act and a number of other statutes relating to elections , of course 
stand repealed by s. 241 of the 2017 Act. The present statute now deals with all 
matters relating to elections to both the Houses of Parliament and the Provincial 
Assemblies.  
7. Learned counsel for the appellant , after stating the facts substantially as 
above, and referring to the litigation in the forums  below, submitted  that there was 
a substantial difference between s. 9 on the one hand, and s. 103AA on the other. 
It was submitted that while the latter had specifically conferred jurisdiction on the 
Commission  to declare the poll in any constituency to be void and call for a bye -
election i n terms of s. 108, the former expressly limited its powers to calling upon CAs 1498/18 etc.  6
the voters of the affected polling stations (or even, in appropriate cases, the whole 
of the constituency) to “ recast their votes in the manner provided for bye -
elections ”. Learned counsel submitted that the reference to bye -elections in s. 9 
was only procedural, i.e., it specified that the manner in which the votes were to 
be recast and nothing more. Learned counsel submitted that Parliament, which 
was of course fully aware of the s tate of the earlier legislation, had deliberately 
restated the language of s. 9 and eschewed the use of the term “void”. Thus, the 
impugned order made by the Commission , which purported to void the 
appellant’s election , was beyond jurisdiction and had to b e set aside on this 
ground alone. Learned counsel further submitted that the earlier case law 
(considered below) in relation to s. 103AA could not be directly applied to the 
provisions of the 2017 Act. As regards the judgment of the High Court, it was 
subm itted that it essentially turned on the observation by the learned Single Judge 
that since the appellant had a right of direct appeal to this Court under s. 9(5), a 
writ petition was not maintainable. It was contended  that the impugned judgment 
did not rea lly stand in the appellant’s way as long as the fate of the impugned 
order of the Commission  was decided.  It was prayed that it be set aside  as being 
beyond jurisdiction . 
8. Learned counsel who appeared for Mr. Makhdoom Qureshi submitted that  
the Commission  had a constitutional duty to hold elections freely, fair ly and 
honestly and to guard against corrupt practices. This was so set out in clause (3) 
of Article 218 and this provision had to be construed and applied in a broad 
manner in order to enable the Comm ission  to fulfill its constitutional mandate. It 
was submitted that this provision was comprehensive  enough to empower the 
Commission  to annul the election in any constituency in appropriate 
circumstances. Learned counsel also referred to Article 222 of th e Constitution, 
which lists the various kinds of electoral laws that Parliament can enact. Learned 
counsel strongly emphasized the last part of this Article, which states that “no 
such law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any of the powers  of 
the Commissioner or the Commission  under this Part”. It was submitted that in 
order to ensure that s. 9 of the 2017 Act was consistent with the constitutionally 
ordained powers of the Commission , its subsection (1) had to be so construed that 
the elect ion to a constituency could be declared void in terms thereof. Learned 
counsel also submitted that the constitutional powers of the Commission  were 
distinct from those that were vested in the election tribunals set up to decide 
election disputes, as contem plated by Article 225. It was submitted that the CAs 1498/18 etc.  7
recasting of votes referred to in s. 9(1) did no t substantively change  the law from 
the earlier position. It was reiterated that the position under, and hence 
interpretation of, both s. 9 and s. 103AA remain ed the same. Learned counsel 
referred to various judgments of this Court, as well as a decision of the Indian 
Supreme Court, in support of his submissions. It was submitted  that the impugned 
order was very much within jurisdiction and learned counsel praye d that the 
appeals and leave petitions be dismissed.  
9. Learned counsel who appeared for Mr. Qureshi  in one of the appeals (CA 
1499/2018) submitted that s. 9 had to be read and applied liberally. Its clear 
purpose, unchanged from before, was to allow the Comm ission  to summarily deal 
with the sort of election disputes as came within its scope, and at the earliest 
stage. It was submitted that the law was now settled that in case a returned 
candidate had made misdeclarations or falsely stated material particulars  in the 
nomination papers, then he should not be allowed to hold office. The matter of the 
right/eligibility of such a person to be a member of the concerned legislature had 
to be dealt with swiftly and hence a broad and liberal interpretation had to be 
accorded to s. 9. It was submitted that the Commission  was fully empowered to 
act in this regard under s. 9 and that the impugned order was within jurisdiction.  
Certain decisions of this Court were relied upon.  It was prayed that the appeals 
and leave petiti ons be dismissed.  
10. The learned AAG, who appeared in Court notice, submitted that the 
impugned order was within jurisdiction. It was submitted that s. 9 could not be 
given a narrow  or pedantic reading.  The learned AAG also referred to certain 
decisions of th is Court , and drew particular attention to a passage from one of 
those cases, which is considered below.  
11. Learned counsel who appeared for Mr. Qureshi in one of the leave 
petitions (CP 972 -L/2019)  submitted that the constitutional provisions, being 
principa lly the various clauses of Article 218, were an interlocking whole which 
had autonomous effect independently of any statutory provisions. In this regard 
reference was also made to Article 222 of the Constitution. It was submitted that 
the Commission  had fu ll powers and ample jurisdiction directly conferred by 
these constitutional provisions to de clare, in appropriate circumstances, any 
election void. As regards s. 9, it was submitted that, in substance, it was no 
different from s. 103AA and had to be given similar effect. The provision was to CAs 1498/18 etc.  8
be construed and applied broadly. Various judgments of this Court were also 
cited. It was prayed that the appeals and leave petitions be dismissed.  
12. Learned counsel for Mr. Anjum adopted the submissions made by other 
learned counsel appearing for the private respondents as also the learned AAG.  
13. We have considered the submissions by learned counsel, the record as 
produced before us and the case law cited. We begin by noting that the matters 
proceeded (with the consent of l earned counsel) purely on the legal plane and in 
jurisdictional terms, i.e., whether the Commission  had the jurisdiction to declare 
the election of a returned candidate void under s. 9 of the 2017 Act and/or more 
generally under Article 218(3) of the Const itution. They are being so decided.  
14. It happens from time to time that the legislature, having earlier enacted a 
law on a particular subject matter, decides to take a fresh look at the same and 
place new legislation on the statute book. This is what has hap pened with 
electoral laws . By 2017, the 1976 Act, and certain allied laws such as the 
Electoral Rolls Act, 1974, the Delimitation of Constituencies Act, 1974 and the 
Senate (Election) Act, 1975 had been on the statute book for well -nigh four 
decades. They had been amended from time to time (indeed, the last amen dment 
to the 1976 Act was done in  2017) and had also been considered many times by 
the courts, including  this Court, and thus acc umulated  a significant body of case 
law. It appears that Parliament de cided to take a fresh look with the v iew of 
producing omnibus legislation that dealt comprehensively with matters relating to 
elections to the National Assembly and the Senate, as well as the Provincial 
Assemblies. The result was the 2017 Act , whereby the existing body of statute 
law was repealed and replaced  with new legislation.  
15. When the provisions of the 2017 Act are compared with the corresponding 
provisions of earlier legislation, we find that the former contains language that is 
sometimes exactly the same as before , and sometimes has been altered.  
Obviously, the legislature, when enacting fresh legislation, is presumed to know 
the previous state of the law, including the case law that gives the inevitable 
judicial gloss to statutory language.  Considere d against this  background it is our 
view  that whe re a provision in the 2017 Act  uses modified  language when 
compared with the corresponding earlier provision, it ought to  be presumed, at 
least in the first instance, that the legislative intent was to alter  the law. Of course, 
it may be that in the end the Court concludes that the change  in language has no CAs 1498/18 etc.  9
modifying effect, and the law remains  exactly the same as before. But this is not a 
conclusion to be drawn  lightly . If it is sought to be show n that the l aw remains  the 
same as before the onus must lie on the person mak ing this claim.  And depending 
on the nature of the change t his may be a heavy burden to discharge.  (Of course, 
even where the language is exactly the same as before, it may take on a new colo r 
and have a different effect than before, in the overall context of the new statute.)  
This, in our view, is the correct approach to take  when, in interpreting and 
applying the 2017 Act, one of the parties before the Court seeks to have recourse 
to the ear lier legislation , and make out a case that the law has not been changed . 
16. Now, the language of s. 9, when compared with that of s. 103AA  has 
clearly been altered in part and left unchanged in some respects. Focusing for the 
time being on the first subsectio ns in the two  provisions, we find that s. 103AA 
stipulated two conditions in which the Commission  could exercise its jurisdiction, 
being either (i) grave illegalities, or (ii) violation of the provisions of the 1976 Act 
or the rules. Section 9 specifie s three conditions. We will come to the third 
condition later. Looking at the first two, it is clear that the language used is the 
same as before, but with the additional requirement that  the result of the  poll at 
one or more polling stations or in the whole c onstituency  must have been 
“materially affected ”. Whether this additional requirement applies only to the 
second of the conditions or to both is a matter that does not require determination 
here. But it would seem that the additional words used are intende d to alter the 
situation in which the Commission  can exercise its jurisdiction. What is crucial 
for present purposes is what it is that the Commission can do if either of the 
conditions is fulfilled . Under s. 103AA, it could declare the poll in the 
constit uency to be void . A judicial gloss put on these words was  that the poll for 
the whole constituency need not be voided: a declaration could even be made in 
respect of one or more  polling stations (see, e.g., Ch. Muhammad Ashraf 
Warraich and another v. Muham mad Nasir Cheema and others  2016 SCMR 998 
(para 23) and Aftab Shaban Mirani and others v. Muhammad Ibrahim and others  
PLD 2008 SC 779 , 817 ). The relevance of this gloss will become clear presently. 
Under s. 9 however, the language used is different. The Co mmission can now 
“call upon the voters in the concerned polling station or stations or in the whole 
constituency as the case may be to  recast their votes in the manner provided for 
bye-elections ”. Is it the legislative intent to alter the law by this chang e in 
language? In our view, the answer must be in the affirmative. There is a 
difference between the voters being asked simply to recast their votes on the one CAs 1498/18 etc.  10
hand, and the election to be declared void on the other. Learned counsel for the 
appellant was, in our view, correct in submitting that under s. 9 everything (and 
especially , for present purposes,  the list of candidates) remains the same . Voters 
simply get another chance  of choosing the person who is to represent them , but  
from the same slate as befo re. Under s. 103AA the entire election (subject to the 
judicial gloss just mentioned) was, as it were, scrapped and the whole exercise 
done afresh.  Obviously, if the matter were limited to one or more polling stations, 
the practical result under both s. 10 3AA (on account of the judicial gloss) and s. 9 
(on account of the statutory language) would be more or less the same . However, 
if the poll in the entire constituency was to be redone then there would be a 
fundamentally different position , as just indicate d. In our view,  this clearly shows 
that Parliament intended to bring about a change when it used the modified 
language. To hold that the law has been left unaltered would be to defeat the 
legislative intent.  
17. The conclusion just arrived at is bolstered when  one looks at the third 
condition in which the jurisdiction under s. 9 can now also be invoked. It is that  
there be an agreement (which has been  implemented) to restrain women from 
casting their votes . This condition is new and was not to be found in s. 10 3AA 
(unless, tangentially, it could have been regarded as constituting a “grave 
illegality”, on which point we need not express an opinion). What is of relevance 
for present purposes is not the condition itself (which could not have arisen  in the 
facts and  circumstances before us ) but rather what the Explanation to subs ection 
(1) has to say about it.  
18. The manner in which an “explanation ” found in a statut ory provision  is to 
be interpreted is well understood. In this Court, it was observed as follows in 
Navee d Textile Mills Ltd. v. Assistant Collector (Appraising) Custom House 
Karachi and others  PLD 198 5 SC 92 (at pg. 96; emphasis supplied ): 
 
“We have heard the learned counsel at length. We are in agreement with 
him that the ordinary function of an explanation  is to clarify, to facilitate 
the proper understanding of a provision, to serve as a guide, as held in the 
case of Muhammad Hussain Patel  [PLD 1981 SC 1] . Nevertheless, it does 
not exhaust or complete the function and the purpose of an explanation . In 
the Privy Council case of Krishna Ayyangar:In re  ([1920] I LR 43 Mad. 
550), it was held that "The  construction of the Explanation must depend 
upon its terms, and no theory of the purpose can be entertained unless it is 
to be inferred from the  language". In anot her case from Indian 
Jurisdiction, State of Bombay v. United Motors  (AIR 1953 SC 252), the CAs 1498/18 etc.  11
Explanation was found to contain a  legal fiction, to provide a simpler and 
workable test directed at facilitating the operation of the statute itself. ” 
 The cited de cision was a leave refusing order. We agree  that it correctly 
states the law . The relevant passage from the judgment of the Indian Supreme 
Court referred to therein  also merits being reproduced (at pg. 258): 
 
“It may be that the description of a provision cannot be decisive of its true 
meaning or interpretation which must depend on the words used therein, 
but, when two interpretations are sought to be put upon a provision, that 
which fits the description which the legislature has chosen to apply to it is, 
according to sound canons of construction, to be adopted provided, of 
course, it is consistent with the language employed, in preference to the 
one which attributes to the provision a different effect from what it should 
have according to its description by  the legislature.”  
 
19. It is in the foregoing manner that , in our view,  the Explanation to s. 9(1) is 
to be construed and applied. For present purposes, it can be regarded as having 
two parts. The first part ( “If the turnout  … casting their  votes ”) permits th e 
Commission , if the votes  cast by women are less than 10% of the total, to 
conclude  (“may presume”)  that there was an agreement of the sort proscribed by 
the third condition . Had this been the whole of it, the Explanation would  be one in 
the “traditional”  mould, i.e., merely clarifying or facilitating the third condition. 
However, it does not end there. The Explanation also specifies what the 
Commission can do once the situation set out therein is found to exist . The 
Commission can then declare the “ pollin g at one or more polling stations or 
election in the  whole constituency, void ”. As it at once obvious, this accords with 
the language of s. 103AA (1), when that provision is read in light of the judicial 
gloss noted above. In our view, t he Explanation , when  read in its totality 
constitutes a special case . In contrast to what is set out in the main part of 
subsection (1) it  allows for the election to be voided , in whole or in part . Thus, in 
the same subsection different outcomes are possible as and when the v arious 
conditions become applicable. For the most part, the Commission can only order a 
recasting of votes. In one special case, it can declare the election to be void.  That 
Parliament considered it expedient to set out a special case in this manner and 
repeat therein alone the language that had been used in s. 103AA(1)  while 
eschewing it in the main part of s. 9(1) also, in our view, makes the legislative 
intent clear. By allowing  the Commission power only to order a recasting of votes 
in the main part of the subsection Parliament intended to bring about a substantive CAs 1498/18 etc.  12
change in the law . The jurisdiction earlier conferred on the Commission  now 
applies only in respect of the special case, and not otherwise . 
20. The conclusion therefore is inescapable. Since the C ommission no longer 
has the power to declare the poll in a constituency (or in any one or more polling 
stations) void  except in the special case, in making such a declaration with regard 
to the appellant’s election it made a fundamental error of law  and cl early went 
beyond its jurisdiction . No such declar ation was permissible under s. 9  on the 
facts and circumstances of the present case . 
21. This does not however end the matter. Although s. 9 is the only specific 
provision relied upon in the operative part of t he impugned order, the 
Commission has also referred generally to the Constitution and the law. The latter 
reference  (i.e., to the “law”)  is so broad and vague that it can be ignored as failing 
to provid e, in any meaningful sense, a basis for declaring the appellant’s election 
void. The same cannot however be said of the reference to the Constitution. 
There, as noted above, learned counsel for the private respondents have relied 
strongly on Article 218 (3). It is to consider this constitutional provision that  we 
now turn.  
22. Clause (3) of Article 218 provides as follows:  
 
“It shall be the duty of the Commission  to organize and conduct the 
election and to make such arrangements as are necessary to ensure that the 
election is conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law, 
and that corrupt practices are guarded against.”  
 Learned counsel for the private respondents relied on certain observations 
made by one of us (Munib Akhtar, J.) when in the High Court, in Waheeda Shah 
v. Commission  of Pakistan and others  PLD 2013 Sindh 117 , at paras 17 -19 (pp. 
137-140). In addition thereto, Article 222 was also relied upon. This empowers 
Parliament to make laws (subject to the Constitution) in respect of various sorts of 
electoral matters as listed there in, but expr essly states that “but no such law shall 
have the effect of taking away or abridging any of the powers of the 
Commissioner or the Commission  under this Part”. Learned counsel relied on 
these words to submit that the powers of the Commission under s. 9(1) h ad to be 
the same as before (i.e., under s. 103AA(1)) but stressed that these provisions 
were just a statutory  manifestation of the constitutional powers conferred by 
Article 218(3) , which operated autonomously and independent ly of any CAs 1498/18 etc.  13
legislation . Finally , reliance was also placed on s. 4(2) of the 2017 Act, which 
corresponds to s. 104 of the earlier law.  
23. Before proceeding further, the point in dispute between the parties may be 
looked at again. The allegation of the private respondents is that the appella nt was 
not of proper age (set at 25  by the Constitution ) to contest the election at the time 
he filed his nomination papers. This meant that he was not qualified to be elected 
a member of the Provincial Assembly, as required by Article 62 (1)(b)  (read with 
Article 113) . It is alleged that in order to show himself as being of eligible age , 
the appellant tampered with and/or manipulated the relevant record , which  
brought  him in breach also of Article 62 (1)(f). A per usal of the impugned order 
shows that this is  the sole allegation considered by the Commission  and, as noted, 
accepted by it. Thus, for present purposes, the submissions by learned counsel for 
the private respondents may be recast in the following terms. It is contended that 
it is inherent in the jur isdiction and powers conferred by Article 218(3) on the 
Commission , and the constitutional duty so cast on it, that it be empowered  to 
adjudicate on whether a candidate ( or member of the legislature ) is qualified (or, 
by extension, disqualified) in terms o f Articles 62 and /or 63 respectively. Now, 
this question is one that be raised on an independent, standalone basis, or it can be 
part of an election dispute. Learned counsel submit ted that in either case, the 
Commission ha d inherent jurisdiction and powers  under Article 218(3). Thus, in 
the present case, it was fully empowered to consider and decide the applications 
filed by Mr. Qureshi and Mr. Anjum, independently of s. 9 or any other provision 
of law.  
24. When put this way, the submissions require us to consi der Article 218(3) 
without taking into consideration any statutory provision  at all  such as, e.g., s. 9 
or s. 103AA . Such an exercise does , one must confess,  take on a  certain  air of 
abstractedness. The reason is that inevitably the jurisdiction of the Com mission to 
consider questions of qualification or disqualification is not invoked in terms of 
Article 218(3) alone. Rather,  it is inextricably interlinked with statutory 
provisions  (especially  those just mentioned ), and the Commission itself tends to 
consi der the matters before  it in such terms.  Indeed, that is how it treated the 
appellant’s case in the impugned order.  In order to consider the position under 
Article 218(3) on a standalone basis , i.e., on the constitutional plane alone , as we 
are invited to do, requires us then to look at the other relevant provisions in the 
Constitution  in this regard . CAs 1498/18 etc.  14
25. Now, the Constitution itself confer s a jurisdiction on the Commission with 
regard to the disqualification of members of the Federal and Provincial 
legislature s. This is contained in clauses (2) and (3) of Article 63  (read, as 
appropriate, with Article 113) , which provide as follows:  
 
“(2) If any question arises whether a member of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) has become disqualified from being a member, the Spe aker 
or, as the case may be, the Chairman shall, unless he decides that no such 
question has arisen, refer the question to the Election Commission within 
thirty days and should he fail to do so within the aforesaid period it shall 
be deemed to have been re ferred to the Election Commission.  
 
(3) The Election Commission shall decide the question within ninety days 
from its receipt or deemed to have been received and if it is of the opinion 
that the member has become disqualified, he shall cease to be a member  
and his seat shall become vacant.”  
 
 A special type  of disqualification, by defection , is provided for in Article 
63A. Clauses (3) and (4) specifically empower the Commission to rule on the 
validity of the declaration of defection against a member. (Claus e (5) allows fo r a 
direct appeal to this Court against the decision of the Commission.)  Thus, the 
Constitution is not silent on whether or when (and if so, under what 
circumstances) the Commission has the power to consider the issue  of 
disqualification. Th e question therefore becomes whether this specific conferment 
of power is exhaustive. In other words,  if the Constitution has itself confer red a 
limited, and not general, power and jurisdiction on the Commission in terms as 
noted above, can a general power  nonetheless be discovered as inhering in Article 
218(3)? In our view, the answer ought to be in the negative. The reason is that that 
would render the relevant provisions of Article 63 and 63A  redundant . These 
provisions can only be invoked in a special m anner and on fulfillment of certain 
conditions. If a general power inhered in Article 218(3) then the constitutional 
safeguards contained therein would be rendered meaningless.  They could be 
bypassed at will and at any time.  Furthermore, the well known leg al maxim, 
expressio unius est exclusio alterious , may also be relevant  in the present context. 
No doubt the maxim must be applied cautiously: it has been said to be a valuable 
servant but a dangerous master. But even within such limitations it provides a 
useful aid in addressing the qu estion now under consideration.  In our view , to the 
extent that the Constitution considered it appropriate to itself confer a jurisdiction 
on the Commission to examine questions of qualification or disqualification on an 
indep endent, standalone basis, it expressly provided for the same in the Articles CAs 1498/18 etc.  15
noted above . Anything other than that, unsupported by statute law (i.e., in terms 
of a jurisdiction conferred by Parliament itself by enacting a law in terms of 
Article 222) would  be beyond the power of the Commission. More particularly, 
no such power can be discovered in terms of Article 218(3) or said to inhere in the 
Commission in terms thereof.  
26. Insofar as the question of qualification or disqualification , arising as part 
of an election dispute  and being considered by the Commission directly in terms 
of Article 218(3) , is concerned , the provisions of Article 225 need to be kept in 
mind . This provides as follows : “No election to a House or a Provincial Assembly 
shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such tribunal 
and in such manner as may be determined by Act of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament)”. To hold that there is an independent power inhering in the 
Commission in terms of Article 218(3) would trenc h upon this constitutional 
provision  which, it is to be noted, is cast in strongly negative terms. This indicates 
that those  election disputes as properly come within the scope of Article 225 are 
to be considered by an election tribunal and not elsewhere a nd before some other 
forum such  as, e.g., the Commission purporting to exercise a jurisdiction said to 
inhere in it under Article 218(3) . It is  no doubt  for this reason that both in terms of 
s. 103AA and s. 9, the Commission was, and c ontinues to be, “ deem ed to be an 
Election Tribunal to which an election  petition has been presented ”. And even 
here, interestingly, the jurisdiction conferred on the Commission came, and 
comes, with a sunset provision: it must decide the matter within the stipulated 60 
days, else “the election of the returned candidate shall be deemed to have become  
final”, subject to a petition (if any) before the election tribunal constituted in 
terms of s. 57 of the 1976 Act and now s. 140 of the 2017 Act. (The question , 
whether a law can at  all deem the Commission to be an election tribunal is one 
that, though interesting, need not trouble us here.)  
27. It follows from the foregoing discussion that in our view there is no power 
or jurisdiction inherent in the Commission itself in terms of Articl e 218(3) to 
consider the qualification /disqualification of a candidate /member , whether as an 
independent, standalone issue or as part of an election dispute.  Can such a 
jurisdiction nonetheless be conferred by Parliament under a statute enacted in 
terms of  Article 222 ? For purposes of this judgment , we assume (without 
deciding) that Parliament may enact such a law  (whether by, or without, deeming 
the Commission to be an election tribunal being immaterial  for purposes of the CAs 1498/18 etc.  16
present discussion ). What now needs to be considered , as the immediately 
relevant question,  is whether such a power was indeed conferred in terms of s. 
103AA and /or is conferred by s. 9 . It will be appreciated that this question is 
distinct from the one already considered above in relatio n to these statutory 
provisions, i.e., what  could  have happen ed (or now can happen)  if the provision 
was, or is,  successfully invoked.  In order to address th e question  now posed , we 
turn to look at the case law.  
28. Learned counsel for the parties  cited , it se ems, almost every case of this 
Court involving s. 103AA  or s. 9 . With respect, every such case is not relevant. 
We will therefore only look at  some of  the cases  cited , particularly those  where 
the question of qualification (or disqualification) was involve d, and Article 218(3) 
and/or s. 103AA w ere said to have been invoked as conferring the necessary 
jurisdiction on the Commission.  
29. We begin with Sher Alam Khan v. Abdul Munim and others  PLD 2018 SC 
449 (decided on 23.02.2018) and Raja Shaukat Aziz Bhatti v. Major (R)Iftikhar 
Mehmood Kiani  PLD 2018 SC 578 (decided on 22.05.2018). (Incidentally, both 
are decisions of the same Bench of the Court. ) Taking up the first case  (herein 
after “ Sher Alam Khan ”), the matter arose out of the General Election of 2013, in 
relation to a seat of the KPK Assembly. The first respondent  (Abdul Munim)  was 
declared the returned candidate. On 28.12.2016, the petitioner filed an application 
before the Commission, under Article 6 of the 2002 Order read with Articles 63 
and 218(3) of t he Constitution  on the ground that the first respondent had been 
disqualified from contesting the election on account of a disability ( under Article 
63(1)(k) ) at the time that he filed his nomination papers.  Article 62 (1)(f)  was also 
invoked. The Commissio n concluded that the first respondent was indeed 
disqualified as alleged and made an order declaring his election to be null and 
void. He challenged this declaration before the Peshawar High Court by way of a 
constitutional petition, which was allowed. The  order of the Commission was set 
aside. Against this decision, the petitioner filed a leave petition before this Court.  
30. It will be seen that this matter did not as such come by way of s. 103AA. 
However, it was observed in this Court as follows  (at pg. 456) : 
 
“13. The primary bone of contention between the parties was with regard 
to the jurisdiction of the ECP to pass an order of de -notifying a Returned  
Candidate several years after the elections. By referring to the various 
provisions of ROPA of 1976 especi ally Section 103AA(2) and the CAs 1498/18 etc.  17
Constitution,  more particularly, Article 225 of the Constitution, it has been 
held by way of the impugned judgment that a pre -election disqualification 
or lack of  qualification is to be adjudicated upon by various fora at vari ous 
points of time ….” 
 It was also observed as follows  (pg. 458) : 
 
“17. The question of availability of the jurisdiction with the ECP to decide 
the complaint and de -notify a Returned Candidate after the lapse of a  
period of sixty days provided in Section 1 03AA(2) of ROPA of 1976, is 
not without difficulty. The contentions of the learned counsel for the  
Petitioner cannot be simply brushed aside as frivolous. However, this 
aspect of the matter as canvassed by the learned counsel for the Petitioner 
needs  not to be adjudicated upon in the instant case. ” 
 It was then observed, after referring to various decisions , that it was well 
settled that one type of proceedings before this Court could be converted into 
another type of proceedings. It was noted that the matt er had come by way of a 
leave petition (i.e., under Article 185(3) ). However, the Court was pleased to 
convert it into suo moto proceedings under Article 184(3) (see at pg. 465). After 
this conversion, the Court then proceeded to consider the facts and cir cumstances 
of the case on the merits  in terms of this jurisdiction, and concluded that the first 
respondent had indeed been disqualified as claimed by the petitioner. The  
judgment of the High Court was set aside and the order of the Commission 
declaring the election to be null and void upheld and restored.  
31. As is clear from the foregoing narration, this decision is not, with respect, 
any binding authority for deciding the question now before us, i.e., whether either 
Article 218(3) or s. 103AA conferred a jur isdiction on the Commission to decide 
the qualification or disqualification of a candidate /member in terms of an 
application filed directly before the Commission. There is perhaps a passing 
reference in a sentence in para 18 (pg. 458) that could be pressed  into service as 
being relevant for the question at hand. However, this tangential reference is 
certainly not part of the ratio decidendi  of the judgment and hence, with respect, 
need not be considered in any detail.  
32. We move to the next case, Raja Shaukat Aziz Bhatti v. Major (R)Iftikhar 
Mehmood Kiani  PLD 2018 SC 578  (herein after “ Raja Shaukat Bhatti ”). This also 
arose out of the General Election of 2013, in relation to a seat in the Punjab 
Assembly. The petitioner before this Court was the returned candid ate. An 
application was filed with the Commission seeking to have him declared 
disqualified in terms of Article 6 2(1)(f)  for the reason that in the previous general CAs 1498/18 etc.  18
election (of 2008) he had made false declarations. The jurisdiction of the 
Commission was a lso invoked on the ba sis of a judgment of this Court,  
Muhammad Rizwan Gill v. Nadia Aziz and others  PLD 2010 SC 828. The 
Commission made the declaration prayed for  on or about 20.06.2017 , and the 
petitioner appealed to this Court under a provision of the 1 976 Act that 
correspond ed to s. 9(5). At the same time, he challenged the order before the 
Islamabad High Court, which dismissed his constitutional petition. Against this 
decision, the pet itioner filed a leave petition.  
33. The case of the petitioner was, inte r alia, that the order of the Commission 
was without jurisdiction as having been made many years after the stipulated 
period of 60 days. It was held as follows  (pg. 586 ; emphasis supplied ): 
 
“15. At the very outset, the Appellant/Petitioner called into que stion the 
jurisdiction of the ECP to pass the impugned Order de -notifying him as a  
Member of the Provincial Assembly. In pith and substance, it is the case 
of the Appellant/Petitioner that with regard to an alleged pre -election  
disqualification or lack of qualification of a candidate or an illegality in 
the conduct of the elections, the jurisdiction of the ECP to pass orders 
under  Section 103 -A of RoPA can only be exercised prior to the expiry of 
60 days from the notification of the result of the elections.  In the instant 
case, it is  contended, that the impugned Order of the ECP has been passed 
several years after the original Notification declaring the 
Appellant/Petitioner as an  elected Member of the Provincial Assembly 
was issued.  
16. A perusal of the impu gned Order of the ECP dated 20.06.2017 reveals 
that pursuant to the judgment of this Court reported as Muhammad  
Rizwan Gill (supra) the ECP and the HEC inquired into the validity and 
authenticity of the educational qualification of the Members of the 
Parli ament  and the Provincial Assemblies. It is in pursuance to the 
aforesaid directions of this Court that the ECP conducted the requisite 
inquiries and  purportedly passed the impugned Order dated 20.06.2017. 
The aforesaid is clear and obvious from paragraph 2  of the Order of the 
ECP dated  20.06.2017. Thus, it appears that the contentions of the learned 
counsel for the Appellant/Petitioner pertaining to the assumption of 
jurisdiction of the ECP after the lapse of 60 days may not be strictly 
applicable as the EC P was purportedly acting in compliance of the 
directions of this Court .” 
 It was further observed as follows  (pp. 587 -590; emphasis supplied) : 
 
“17. Furthermore, it is the case of the Respondents and as is also evident 
from the Order of the ECP dated 20.06 .2017 that Article 218(3) of the  
Constitution must necessarily be read and interpreted in its broadest 
amplitude thereby conferring jurisdiction on the ECP to pass appropriate 
orders at  any stage unfettered by technical restrictions imposed by any 
sub-Cons titutional legislation pertaining to the conduct of elections 
including RoPA. In  this behalf, Article 225 of the Constitution must also CAs 1498/18 etc.  19
be read in harmony with Article 218(3) of the Constitution …. However, 
the question of jurisdiction of  the ECP to pass su ch order de -notifying the 
Member of the Parliament or the Provincial Assembly on account of a pre -
election disqualification or lack  of qualification after a lapse of 60 days 
from the original Notification is not free from difficulty.  
 
18. Be that as it may , this Court when confronted with the issue of 
jurisdiction, the ECP with regard to pre -election disqualification or lack of  
qualification in its judgment dated 23.02.2018 passed in Civil Petition 
No.3131 of 2017  [i.e., the decision reported as Sher Alam K han v. Abdul 
Munim and others  PLD 2018 SC 449] , after examining various judgments 
of this Court  …. concluded as follows: [and then paras 27 to 29 of the 
reported judgment were reproduced].  
19. In view of facts and circumstances narrated above and as the se ttled 
law referred to above we cannot abdicate our responsibility by brushing  
the issues floating on the surface under the carpet. Hence, we have no 
other option but to convert the instant proceedings into suo motu 
proceedings under Article 184(3) of the C onstitution so as to examine the 
cases of the parties on the basis of the material available on record so as 
to examine the Order of the ECP dated 20.06.2017 by determining as to 
whether the Appellant/Petitioner was disqualified or not qualified for 
being a Member of the Provincial Assembly under the Constitution .” 
 After considering the merits of the case, it was concluded that the 
petitioner was indeed disqualified in terms as alleged. Accordingly, the order of 
the Commission was upheld and the petitioner ’s direct appeal and leave petition 
were dismissed.  
34. We have quoted somewhat  extensively from the cited case because the  
state of the proceedings was rather similar to the situation at hand.  However, in 
the end, this judgment also is not, with respect, any binding aut hority for the 
question at hand . The reason is that like the  Sher Alam Khan  case, this also was 
decided by converting the appeal and leave -petition into suo moto proceedings 
under Article  184(3).  Any references to s.  103AA or Article 218(3) were  not, with 
respect, part of the ratio decidendi  of the decision. We may also note that the 
application before the Commission had been  made sometime in April 2016, i.e., 
many years after the elections of 2013. In this respect this case was similar to the  
Sher Alam Khan  case. Hence , insofar as s. 103AA was concerned the facts of this 
case also suffered from the infirmities that ha ve been noted in respect of the 
situation in th at decision.  
35. This brings us to Muhammad Rizwan Gill v. Nadia Aziz and others  PLD 
2010 SC 828  (“Rizwan Gill ”). This decision has been cited from time to time in 
various decisions but, with respect, requires to be looked at closely . When the CAs 1498/18 etc.  20
judgment is considered, the following points emerge. Firstly, although the 
notation on the title pag e (i.e., pg. 828) appears to suggest that this was a decision 
on a miscellaneous application, para 3 (pg. 833) makes clear that it was the main 
appeal that was heard and decided. Secondly, the appeal was a n ordinary election 
dispute, and arose out of a dec ision of the Election Tribunal. In other words, the 
proceedings did not start by way of an application before the Commission. The 
matter arose out of the General Election of 2008. The appellant was the returned 
candidate. The respondent , a losing candidate , challenged the election by filing an 
election petition on the ground that the graduate degree  presented by the appellant 
was false and bogus. The Election Tribunal accepted this allegation and declared 
the election null and void. Against this decision, t he appellant exercised his 
statutory right of appeal to this Court.   
36. The Court considered the appeal on the merits, and agreed with the 
Election Tribunal that the degree presented by the appellant was “fabricated, 
interpolated, forged and fictitious”. Acco rdingly, the appeal was dismissed with 
costs: see para 11 (pg. 838). Now, it is obvious that  at that point  the judgment on 
the appeal c ame to an end. Whatever followed thereafter could not therefore be 
part of the ratio decidendi  of the decision. In the su bsequent paragraphs (paras 12 
to 19) the Court proceeded to consider elections in general terms and in particular 
the problem of candidates presenting degrees  or other papers/record  that were 
forged or bogus. What jurisdiction was the Court exercising in these paras ? 
Obviously, it was not appellate jurisdiction : as noted, the appeal already stood 
decided. Since the then Chief Justice was himself a member of the Bench it was, 
in our view, nothing other than an exercise of suo moto jurisdiction under Article 
184(3). It was in these terms that the Court gave certain specific directions and 
orders, directed towards the Commission, at paras 17 -18 (pg. 840). Para 18 was in 
the following terms:  
 
“18. The Election Commission is, therefore, directed to initiate actio n 
against all such persons who are accused of commission of corrupt 
practices; of  committing forgery and of using, as genuine, documents 
which they knew or at least had reason to believe to be forged. The 
Election Commission  shall ensure that the investiga tions in these matters 
are conducted honestly, efficiently and expeditiously and shall depute one 
of its senior officers to  supervise the same. The learned Sessions Judges to 
whom these trials shall then be entrusted, are also directed to conclude the 
same  without any  delay, in consonance with the spirit of the Elections 
laws as displayed, inter -alia, by the Provisos newly -added to subsection (I -
A) of section 67 of the  said Act of 1976 through the Amending Act No.IV 
of 2009 promulgated on 2 -11-2009. In any case, it should not take each CAs 1498/18 etc.  21
learned Sessions Judge  who gets seized of the matter, more than three 
months to conclude the same. ” 
 It will be seen from the foregoing that the directions given by this Court 
moved within a specific and rather narrow locus. I t was simply to determine 
whether forged or fabricated degrees or documents had been used by the 
(successful) candidates and if so, then to send their cases for criminal trial of the 
offences thereby committed under the 1976 Act. Subsequently, the matter 
returned to this Court in other proceedings, of a miscellaneous nature, in an 
appeal that had already been decided (being Mian Najeeb -ud-Din Owais v. Aamir 
Yar and others  2011 SCMR 180). On the miscellaneous application (CMA 
1712/2013) in the aforesaid matt er, an order  was made on  01.04.2013 , which is 
reported as Mian Najeeb -ud-Din Owasi and another v. Amir Yar Waran and 
others  PLD 2013 SC 482.  The data and details regarding fake degrees of 
parliamentarians were placed before the Court.  It was found that the re were 189 
such persons.  Para 18 of the Rizwan Gill  case was referred to and it was noted that 
in the said para  “direction was only given for the prosecution of such like 
persons” (pg. 486). After considering the entire matter, the Court directed (pp. 
488-89) that all 189 of them be given an opportunity of getting their degree s 
verified by or before the date specified but that if it was then found that the degree 
of anyone was fake, it would be tantamount to him having made an incorrect 
declaration and his  election could be annulled. It was in this context that it was 
observed as follows  (pg. 489) : 
“14. We may again point out that the ECP must adopt a distinction in 
between making, of a declaration, which is against the provisions of 
Articles  62 and 63 of t he Constitution and the process of Criminal 
proceedings as a result of making mis -representation. Once a person has 
filed a declaration  under his signatures declaring that he fulfils the 
conditions of Articles 62 and 63 of the Constitution and he undertake s that 
the statement is correct  and if such declaration is incorrect the ECP, shall 
de-notify him for such misrepresentation, retrospectively .” 
 
   Unfortunately, the Commission, in our view wholly erroneously, appears 
to have taken  a rather expansive view  of the directions given earlier in the Rizwan 
Gill case and those as just noted, and took them to mean that this Court had 
conferred some open -ended powers on it, exercisable at any time in the future,  to 
consider the question of qualification/ disqualific ation autonomously and on its 
own, and make declarations accordingly. This was  patently  not so.  CAs 1498/18 etc.  22
37. Before proceeding further, it is pertinent to take a look at a passage from 
the Sher Alam Khan  case, to which our attention was drawn in particular by the 
learn ed AAG. It was observed as follows (pg. 464-5; emphasis supplied):  
 
“29. Consequently, where a disqualified or unqualified person slips 
through the cracks sneaks into the Majlis -e-Shoora or the Provincial  
Assemblies, his presence in the said House can alwa ys be challenged 
through exercise of the Constitutional jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article  184(3) of the Constitution and before the learned High Court under 
Article 199 of the Constitution by way of a Writ in the nature of quo 
warranto.  Even where a  matter comes before this Court regarding the 
qualification or disqualification of a Member of the Majlis -e-Shoora or the 
Provincial  Assemblies otherwise by way of proceedings other than under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, this Court not only has the  jurisdiction 
to convert such proceedings to proceedings under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution but is bound to do so , as to permit an unqualified or 
disqualified person to  continue to defile and desecrate the Majlis -e-Shoora 
or the Provincial Assemblies  and [masquerade]  as a chosen representative 
of the people would  amount to frustrating the Constitutional provisions. In 
such an eventuality, if this Court looks other way, it would perhaps 
constitute a failure to  protect and preserve the Constitution. ” 
 The learned AAG submitted that even if it was concluded that the 
impugned order could not have been made under Article 218(3) and/or s. 9, it was 
always open to us to convert these matters into suo moto proceedings under 
Article 184(3), as had been done in both the Sher Alam Khan  and Raja Shaukat 
Bhatti  cases. As we understood it, the learned AAG submitted, on the basis of the 
passage extracted above (and especially the portion emphasized), that this was the 
procedure that ought to be followed as a matter of  course in suchlike cases. With 
respect, we are unable to agree. Firstly, as noted in para 13 above, these cases are 
(with the express consent of learned counsel) being decided solely on the point of 
jurisdiction. Secondly, and more importantly, if the sub mission by the learned 
AAG were to be accepted, then in cases of qualification/disqualification of 
candidates/members, it would be mandatory for the Court to convert any type of 
proceedings before it into suo moto proceedings under Article 184(3), if the 
matter could not otherwise be attended to. In other words, the jurisdiction of the 
Court would cease to be discretionary. With respect, this cannot be accepted. It is 
of the essence of this jurisdiction that it is, and must remain, discretionary. The 
para f rom the Sher Alam Khan  case set out above certainly puts the point it seeks 
to make in (if we may say with respect) very strong terms. However (and again, 
with respect), matters relating to the jurisdiction of the Court cannot, and ought 
not, to be approac hed in this manner. It is a bedrock principle of the judicial 
function that all discretion must be exercised judiciously and in accordance with CAs 1498/18 etc.  23
well settled principles, and not otherwise. The jurisdiction of the Court that is 
discretionary cannot be calcif ied into an inflexible and unyielding rule that must 
always produce the same result no matter what the actual facts and circumstances 
before the Court may be. The Court cannot adopt such a position automatically 
and as a matter of course. The passage being  relied upon must be read in the 
overall context of the judicial function and the methods not just of law but also of 
equity with which the Courts have such familiarity. It is of the essence of 
discretionary jurisdiction that it is, and must remain, flexib le. The reference to any 
presumed “duty” cannot, with respect, obliterate or alter the discretion that must 
always vest in the Court when considering whether to “covert” one type of 
proceedings into another. To hold otherwise would be not just to bring abo ut a 
fundamental change in the practice and procedure of the Court; it would affect the 
very essence of the judicial function .  
38. It remains only to notice Allah Dino Khan Bhayo v. Election Commission 
of Pakistan and others  2013 SCMR 1655. This was a leave r efusing order dated 
09.07.2013, whereby a leave petition (CP 1033/2013) against a judgment of the 
Islamabad High Court was dismissed. This case need not be considered in any 
detail. The reason is that firstly, a review petition (CRP 218/2013) was filed 
against the leave refusing order. This review petition was allowed on 04.02.2020 . 
The leave refusing order ha s thus lost its position as an authority. Secondly, and in 
any case, as per the jurisprudence of this Court, a leave refusing order does not 
constitut e binding authority.  
39. We now turn to look at two decisions of this Court in relation to s. 9. The 
first case is Shaukat Ali v. Election Commission of Pakistan and others  2018 
SCMR 2086.  The matter arose out of the General Election of 2018 and in relation 
to a seat in the KPK Assembly. An application was filed with the Commission 
under s. 9 to the effect that the votes cast by women were less than 10% of the 
total, and this was because of an agreement to restrain them from exercising their 
right of franchise.  Thus, the Explanation to s. 9(1) was invoked. The Commission 
came to the conclusion that the grievance was made out , and ordered a re -poll for 
the entire constituency. The appellant, being the successful candidate, appealed to 
this Court under s. 9(5). In terestingly, at the time of hearing learned counsel for 
the appellant sought to challenge s. 9(1) as being ultra vires the Constitution. 
After considering submissions in detail  on this point , the attack was repelled. On 
the merits, it was found that the Co mmission had properly exercised its CAs 1498/18 etc.  24
jurisdiction and powers , and the appeal was dismissed. Putting this decision  in 
terms as set out herein above , it involved the special case of the Explanation to s. 
9(1) where, as noted, the Commission is empowered to de clare the poll in one or 
more polling stations or the whole of the constituency to be void.  
40. The other case is Sardar Masood Khan Luni v. Election Commission of 
Pakistan and others  2019 SCMR 61. It also arose out of the General Election of 
2018, in relation  to a seat in the Balochistan Assembly.  On two separate  
application s made under s. 9 the election was declared null and void and a re-poll 
was ordered. The successful candidate appealed to this Court, and after 
considering the impugned order in the facts a nd circumstances on record, the 
appeal s were dismissed. What is relevant for present purposes is that the facts 
alleged for invoking s. 9 were clearly relatable to what have been called the first 
two conditions of s ubsection (1) herein above. Yet, the elec tion was declared to 
be “null and void” by the Commission and this order was upheld by this Court. In 
our view, with respect, the election could not have been declared “null and void” 
for the reasons set out  above. However, in the reported decision the dif ference 
between the previous position, under s. 103AA, and the present language of s. 9 
was not in issue nor considered by the Court. The point made  earlier in this 
judgment can be regarded as having passed sub silentio . While the decision was 
undoubtedly correct on the facts it does not, with respect, constitute an authority 
as would preclude us, in terms of the well known principles of precedent, from  
reaching any of the conclusions arrived at herein above.  
41. It would therefore seem that there is no direct authority, at any rate as 
would be binding on us, in which the question under discussion was considered or 
decided directly. The question, nonetheless, remains: did Parliament confer a 
jurisdiction in terms of s. 103AA (and/or s. 9) on the Commission to co nsider the 
qualification or disqualification , under Articles 62 and/or 63,  of a candidate for 
election or a member of the legislature? In our view, the answer must be in the 
negative.  We begin with an obvious  point: neither of the sections expressly or 
explicitly conferred (or confers) any such jurisdiction. If at all it exists, it has  
therefore  to be read into the provisions, and discovered collaterally or by 
implication. Now, t he question of whether a candidate is qualified or disqualifie d 
goes to his sta tus, i.e., ability to contest the election.  Both the sections however 
are primarily (though not exclusively) directed towards what happens on the 
polling day , i.e., towards the process of the actual conduct of the election itself . CAs 1498/18 etc.  25
Obviously, this remains u naffected by the status (qualified/disqualified) of the 
candidates.  Section 9(1) even otherwise makes this clear, in two ways. Firstly, by 
adding the test of materiality: the “result of the poll” should have been affected. 
Even if (and secondly) the test a pplies only to second condition (a point on which 
we form no definite opinion), the last part of the subsection, which allows only for 
a recasting of votes to be ordered, makes it clear that the slate o f candidates 
remains the same. Although s. 103AA was w orded in a more open -ended manner, 
empowering the Commission to decide whether the poll in the constituency (or, 
by way of judicial gloss, any one or more polling stations) ought to be declared 
void, the purpose behind the section was still the same. It re mained essentially 
focused on the day of the election itself.  The facts and circumstances in which 
almost all the reported cases came to be decided also testify, and point, to this 
conclusion.  
42. It is also to be remembered that in the entire process leading up to the day 
of the election, the question of whether the candidate was qualified or disqualified 
has already been scrutinized. This scrutiny, of the nomination papers , is done  by 
the Returning Officers . However, they are not the only ones allowed by law to 
scrutinize the nomination papers. They are also open  to objections  by others . 
Under the 1976 Act this right was of a somewhat restricted nature: see s. 14(1). 
Under s. 62 of the 2017 Act th e right has been extended to any voter of the 
constituency. Ther e is a right of appeal to an appellate forum comprising of High 
Court judges . Under the 1976 Act this right of appeal was restricted to candidates  
only, whereas the 2017 Act has expanded it to include the objector as well. After 
this appellate forum there can be  (though not of course as of right)  constitutional 
petitions under Article 199 and even petitions to this Court  under Article 185(3) . 
In other words, the question of qualification/disqualification is thoroughly tested 
by a dedicated procedure before the day of the election. And of course, after the 
election a losing candidate can always file a petition before the election tribunal  
and again bring  the question into issue. There is a direct appeal to this Court 
against the decision of the election tribu nal. When such a framework is available, 
it is difficult to see why  any such jurisdiction should be impliedly read into s . 
103AA and/or s. 9 so as to empower the Commission.  In our view, if at all 
Parliament has the legislative competence to confer such a jurisdiction on the 
Commission in terms of a law made under Article 222 (an assumption we make 
for purposes of this judgment, without deciding), then it must be done explicitly JUDGMENT  
 
MUSHIR ALAM, J. - I have carefully gone through the opinion 
authored by my learned brother  Munib Akhtar, J. in the 
matter before us and respectfully disagree for the following 
reasons:  
 The Appellant, Muhammad Salman, contested the 
election to PP -217, Multan VII. He secured  35,300  votes and 
was declared returned candidate by the Election Commission 
of Pakistan vide notification dated 07.08.2019.1 He 
consequently entered as the Member of Provincial Assembly.  
 
2.  Mr. Shoaib Akmal Qureshi, a registered voter of 
the constituency, filed a Petition before the Election 
Commission of Pakistan2 under section 218(3) of the 
Constitution, 1973 read with section 4,  8 and 9 of the 
Elect ions Act, 2017, challenging the very eligibility of the 
appellant under Article 113 read with Article 62 of the 
Constitution, being under -aged (less than 25 years of age),on 
the last date of submission of his nomination paper, 
registered as Case No. 30/ (2 6)/2018 -Law.3 
 
3.  Meanwhile, Mr. Naveed Anjum, another registered 
voter of the constituency, also challenged the eligibility of the 
Petitioner, but adopted a different course by invoking writ 
jurisdiction of the Lahore High court filing Constitutional 
Petition No. 11388/20184 before the Lahore High Court.  
 
4.  The Lahore High Court, by consent of the parties, 
namely Mr. Anjum and the Election Commission of Pakistan, 
vide order dated 8.8.2018,5 transmitted the copy of the 
Constitutional Petition to the Commission , for decision after 
hearing all the parties. The Commission  assigned the 
                                       
1  Page 78 of CPLA 973/19  
2 Herein  referred to as “The Commission”  
3 Page 61 -70 CPLA 973/19  
4 Page 81 - of CPLA 973/19  
5 Page 80 ibid  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 2
transmitted Constitution Petition, Case  No. 30(26)/2018 -
Legal.  
 
5.  The Commission , after due noti ce and hearing all 
the parties, accepted both the cases  vide short order,6 as well 
as the reasons7 recorded separately,8 dated 1.10.2018.  The 
Commission  concluded that the Appellant had indeed 
amended his age, which was a non -bona fide mistake. 
Therefore, the election of the Appellant was set aside with an 
order for re -election in the whole constituency vide order 
dated 01.10.2018.9 The rele vant paragraph of the detailed 
order is reproduced below:  
 
“16. In the light of the entire discussion 
above, the Commission holds that the 
Respondent, Muhammad Salman, on the date 
of filing nomination papers on 06.06.2018 
was not eligible to contest electi ons being 
below the age of 25. That his date of birth 
throughout shown as 28.01.1994, was correct 
and the one now changed to 01.02.1993, is a 
result of manipulations and interpolations. 
The election of Muhammad Salman, returned 
candidate from PP -217 Multan -VII is hereby 
declared void, under Section 9 of the Elections 
Act, 2017 and all enabling provisions of the 
Constitution and the law. His notification as a 
returned candidate is withdrawn and it is 
hereby directed that re -election be conducted 
in the whole  constituency PP -217 Multan -VII. 
These are our reasons for the short order 
announced on 01.10.2018.”  
 
6.  Thereafter, the current Appellant was de -notified 
and the election schedule was notified vide notification dated 
08.10.1810 and a bye -election was scheduled to be held on 
28.11.18. Aggrieved by the aforementioned consequence, the 
Appellant then made a quadruple challenge.  He filed two Writ 
                                       
6 Page 20 CA No. 1498/18  
7 Page 21 to 27 ibid  
8 Dated 01.10.2018 as well.  
9 Page 54 ibid  
10 Page 85 ibid  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 3
Petitions in the Lahore High Court Multan Bench.  The First11 
being W.P No. 14893/2018  filed on 01.10.18, challenging the 
Short Order  of the Election Commission dated 01.10.18 and 
the consequential notification for re -election on grounds that 
the Election Commission is not empowered under S.9 of the 
Elections Act, 2017 to declare an election to be null and void 
in view of the bar contained in Article 225 of the Constitution 
of Pakistan. The Lahore High Court, vide order dated 
12.10.2018,12 suspended the impugned notification dated 
08.10.18 as an interim relief to the current Appellant.  
 
7.  The Second W.P No. 16234/201813 was filed on 
27.10.2018 before the Lahore High Court, Multan Bench, 
Lahore, challenging the detailed reasons recorded separately 
on same date14 by the Election Commission on similar 
grounds as raised in W.P No. 14893 of 2018 .  
 
8.  Finally, the third and fourth challenge was made 
against the order dated 1.10.2018, passed by the 
commission,  before this court through two direct Appeals15 
under S.9(5) of the Elections Act, 2017. The first appeal 
before us is CA 1498/2018 , arising out of case 30(26)/2018 -
Law,16 is filed directly in the Commission by Shoaib Akmal 
and the second appeal is CA. 1499/18 , in Case No. 
1(19)/2018 -Legal, arose out of W.P.17 filed by Naveed Anjum  
which was sent to the Commission by the Lahore High Court.  
 
9.  Since the orders impugned were sub -judice before  
this Court in direct appeals, as noted in preceding para, the 
High Court dismissed both the Writ Petitions No. 14893/2018 
                                       
11 Filed on 1.10.2018  
12 Page 87 ibid  
13 Page 111 -125 CMA 2169 in CA No.1499/18  
14 i.e dated 01.10.18 page 20 CA 1498/18  
15 Filed on 05.11.18  
16 Pages 29 -38 of CA No.1499/18 filed on 27.10.18  
17WP 11388/18 @ Pages 28 -31 in CA No.1498/18, filed on 7 -8-2018. Remitted by the HC 
to ECP on 8.8.18 (Order of HC Page 32)  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 4
& No.16234/2018 vide consolidated judgment dated 
26.02.1918 as being non -maintainable.  
 
10.  Therefore, we are now confronted with two sets of 
twin proceedings emanating from one and same order dated 
01.10.18.  The First of the twin proceedings are against the 
orders of the High Court dismissing the matter as being sub -
judice before this Court unde r the direct appeal filed by the 
operation of Section 9(5) of the Elections Act, 2017. These are 
CPLA 972/2019  against common judgement dated 26.02.19  
passed in WP 14893/18 and CPLA 973/ 2019  arising  out of WP 
16234/18  challenging dismissal of Writ petitions by the 
Multan Bench of the Lahore High Court.  
 
11.  The second set of the direct appeals, being CA 
1498/2018 , are arising out of case 30(26)/2018 -Law filed 
directly before ECP by Shoaib Akmal and CA 1499/ 2018 , in 
Case No. 1(19)/2018 -Legal,  are arising out the  W.P19 filed by 
Naveed Anjum  which was sent to the commission by the 
Lahore High Court to be decided in accordance with Article 
218(3) of the Constitution of Pakistan.  
 
12.  Therefore, there are two questions that arise from 
instant proceedings.  The first pertains directly to the 
maintainability of the Constitutional Petitions filed by the 
current Appellants and Respondents. The second , whether 
the Election Commission can declare an election void under 
S.9 and other enabling provisions of Constitution, 1973 and 
Elections Act, 2017.  
 
I. THE MAINTAINABILITY OF CONSTITUTIONAL 
PETITIONS BEFORE THE HIGH COURT:  
 
13. As noted above, the Appellant/petitioner 
Muhammad Salman, has essentially adopted two -
                                       
18Page 26 -37 CPLA 973 -L/2019  
19 WP No. 11388/2018 remitted to ECP vide order dated 8.8.2018 @ 80 of CPLA 973/19  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 5
pronged approach against one and the same set of 
orders dated 1.10.2018 passed by the Commission  in a 
purported exercise of powers under Article 218 (3) of 
the constituti on read with sections 4, 8 and 9 of the 
Elections Act, 2017. The remedy against the declaration 
made by the Commission is provided by way of statutory 
appeal under sub -section (5) of Section 9 of the Act, 
2017 itself.  
 
14. In order to ascertain the maintain ability of the 
Constitutional Petitions before the High Court, we must 
first delve into question as locus standi of the 
Petitioner. Perusal of Article 199 of the Constitution of 
Pakistan provides twin test  approach for the High Court 
to take cognizance of a matter firstly, ‘ if it is satisfied 
that no other adequate remedy is provided by law.’20 
Secondly , “on application of any aggrieved party”21. 
Therefore, the two requirements that need to be met are  
there has to be an application of an aggrieved party and 
secondly, lack of alternate remedy under the law.  
 
15. Under the scheme of the Elections Act, 2017 there are 
two stages of challenge to the election process. These 
can be bifurcated into a pre -election and post -election 
stages.  Currently we are confronted with a post -election 
challenge. A contesting candidate can avail the remedy 
to challenge the election of a returned candidate before 
the Ele ction Tribunal22 by way of Election Petition 
under Article 225 of the constitution read with section 
139 of the Elections Act, 2017 .23 The appeal against the 
order of the Tribunal will be before the Supreme 
                                       
20 Article 199(1) of the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973  
21 Article 199(1)(a) ibid;  
22 Election Tribunal appointed under Section 140 of the Elections Act , 2017.  
23 On the grounds, inter -alia, provided under section 156 to 158 and section 167 of the 
Elections Act, 2017  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 6
Court.24 From the Scheme of the Elect ions Act, 2017 , 
the remedy to a voter of the constituency to challenge 
the candidature of returned candidate is not provided 
in clear terms in comparison to the remedies provided 
to a contesting candidate.  
 
16.  In the instant case, we are confronted with  two 
remedies invoked by the two different voters of the 
constituency.  Firstly, by one of the voters challenging 
the election by invoking  Article 199 of the Constitution  
before the High Court and,  second by another voter 
through an Election Petition the un der Article 218(3)  of 
the Constitution read with section 9 of the Elections Act, 
2017 .  
 
17. We will now begin to examine the validity, or otherwise, 
of each of the remedies invoked by the voters and what 
is the proper mechanism in the light of Article 218 (3), of 
the Constitution of Pakistan read with the Elections Act, 
2017 .  
 
i. The remedy of the voter to bring a Constitutional 
Petition post -election:  
 
18.  A voter has been defined under section 2(xli)  of the 
Elections Act, 2017 : 
a) in relation to an Assembly or a local 
government, a person who is enrolled as a 
voter on the electoral roll of any electoral 
area in a constituency; and  
 
b) in relation to the senate, a person who – 
 
(i) for election to a seat from a Prov ince, is 
a Member of the Provincial Assembly;  
 
(ii) for election to seats from the Islamabad 
Capital Territory, is a Member of the 
National Assembly; and  
 
                                       
24 Section 155 of the Elections Act , 2017  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 7
(iii) for election to a seat from the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas, is a Member 
of the Nationa l Assembly elected from 
the Federally Administered Tribal 
Areas.  
 
19.  On a bare perusal of the Elections Act,2017 , it is 
manifest that a voter  has only been provided remedy to 
object candidature of a candidate, prior to 
commencement of elections  and at the time of scrutiny 
of Nomination Papers under section 62 of the Elections 
Act, 2017 . The appeal against the acceptance or 
rejection of nomination papers by the Returning Officer 
is available to the contesting candidate and/or to the 
Objector, as t he case may be, under section 63  of the 
Act of 2017 before the Tribunal as may be constituted 
by the Commission . If the appeal25 or suo-moto26 
cognizance, if any , taken by the Tribunal, is not decided 
within the time notified by the Commission,27 the order 
of the Returning Officer is deemed final and further 
remedy against the order of the Tribunal  at the pre -
election stage of the c ontroversy under the Act of 2017  
is sealed. The candidature of the returned candidate, 
post-election, prima facie could only be challenged 
under section 139 of the Elections Act, 2017 by a 
contesting candidate through an Election Petition.  
 
20. Interesting ly, the  Elections Act 2017  provides two 
distinct powers for the exercise of suo moto  jurisdiction. 
The first suo moto jurisdiction is bestowed upon the  
Appellate Tribunal  at the pre -election stage by the 
exercise of which they may reject the nomination 
papers.28 The second suo moto  jurisdiction is vested on 
the Commission,  which becomes exercisable at the post-
                                       
25 Sub-section (1) of section 63 of the Elections Act , 2017  
26 Sub-section (4) section 63 ibid 
27 Sub section (2) section 63 ibid 
28In terms of sub -section (4) of section 63  ibid Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 8
election stage  to examine the proprietary of elections,29 
on the grounds enumerated therein, on the basis of  
information or material that may form the basis or 
foundation to adjudge that “… by reason of grave 
illegalities or such violations of the provisions of this Act 
or Rules as have materially affected the result of poll at 
one or more polling station or in the whole constituency… 
it shall make a declaration accordingly and call upon the 
voters in the concerned polling station or stations or in 
the whole constituency as the case may be , to recast 
their votes  in the manner provided for bye -elections ”. 
 
21. However, such powers could be exercised before the 
expiration of sixty days after the publication of 
notification of returned candidate.30 The declaration so 
made by the Commission  is amenable to appeal before 
the Supreme Court31 within 30 days of such 
declaration.  In case the decision could not be made by 
the Commission within the period prescribed,  the fate of 
the notification of retur ned candidate becomes final and 
the election of a returned candidate could be challenged 
only by the contesting candidate before the Election 
Tribunal , constituted under section 139 of the Act, 2017 . 
 
22. The voter’s remedy, at the pre -election stage, exte nds 
only up to appeal32 for the scrutiny of nomination 
papers under the Elections Act 2017 . However, it has 
been observed that in certain exceptional cases, the 
voter may invoke the Constitutional Jurisdiction of the 
High Court under Article 199 post -election since he 
lacked an alternate remedy.  
 
                                       
29 Under sub section (1) of section 9 ibid 
30 Sub-section (3) of section 9 ibid;  
31  Sub-section (5) of section 9 ibid 
32 Under Section 63 of the Elections Act , 2017  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 9
23. Even this Court has assumed the jurisdiction  under 
Article 184(3)  of the Constitution  to examine the 
eligibility of a returned candidate. This Court, in the 
case of  Dr. Raja Aamer Zaman v. Omar Ayub Khan ,33 
while examining the power and jurisdiction of the 
Election  Commission and E lection Tribunal  in a post -
election matter has held that “ power of Election Tribunal 
based on Article 225 of the constitution are judicial and 
adjudicatory subject to appeal under the Representation 
of Peoples Act ”.34 
 
24. Prior to delving on the current set of facts, we find it 
proper to enumerate how the Courts have dilated upon 
instances where the voter has invoked the remedies of a 
Constitutional Petition under Art. 199(b)(ii)  and Article 
184(3) of the Constitution35 for illegalities committed by 
returned candidates post -election.  
 
25. Normally, in light of Article 225  of the Constitution, a 
voter cannot invo ke the Constitutional Jurisdiction of 
the Court under Article 199. This Court affirmed the 
bar in the case if  Election Commission of Pakistan 
through its Secretary v. Javaid Hashmi ,36 wherein it 
was held that:  
“In enacting Article 225 in the Constitution the 
purpose of Legislature is obvious that it did 
not contemplate two attacks on matters 
connected with the election proceedings; one 
while the election process is on and has not 
reached the stage of its completi on by 
recourse to an extraordinary remedy provided 
by Article 199, and another when the election 
has reached the stage of completion by 
means of an election petition. It is also of 
utmost consideration that in the case of two 
attacks on a matter connected with the 
election proceedings there is likelihood of 
                                       
33 2015 SCMR 1303  
34 The analogous provision is now under S ection 139 of the Elections Act , 2017  
35 See Workers Party Pakistan v Federation of Pakistan PLD 2012 SC 681  
36 PLD 1989 SC 396  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 10
there being two inconsistent decisions; one 
given by the High Court and the other by the 
Election Tribunal which is also an 
independent Tribunal and this could not be 
the intention of the Legislature. Ag ain the 
words "except by an election petition" in 
Article 225 of the Constitution do not refer to 
the period when it can be called in question 
but point to the manner and the mode in 
which it can be called in question. It is, 
therefore, that the constituti onal provision is 
expressed in the negative form to give 
exclusive jurisdiction to the Tribunals 
appointed by the Election Commissioner and 
thus to exclude or oust the jurisdiction of all 
Courts in regard to election matters and to 
prescribe only one mode of challenge. The 
purpose is not far to seek as in all democratic 
constitutions such as is ours the Legislatures 
have an important role to play, and, therefore, 
it is of utmost importance that the election 
should be held as scheduled without being 
unduly d elayed or prolonged by challenging 
matters at an intermediate stage.”  
 
26. The rule derives further strength from the case of Aftab  
Shahban Mirani v. President of Pakistan and 
others ,37 later reiterated in Lt. Gen. (R) Salahuddin 
Tirmizi v.  Election Commission of Pakistan ,38 
wherein it was held as follows:  
“In consequence to the above discussion, we 
hold that the scope of interference of the High 
Court in its jurisdiction under Article 199 of 
the Constitution in election cas es is very 
limited to the extent of matter which do not 
exclusively fall within the ambit of jurisdiction 
of election Tribunals or Election Commission 
of Pakistan or in respect of the orders which 
are coram non judice, without jurisdiction or 
mala fide. Th e interference of the High Court 
in the orders passed by Election Commission 
of Pakistan in discharge of its duty in terms of 
Articles 218 & 219 of the Constitution read 
with sections 103 and 103 -AA of Act, 1976 in 
the normal circumstances is not justified .” 
 
                                       
37 1998 SCMR 1863  
38 PLD 2008 SC 735  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 11
27. The aforementioned rule was later affirmed in the case 
of Ayatullah Dr. Imran Liaquat Hussain v. Election 
Commission of Pakistan, Islamabad ,39 as: 
“Exercise of power under Art. 199 cannot be 
placed on any higher footing than that 
emanating from Art.225. Article 225 is 
expressed in the negative form to give 
exclusive jurisdiction to the Tribunals 
appointed by the Election Commission and 
thus to exclude or oust the jurisdiction of all 
Courts in regard to election matters and to 
prescri be only one mode of challenge. The 
Election Tribunals are final judges of facts as 
well as of law, including the interpretation of 
law and, it would be incorrect to say that 
their determinations are "without lawful 
authority" because the High Court does no t 
agree with them. All questions of law which 
have to be decided for determination of the 
election disputes must be decided and finally 
decided only by the authorities mentioned in 
Article 225. The Article is intended to protect 
the determinations of the a uthorities 
designated in it from being subjected to 
judicial review by the High Court under 
Article 199 on grounds such as an error of 
law apparent on the face of the record.”  
 
28. An exception to this rule was carved out by this Court 
in the case of Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi v. Addl. District 
& Sessions Judge/Returning Officer ,40 where it was 
held that any interference under Article 199 during the 
election process can only be done so under exceptional 
circumstances. The relev ant extract is reproduced 
below:  
“The upshot of the above discussion is that 
generally in an election process the High 
Court cannot interfere with by invoking its 
Constitutional jurisdiction in view of Article 
225 of the Constitution. However, this is 
subject to an exception that where no legal 
remedy is available to an aggrieved party 
during the process of election or after its 
completion, against an order of an election 
                                       
39 PLD 2005 SC 52  
40 1994 SCMR 1299 (Paragraph 26)  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 12
functionary which is patently illegal/without 
jurisdiction and effect of which is to d e-
franchise a candidate, he can press into 
service Constitutional jurisdiction of the High 
Court.”  
 
29. The rule and its exception was aptly summarized by 
this Court in the case of Federation of Pakistan v. 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ,41as: 
“After the judgment of Javaid Hashmi's case, 
this Court had provided a limited window in 
writ jurisdiction under Article 199 of the 
Constitution to challenge an order passed by 
a functionary of the Election Commission 
during currency of the  election process or 
after the said process is over, provided the 
said order is patently illegal, the law does not 
provide remedy either before or after the 
election process and if the order relates to 
disqualification of a candidate, the alleged 
disqualif ication is floating on the surface 
requiring no further probe.  
 
30. The bar was also endorsed by this Court in the case of 
Rana Aftab Ahmad Khan v. Muhammad Ajmal ,42 as: 
“… under command of Article 225 of the 
Constitution which is couched in the form of a 
prohibition, if a dispute of any kind or nature 
arises out of the election/election process, 
may it be of a pre or post -poll stage, and is 
earlier either not resolved as pe rmissible 
under the law or non -resolvable, due to its 
peculiar nature or reasons or inadequacies of 
the Act to meet the exigencies at the relevant 
time, it shall not be called in question except 
through an election petition presented to such 
a tribunal and  in such manner as may be 
determined by Act of Parliament, which 
obviously is that Act of 1976.”  
 
 
 
31. Under the Elections Act, 2017, the voter and contesting 
candidates are provided with a remedy under the 
Elections Act, 2017 to scrutinize the nomination  papers 
of other contesting candidates. However, time and again 
                                       
41 PLD 2009 SC 644 (Pa ragraph 47)  
42 PLD 2010 SC 1066 at Paragraph 9  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 13
this Court has been confronted with scenarios where 
the voter or candidate does not avail the remedy 
available to them at the pre -poll stage and chooses to 
invoke the constitutional jurisdicti on of the High Court 
at the post -poll stage to achieve the same means. It 
must be noted that the availing of the remedy of 
constitutional jurisdiction is not without limitations, 
with the most salient one being the availability of an 
‘other remedy’ to the aggrieved party. The question then 
becomes, should an objector who has not availed the 
alternate remedy available to them within the 
prescribed time period be allowed to invoke the 
extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court?  
 
32. This matter was also add ressed by this Court in Rana 
Aftab Ahmad Khan v. Muhammad Ajmal,43 where the 
objector had no plausible explanation as to why they 
had not availed the remedy available to them at the pre -
poll stage and instead chose to exer cise the 
constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court. It was 
concluded that:  
“11. We have considered the above and are 
constrained to hold that the constitutional 
jurisdiction (reference Article 199) of the High 
Court in all the cases cannot be invoked a s a 
matter of right, course or routine, rather such 
jurisdiction has certain circumventions which 
the Court is required to keep in view while 
exercising its extraordinary discretionary 
powers, as the conditions mentioned in Article 
199 of the Constitution are obviously meant 
for the purposes of regulation of the Courts 
jurisdiction and the availability of "other 
remedy" is one of such limitations. When the 
petitioner has no explanation to offer, as to 
why the "other remedy", which is a definite 
one in natur e; is time bound and is, 
specifically designed and prescribed by the 
legislature keeping into consideration time 
constraints in the election process, but has 
                                       
43 PLD 2010 SC 1066 at Paragraph 11  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 14
not been availed for any good reason, by the 
petitioner. Whether still the High Court should 
have imperatively interfered in the matter and 
the refusal thereof, should be construed as an 
erroneous or patently illegal order or an order 
suffering from any jurisdictional defect calling 
for the intervention by this Court in its instant 
jurisdiction? The an swer is in negative.  
 
12.  Resultantly, in the circumstances of the 
case, the High Court had rightly refused to 
interfere in its constitutional jurisdiction, 
when an appropriate, efficacious and 
adequate alternate remedy available to the 
petitioner has not  been availed by him 
without any justification …” 
 
33. The rationale for the writ to not be maintainable in 
the first instance in matters pertaining to elections is 
provided in the case of The Presiding Officer v. 
Sadruddin Ansari and Lal Muhammad Bin Yousuf44 
which states that:  
“Ordinarily the Court in exercise of its writ 
jurisdiction would decline to interfere in cases of 
election, because, it is desirable that the decisi on 
on a matter of disputed elections should as soon as 
possible become final and conclusive. But this is not 
the only reason. Another valid reason for 'so 
declining to interfere is because by so doing it 
would involve itself into a field of investigation 
which is more appropriate for a tribunal rather than 
for a Court exercising the prerogative power. The 
fact, therefore, that an alternative remedy is 
provided by law should not only upon the above 
principles but upon general principles too disincline 
a Cour t to invoke its extraordinary jurisdiction in a 
case where such a remedy is still available .” 
 
34. In the current scenario, a voter of the constituency, 
namely Mr. Anjum, filed a Writ Petition before the 
Lahore High Court, Lahore. The High Court has 
rightf ully declined to exercise jurisdiction as an 
appropriate, alternate, and efficacious remedy was 
available to the voter who had not availed it without any 
                                       
44 PLD 1967 SC 569  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 15
justification and the matter was, therefore, referred to 
the Election Commission via consent order.  
 
35. The Elections Act, 2017 has expanded the domain of 
remedies available to the voter as the voter may now 
avail the remedy available under S ection 9 of the 
Elections Act, 2017 by bringing the facts constituting 
grave illegality which, at the discretion o f the 
commission, may warrant the exercise of the suo moto 
jurisdiction by the commission itself.  
 
36. Another aspect that requires consideration is the fact 
any objector  laying information before the commission 
under Section 9 of the Elections Act, 2017 is also 
extended the appellate forum of this Court under 
Section 9(5) of the Elections Act, 2017 read with Article 
218(3) of the Constitution. Therefore, under the current 
regime, and in light of the alternate and efficacious 
remedy available to the voter,  or any other objector 
alike, the criteria enumerated under Article 199 of the 
Constitution cannot be fulfilled. Furthermore, the 
remedy of appeal to this Court reinforces the argument 
that an alternate and efficacious remedy exists whereby 
the declaration  of the commission can be challenged 
under Article 218(3). Hence, in light of the current 
scheme, while the voters, and other objectors alike, 
have been extended the benefit of Section 9 of the 
Elections Act, 2017, it appears that the above -
mentioned juris prudence whereby the voters invoked 
the Constitutional jurisdiction of the superior courts 
can be distinguished and, therefore, is inapplicable to 
the current set of facts.  
 
37. In light of the aforementioned discussion, the voter had 
an alternate and eff icacious remedy in terms of  
section 9  of the Elections Act, 2017  and the High Court Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 16
was correct in not assuming the jurisdiction and 
remitted the matter to the Commission . However, the 
next question then becomes whether the High Court 
had the authority to transfer such a matter to the 
commission.  
 
ii. Whether Jurisdiction can be conferred by consent of 
the parties:  
 
38. It is well entrenched constitutional mandate that no 
Jurisdiction can be conferred on the Court by the 
consent of the parties unless the jurisdiction is  
“conferred on it by the constitution or by or under any 
law.”45 Such principle has been often reiterated by this 
Court in a string of authorities including Multan 
Electric Power Company Ltd. through Chief 
Executive and another v Muhammad Ashiq and 
others,46 wherein it was held that:  
“Jurisdiction on Court or Tribunal would be 
conferred by law and not by consent of 
parties, express or implied, Consent could not 
confer or take away jurisdiction.”  
 
39. Indeed, jurisdic tion cannot be conferred on any Court 
or judicial adjudicatory forum by consent of the parties.  
However, in a number of cases, it has been held by 
superior Courts that there is no legal impediment in the 
way of court or tribunal to decide its own jurisdict ion.47 
There are numerous authorities whereby the superior 
courts have converted one  form of proceedings filed in a 
wrong from and remitted, transferred the same to a 
court and or forum of competent jurisdiction.  
 
                                       
45  Article 175 (2) of the Constitution, 1973.  
46 PLD 2006 Supreme Court 328, ‘Said alias Khurshid and others v  Deputy Commissioner, 
Settlement Department and others’ (PLD 2003 Lahore 617), ‘Syed Muhammad Hussain 
Shah v Abdul Qayyum and others’ (2011 SCMR 743) Government of Sindh and others 
versus Saiful Haq Hashmi and others’ (1993 SCMR 956) Ali Muhammad etc. v Mu hammad 
Shafi etc.’ (PLJ 1996 SC 560) etc.,  
47 See Government of Punjab v. Sanosh Sultan PLD 1995 SC 541 and Raunaq Ali v.Chief 
Settlement Commissioner PLD 1973 SC 236  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 17
40. The p ower to convert and or treat one kind of 
proceeding into another is derived from the doctrine of 
“ex debito  justitiae ”, wherein, the Court owes a debt 
to the litigant to correct an error in judicial 
dispensation.  This authority is inherently possessed 
and exercised by the Court not only to advance the 
cause of justice but also to prevent the injustice. The 
Super ior Courts cannot be barred or restrained to 
convert one type of proceeding into another and either 
proceed to decide the matter itself, provided the court 
itself having jurisdiction over the lis, or may remit the 
lis to the court/forum of competent jurisd iction for 
decision on its own merits. The Superior Courts have 
been treating and /or converting appeal into revisions 
and vice versa and Constitution Petitions into appeal or 
revisions. In the case of Jane Margrete William v. 
Abdul Hamid Mian ,48 a CMA under section 151 CPC 
filed in the High Court was treated as cross objection. 
In the case of Capital Development Authority v. 
Khuda  Baksh and 5 others ,49 the High Court 
converted the CMA filed in a disposed of Writ Petition as 
a separate Writ Petition and decided the same 
accordingly. There is no legal bar to such conversion of 
proceedings.  
 
41. The doctrine is construed liberally as there have been 
several instances where even the time consumed by 
pursuing the appropriate remedy before a wrong forum 
or jurisdiction in appropriate cases is condoned as in 
Shamsul Haq and others v. Mst. Ghoti and 8 
others .50 
 
                                       
481994 SCMR 1555  
491994 SCMR 771  
501991 SCMR 1135  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 18
42. In a case cited as Muhammad Anis and others v. 
Abdul Haseeb and others ,51 the eligibility to consider 
promotion was successful ly challenged in writ 
jurisdiction of the High Court. On appeal, this Court 
came to a conclusion that such question falls within the 
competence of Service Tribunal, therefore, the writ is 
not maintainable. Consequently, the impugned 
judgment passed by the High Court, in exercise of writ 
jurisdiction, was set aside and in paragraph 16 of the 
judgment this Court,  the Writ Petition filed by the 
litigant before the High Court was treated as a Service 
Appeal pending before the Service Tribunal and 
transmitted to  it with direction to decide the same after 
notice to the parties concerned in accordance with law.  
 
43. Similarly, in a judgment recently reported as Province 
of Sindh and another v. Muhammad Ilyas and 
others ,52 a dismissal from service ord er was challenged 
before the learned Sindh High Court through a 
Constitution Petition. The Constitution Petition was 
treated by the High Court as a service appeal and sent 
to the Service Tribunal which was decided by the 
Service Tribunal on merit and this Court declined leave 
in the matter.53 
 
44. An identical course was followed by the lear ned Division 
Bench of Peshawar High Court in a case reported as 
Engineer Musharaf Shah v. Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary and 2 
others .54 
 
45. In the instant matter, the Lahore High Court, in 
consideration of fac t that another voter, Shoaib  Akmal 
                                       
51PLD 1994 SC 539  
522016 SCMR 189  
53 See also Thal Engineering Industries Ltd and another v. The Bank of Bahawalpur Ltd. and 
another (1979 SCMR 32)  
542015 PLC (C.S) 215  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 19
Qureshi, had made a similar challenge on the 
candidature of the Appellant before the Commission , 
transmitted the Writ Petition along with the annexures 
“for hearing and deciding the grievance of the Petitioner 
strictly in  accordance with law, rules and policy, after 
affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and 
other concerned” .55 In view of the string of authorities 
noted above, we see no wrong to such course adopted 
by the High Court of transmitting the Writ Petition to 
the Commission for decision in accordance with law.  
 
46. In the case of Lt. Gen. (R) Salahuddin Tirmizi vs. 
Election Commission of Pakistan ,56 the controversy 
was with respect to a challenge against polls held at 
NA-20, Mansehra -I, before the Commission , which was 
dismissed. The controve rsy was then taken to 
Islamabad High Court in writ jurisdiction, which sent 
the matter back to the Election Commission to be 
decided ‘ as to whether a case is made out under section 
103-AA of RoPA, 1976’.  The Commission  in exercise of 
power under section 10 3-AA of Representation of People 
Act, 1976  57 directed a re -poll at two polling stations of 
the constituency. Subsequently, the order of the 
Commission  was unsuccessfully challenged before the 
Before the Abbottabad Bench of Peshawar High. The 
controversy came up before this court. While approving 
the exercise of powers by the Commission , this court 
held that:  
“It may be pointed out that in the light of 
principle laid down by this Court regarding 
the exercise of jurisdiction in such situation, 
the order passed by the Election Commission 
of Pakistan which functions at Islamabad in 
respect of the constituency of Province of N. -
W.F.P., would be challengeable b oth before 
                                       
55 Order dated 8.8.2018 in WP No. 11388 of 2018 (Naveed Anjum v. ECP and others) page 
80 of CPLA 973/2019.  
56 PLD 2008 Supreme Court 735  
57 Corresponding section 9 of Elections Act, 2017  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 20
the Islamabad High Court and Peshawar 
High Court. This concurrent jurisdiction is, 
however, subject to the rule -5- of propriety 
according to which a High Court having 
jurisdiction in a matter if has exercise such 
jurisdiction, the other High Co urt which has 
also jurisdiction in the matter may restrain 
from exercising its jurisdiction.”  
 
47. This Court, in the case of Dr. Raja Aamer Zaman vs. 
Omar Ayub Khan and others ,58 examined the power  of 
the Election Tribunal,  under Section 70 of the RoPA59 
and powers of the Commission under Section 103 and 
103AA to “ to declare the election as a whole void ”. It was 
held by this court held as follows:  
“Moreover, when the provisions of Sections 
103 and 103AA are examined, it becomes 
abundantly clear that the Commission has 
been granted administrative and policing 
functions for the purpose of conducting 
elections honestly, fairly, justly and in 
accordance with law. There administrative 
powers are not judicial in nature and are 
exercisable without any deep probe of facts 
as may be ascertainable on “the face of the 
record” or after a “summary inquiry” if 
deemed necessary by the Commission …The 
powers of the El ection Tribunal on the other 
hand are based on Article 225 of the 
Constitution and are of a judicial and 
adjudicatory nature subject only to an appeal, 
in accordance with the provisions of ROPA 
and the rules.”  
 
48. It may be observed that when the case of Lt. Gen. (R) 
Salahuddin Tirmizi  (supra), was decided and when the 
case of Dr. Raja Aamer Zaman (supra)  was decided on 
19 June 2015 questioning the election held on  
11.5.2013, there existed no remedy or  
appeal against the decision of Commission   
under section 103AA of  RoPA 1976 . The  
right of appeal was provided at a subsequent  
                                       
58  2015 SCMR 1303  
59 Corresponding  to section 139 of the Elections Act , 2017  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 21
stage by inserting sub-section (4) to section 103AA  
through RoPA (Amendment Act), 2017  dated 9.1.2017. 
Another aspect that supplemented the aforementioned 
decision is the constituti onal mandate putting fetters 
even on the legislature in later part of Article 222  of the 
Constitution which categorically provides that “no such 
law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any 
of the powers of the Commission or an Election 
Commis sion under this part.”  
 
49. In the case of Ameer Haider Sangha and another v. 
Mrs Sumaira Malik and others ,60 this court examined 
the power of the Election Commission as conferred 
under the Constitution. It was held that:  
“Articl e 222 of the Constitution enables the 
concerned legislature to make laws in respect 
of election matters, however, this Article 
concludes by stipulating that, "no law shall 
have the effect of taking away or abridging 
any of the powers of the Commissioner or  the 
Election Commission." Therefore, we need to 
examine the powers of the Election 
Commission. The Election Commission is 
required to hold local government elections 
(Articles 140A and 219(d) of the Constitution) 
and to organize and conduct them by making  
"such arrangements as are necessary to 
ensure that elections are conducted honestly, 
justly, fairly and in accordance with law, and 
that corrupt practices are guarded against" 
(Article 218(3) of the Constitution). The powers 
of the Election Commission whi ch are 
mentioned in the Constitution neither 
stipulate nor require nor are dependant on the 
legislature granting, amongst others, specific 
powers to the Election Commission to order a 
re-poll. Section 103AA of the Representation 
of the People Act, (which i s applicable in 
respect of elections to the National Assembly 
and the Provincial Assemblies) grants the 
Election Commission the specific power to 
order a repoll. Much has been made of the 
fact that such specific power has not been 
given to the Election Com mission by the Act. 
                                       
60 2018 SCMR 1166  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 22
However, from this it cannot be inferred that 
the Election Commission does not have such 
power, particularly when the Constitution 
gives the Election Commission general and 
wide powers to conduct elections (as noted 
above). The Act does  grant the Election 
Commission the power to order a re -poll, not 
in such specific terms as mentioned in the 
said section 103AA, but by exercisinggeneral 
powers granted by the Act and the Rules 
which bring about the same result …” 
 
50. In light of the discus sion above, it can be conclusively 
ascertained that the courts have the prerogative to 
ascertain the true nature of proceedings, convert them 
into the appropriate form, and either decide the lis 
themselves, subject to whether the superior court has 
the jurisdiction itself, or remit the matter to the 
appropriate forum for adjudication in accordance with 
law.  
 
II. THE POWERS OF THE COMMISSION UNDER S.9 OF 
THE ELECTIONS ACT:  
 
51. The second limb of the proposition revolves around the 
scope of powers entrusted to the Election Commission 
of Pakistan. The Election Commission is a 
constitutional authority under Article 218(1) , of the 
Constitution  and is entrusted with the duty to “orga nize 
and conduct the election and to make such arrangement 
as are necessary to ensure that the election is conducted 
honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law, and 
that corrupt practice are guarded against.”61 
 
52. Article 222 of the Constitution , confers legislative 
authority, subject to Constitution, on the Parliament to 
make law in respect of “ all other  matter as may be 
necessary to hold and conduct elections for due 
constitution of two houses, the Provincial ass emblies and 
                                       
61 Sub Article (3) of Article 218  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 23
local government.’’  However, we observe that such 
legislative authority is curtailed with respect to the 
independent authority of Election Commissioner  and the 
Election Commission , which are  saved from the 
legislative trapping in the concluding  part of Article 
222. Therefore, fetters are placed on the legislature to 
the effect that “no law shall have the effect of taking 
away or abridge any of the powers of the Commissioner 
or Election Commission” . 
 
53. It is manifest from the scheme of the Constitution that 
the Commission  has been created “to organize and 
conduct the election and to make such arrangement as 
are necessary to ensure that the election is conducted 
honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law, and 
that corrupt practice are guarded against”.  This view 
finds support from para 10 of the recent 
pronouncement of this Court in the case of Aamir 
Haider Sangha v. Sumaira Malik .62 In the cited case, 
it was held “The power of ele ction commission, which are 
mentioned in the Constitution neither stipulate nor 
require nor are dependent on the legislature granting 
amongst other, specific powers to the Election 
Commission to order repoll” .63 
 
54. Section 9 of The Elections Act, 2017 is reproduced below:  
"9. Power of the Commission to declare a poll 
void.  
 
1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, if, from facts apparent on the face of 
the record and after such enquiry as it may 
deem necessary, the Commission is satisfied 
that by reason of grave illegalities or such 
violations of the provisions of this Act or the 
Rules as have materially affected the result of 
the poll at one or more polling stations or in 
                                       
62 2018 SCMR 1166  
63 Para 10 At page 1175 ibid.  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 24
the whole constituency including 
implementat ion of an agreement restraining 
women from casting their votes, it shall make 
a declaration accordingly and call upon the 
voters in the concerned polling station or 
stations or in the whole constituency as the 
case may be, to recast their votes  in the 
manner provided for bye -elections .  
 
Explanation. – If the turnout of women voters 
is less than ten percent of the total votes 
polled in a constituency, the Commission may 
presume that the women voters have been 
restrained through an ag reement from casting 
their votes and may declare, polling at one or 
more polling stations or election in the whole 
constituency, void.  
 
2) Notwithstanding the powers conferred 
on it by sub -section (1), the Commission may 
order filing of complaint under th is Act before 
a court of competent jurisdiction against 
persons who entered into the agreement 
referred to in sub -section (1).  
 
3) Notwithstanding the publication of the 
name of a returned candidate under section 
98, the Commission may exercise the powers 
conferred on it by sub -section (1) before the 
expiration of sixty days after such 
publication; and, where the Commission does 
not finally dispose of a case within the said 
period, the election of the returned candidate 
shall be deemed to have become final,  subject 
to the decision of an Election Tribunal on an 
election petition, if any.  
 
4) While exercising the powers conferred 
on it by sub -section (1), the Commission shall 
be deemed to be an Election Tribunal to which 
an election petition has been presente d and 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
Chapter IX, regulate its own procedure.  
 
5) Any person aggrieved by a declaration 
of the Commission under this section may, 
within thirty days of the declaration, prefer 
an appeal to the Supreme Court.  
   
55. Section 9  of the Elections Act 2017, is enabling power 
emanating from the noted constitutional mandate of Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 25
Article 218(3),  together with concluding part of Article 
222 of the Constitution , is to be read generously. The 
Commission  may take cognizance of  a matter “ if from 
facts apparent on the face of the record and after such 
enquiry as it may deem necessary, the Commission is 
satisfied that by reason of grave illegalities or such 
violations of the provisions of this Act or the Rules as 
have materially a ffected the result of the poll ”. 
Furthermore, the Commission  ‘shall make a declaration 
accordingly and call upon the voters in the concerned 
polling station or stations or in the whole constituency as 
the case may be, to recast their votes in the manner 
provided for bye -elections.’  
 
56. Such powers are exercisable by the Commission  in 
consonance with the constitutional duty, as conferred 
under sub article (3) of Article 218  of the Constitution ,64 
read with the saving of the Constitutional insulation 
against legislative enslavement65 under Article 22266 of 
the Constitution, to ensure that the election is 
conducted honestly, justly, fairly, in accordance with  
law, and that corrupt practices are guarded against . The 
Constitution has conferred a sacred duty on the 
Commission  to guard against corrupt practices, 
specifying the parameters where the Commission  may 
exercise the powers to make a declaration and call u pon 
the voters in the concerned polling station/stations, or 
in the whole constituency to recast their vote.  
57. Another manner in which the Commission can take 
cognizance is in cases where information is laid before 
                                       
64 Article 128(3) ” It shall be the duty of the Election Commission  to organize and conduct 
the election and to make such arrangements as are necessary to ensure the election is 
conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with law and the corrupt practices are 
guard ed against”  
65 See last part of Article 222 of the Constitution  
66  Last part of Article 222 ibid; ‘’ But no such law shall have the effect of taking away or 
abridging any of the powers of the Commissioner or an Election Commission under this 
part.’’  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 26
as regard such grave illegalities or the violations of the 
Elections Act, 2017 . Even in such a scenario, the 
authority of Commission  is not dependent on any formal 
complaint but the Commission is obligated to exercise 
its inherent powers to issue such declarations and 
order repolling when on t he basis of any information 
before it, having  conducted an enquiry  through, which 
it is satisfied that by reasons of grave illegalities or such 
violations of the provisions of Elections Act, 2017 or the 
Rules as have materially affected the result of the p oll…”  
 
58. The enabling power under section 9  of the Elections Act 
2017  is further reinforced by section 4(1) of the Act 
2017,  which provides for the Commission to issue 
directions. The following section has been reproduced 
below:  
“4. Power to issue directions. — 
 
The Commission shall have the power to 
issue such directions or orders as may be 
necessary for the performance of its functions 
and duties, including an order for doing 
complete justice in any matter pending before 
it and a n order for the purpose of securing the 
attendance of any person or the discovery or 
production of any document.  
 
1) Any such direction or order shall be 
enforceable throughout Pakistan and shall be 
executed as if it had been issued by the High 
Court.  
 
2) Anything required to be done for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act, for 
which no provision or no sufficient provision 
exists, shall be done by such authority and in 
such manner as the Commission may direct. ” 
 
59. In the current matter, the Commission  was adjudicating 
on a matter brought to its surveillance under the 
authority vested in it by virtue of Article 218 (3)  read 
with Article 222  of the Constitution and with section 4  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 27
as well as section 9 of the Elections Act, 2017.  Though 
the Commission  is deemed to be an Election Tribunal by 
the operation of section 9(4) of the Elections Act, 201 7, 
yet the independence of Commission  is not 
compromised, and it is not enslaved to procedural 
trapping of Chapter IX, of the Act of 2017 , unlike the 
Election Tribuna l.   
 
60. The Commission  not only exercised the enabling power 
contained under section 9 of the Elections Act 2017 , as 
backed by the Constitutional mandate noted above, by 
enquiring into the matter through information laid 
before it by a voter, Mr. Shoaib Akmal Qureshi, and on 
another complaint of similar nature in the form of writ 
Petition, as transmitted to it by the Lahore High Court 
filed by Mr. Anjum. The Commission , in exercise of 
jurisdiction as conferred under the constitutional 
mandate noted above,  read with section 9(4)  of the 
Elections Act, 2017 , is deemed to be an Election Tribunal  
within the contemplation of sub-section (4) of section 9,  
and may issue any one of the declarations provided for 
under section 154(b)  of the Elections Act, 2017  
respectively or issue orders accordingly in exercise of 
powers conferred through section 4 of the Elections Act, 
2017 . The declarations provided in  section 154(b)  of the 
Election, 2017 ; are reproduced as follows:  
“154. Decision of the Election Tribunal. —  
 
(1) The Election  Tribunal may, upon the 
conclusion of the trial of an election 
petition, make an order — 
(b) declaring — 
(i) the election of the returned 
candidate to be void and directing 
that fresh poll be held in one or 
more polling stations;  
(ii) the election of the returned 
candidate to be void and the Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 28
petitioner or any other contesting 
candidate to have been elected; or  
(iii) the election as a whole to be 
void and directing that fresh 
election be held in the entire 
constituency.”  
 
61. Given the insertion of the word ‘notwithstanding’  in 
section 9(4) , and read with section 4(3)  of the  Elections 
Act, 2017,  the Commission  may also pass any orders it 
deems are necessary to do ‘complete justice’,  so long it 
is within the precinct of the constitutional  mandate 
coupled with Elections Act, 2017 , in the matter before it. 
However, this would not be the case for Election 
Petitions , where the ‘Election Tribunal’  does not enjoy 
comprehensive powers as the ‘Election Commission’  
does. 
 
62. Therefore, the ‘Electi on Commission’ , exercising 
jurisdiction under section 9  of the Elections Act,  2017  
can act on a matter , if it is itself satisfied, or if 
information is laid before it, under the criteria 
mentioned within section 9(1),  of the Act of 2017  can 
take cognizance  of a matter, albeit  deemed to be an 
Election Tribunal as legal fiction, and pass orders, 
notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter IX , 
including declarations provided for under section 154 , 
and the powers under section 4  whereby it has the 
authority ‘to issue such directions or orders as may be 
necessary for the performance of its functions and 
duties, including an order for doing complete justice in 
any matter pending before it ’.   
 
63. In conclusion, as discussed in preceding paragraph, it 
has been h eld that one kind of proceeding can always 
be converted and treated into another kind of 
proceedings, therefore, we take no exception to order of 
the learned High Court transmitting the Writ Petition Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 29
filed by Mr. Anjum for decision to the Election 
Commissi on, which was already seized of a matter 
similar in nature through the complaint by Mr. Shoaib, 
another registered voter, and to decide the same in 
accordance with law.  
 
64. Similarly, since a direct Appeal under the Elections Act, 
2017  was already pending  before this Court when the 
Constitutional Petitions were filed, the High Court has 
rightfully dismissed the Writ Petitions filed by the 
current Appellant and remitted the Writ Petition filed by 
the current Respondent as being non -maintainable. The 
alterna te and efficacious remedy, for the purposes of 
Article 199, for the returned candidate, being the 
aggrieved person , is a direct appeal to this Court 
against the order of the Commission. Whereas, the 
alternate and efficacious remedy, for the purposes of 
Article 199, for the voter, or objector, being the 
aggrieved person , at the post -election stage is the 
remedy before the commission under s ection 9 of the 
Elections Act, 2017.  
 
65. Now adverting to merits of the case, in CA 1498/18 and 
CA 1499/18, as noted ab ove, the Commission  is the 
constitutional authority , which draws its unfettered 
power and authority directly from the Constitution itself 
and is not dependent on legislative embellishment, like 
other authorities.  
 
66. It is clearly demonstrated through th e facts and 
information laid before the Commission  directly, and as 
remitted by the Lahore High Court, that the enquiry 
conducted into the allegation against the appellant 
regarding his qualifying age (i.e 25 years of age)67 is a 
                                       
67  Clause (b) to Article 62 of the Constitution, 1973, read with Section 156 (1)(b) of the 
Elections Act , 2017.  Civil Appeal No.1498 of 2018 etc.  
 30
valid ground for declaring election of a returned 
candidate void. The Commission has exercised its 
constitutional function and declared the  election void 
and the same cannot be struck down unless it is 
demonstrated that the declaration made by the 
Commission, after holding enquiry into his age and 
obtaining CNIC card with different age to earn eligibility 
age to contest election is nothing bu t, mala fide  in law 
on the face of it. The Commission has thoroughly 
examined the claim of the Appellant, scrutinized the 
official record of the NADRA in depth, as reflected from 
paragraph 4 to 16 of the impugned decision, followed by 
declaration contained  in Paragraph 16 of the impugned 
judgment, after hearing the Appellant, and having 
satisfied itself that has declared the election of the 
Appellant as returned Candidate from PP -217 Multan 
VII as void. We are not convinced that the Commission 
had no jurisd iction to embark to examine the inherent 
disqualification of a returned post -election. Finding no 
merits appeals are dismissed.  
 
 
    Judge  
 
Approved for Reporting . 
 
  
  
 