IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
 
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN  
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ MR. HUSAIN  JILLANI  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE TARIQ PARVEZ  
MR. JUSTICE MI AN SAQIB NISAR  
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ATHER SAEED  
 
 
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO. 77 TO 85 & 89 OF 2011  
& CMA NO. 5505/2011 IN CONST. P. 79 OF 2011  
[Constitution Petition under Article 184(3) of the  Constitution 
regarding alleged Memorandum to Admiral Mike Mullen by Mr. 
Husain  Haqqani, former Ambassador of Pakistan to the United 
States of America]  
…  
 
 
 
Watan Party       … PETITIONER  
         [CP 77/2011]  
 
M. Tariq Asad Advocate Supreme Court   … PETITIONER  
         [CP 78/2011]  
 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif     … PETITIONER  
         [CP 79/2011]  
 
Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar & another   … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 80/2011]  
 
Iqbal Zafar Jhagra & another     … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 81/2011]  
 
Lt. General ®  Abdul Qadir Baloch & 2 others  … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 82/2011]  
 
Raja Muhammad Farooq Haider Khan & another…  PETITIONERS  
         [CP 83/2011]  
 
Syed Ghous Ali Shah & 2 others    … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 84/2011]  
 
 CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  2 
Hafeez u r Rahman      … PETITIONER  
         [CP 85/2011]  
 
Shafqatullah Sohail      … PETITIONER  
         [CP 89/2011]  
VERSUS  
 
 
Federation of Pakistan & others    …  RESPONDENTS  
 
 
 
For the petitioners:   Barrister Zafarullah Khan, ASC in person  
Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC in person  
Mr. Rash id A. Razvi, Sr. ASC  
Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar &  
Khawaja Muhammad Asif, MNA in person  
Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Rajwana, ASC  
Mr. Attique Shah, ASC  
Dr. M. Salahuddin Mengal, ASC  
Sardar Asmatullah Khan, ASC  
Syed Ghous Ali Shah, ASC  
Dr. M. Shamim Rana, ASC  
Mr. Naseer Ahmad Bhutta, ASC  
     Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
 
 
 
For the President of Pakistan:   Nemo .  
 
 
For the Prime Minister of Pakistan:  Nemo .  
 
 
For Chief of Army Staff,    Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
DG, ISI & M/O of Cabinet,    Attorney General for Pakistan  
Defence,  Foreign Affairs,   Mr. Dil Muhammad Alizai, DAG  
Interior & Law:     
 
 
For Mr. Husain  Haqqani:   Ms. Asma Jahangir, ASC  
      Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR assisted by  
      M/s Idrees Ashraf and Asad Jamal, Advocates  
 
 
For Mansoor Ijaz:    Nemo .  
 
 
Date of hearing :    19-23 & 27 -30 December, 2011  
 
…  
 CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  3 
O R D E R  
 
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ.  –  We have 
upheld the maintainability of the listed petitions vide following order 
dated 30.12.2011: - 
“The Objectives Resolution, which has been made substantive part of  
the Constitution by means of Article 2A of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan commands that:  
“And whereas it is the will of the people of Pakistan to 
establish an order;  
Wherein integrity of the territories of the Federation, its 
independenc e and all its rights, including its sovereign 
rights on land, sea and air, shall be safeguarded;  
So that people of Pakistan may prosper and attain their 
rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the 
World and make their full contribution towards 
international peace and progress and happiness of 
humanity.”  
2.  This short order shall be followed by detailed reasons, to 
be recorded later. The above petitions have been instituted under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan .  
3.  For the purpose of understanding the issues involved in 
these petitions precisely the facts noted from the pleadings of the 
parties are that on 10th October, 2011, the respondent Mansoor Ijaz 
wrote an Article in Financial Times, London. The contents  of the said 
Memo have already been reproduced in the order dated 1st December, 
2011, however, same are repeated herein below: - 
 
“CONFIDENTIAL MEMORANDUM  
BRIEFING FOR ADM . MIKE MULLEN , CHAIRMAN , JOINT CHIEFS 
OF STAFF  
 
During the past 72 hours since a mee ting was held between the 
president, the prime minister and the chief of army staff, there has 
seen a significant deterioration in Pakistan’s political atmosphere. 
Increasingly desperate efforts by the various agencies and factions 
within the government to  find a home – ISI and/or Army, or the 
civilian government – for assigning blame over the UBL raid now 
dominate the tug of war between military and civilian sectors. 
Subsequent tit -for-tat reactions, including outing of the CIA station 
chief’s name in Isla mabad by ISI officials, demonstrates a dangerous 
devolution of the ground situation in Islamabad where no central 
control appears to be in place.  
Civilians cannot withstand much more of the hard pressure being 
delivered from the Army to succumb to wholesa le changes. If civilians 
are forced from power, Pakistan becomes a sanctuary for UBL’s legacy 
and potentially the platform for far more rapid spread of al Qaeda’s 
brand of fanaticism and terror. A unique window of opportunity exists 
for the civilians to ga in the upper hand over army and intelligence 
directorates due to their complicity in the UBL matter.  
Request your direct intervention in conveying a strong, urgent and 
direct message to Gen Kayani that delivers Washington’s demand for 
him and Gen Pasha to  end their brinkmanship aimed at bringing down CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  4 
the civilian apparatus – that this is a 1971 moment in Pakistan’s 
history. Should you be willing to do so, Washington’s political/military 
backing would result in a revamp of the civilian government that, whil e 
weak at the top echelon in terms of strategic direction and 
implementation (even though mandated by domestic political forces), 
in a wholesale manner replaces the national security adviser and other 
national security officials with trusted advisers that include ex -military 
and civilian leaders favorably viewed by Washington, each of whom 
have long and historical ties to the US military, political and 
intelligence communities. Names will be provided to you in a face -to-
face meeting with the person deliveri ng this message.  
In the event Washington’s direct intervention behind the scenes can be 
secured through your personal communication with Kayani (he will 
likely listen only to you at this moment) to stand down the Pakistani 
military -intelligence establishm ent, the new national security team is 
prepared, with full backing of the civilian apparatus, to do the 
following:  
 1. President of Pakistan will order an independent 
inquiry into the allegations that Pakistan harbored and offered 
assistance to UBL and oth er senior Qaeda operatives. The 
White House can suggest names of independent investigators 
to populate the panel, along the lines of the bipartisan 9 -11 
Commission, for example.  
 2. The inquiry will be accountable and independent, and 
result in findings of  tangible value to the US government and 
the American people that identify with exacting detail those 
elements responsible for harboring and aiding UBL inside and 
close to the inner ring of influence in Pakistan’s Government 
(civilian, intelligence directo rates and military). It is certain 
that the UBL Commission will result in immediate termination 
of active service officers in the appropriate government offices 
and agencies found responsible for complicity in assisting UBL.  
 3. The new national security t eam will implement a 
policy of either handing over those left in the leadership of Al 
Qaeda or other affiliated terrorist groups who are still on 
Pakistani soil, including Ayman Al Zawahiri, Mullah Omar and 
Sirajuddin Haqqani, or giving US military forces a “green light” 
to conduct the necessary operations to capture or kill them on 
Pakistani soil. This “carte blanche” guarantee is not without 
political risks, but should demonstrate the new group’s 
commitment to rooting out bad elements on our soil. This 
commitment has the backing of the top echelon on the civilian 
side of our house, and we will insure necessary collateral 
support.  
 4. One of the great fears of the military -intelligence 
establishment is that with your stealth capabilities to enter and 
exit P akistani airspace at will, Pakistan’s nuclear assets are 
now legitimate targets. The new national security team is 
prepared, with full backing of the Pakistani government – 
initially civilian but eventually all three power centers – to 
develop an acceptabl e framework of discipline for the nuclear 
program. This effort was begun under the previous military 
regime, with acceptable results. We are prepared to reactivate 
those ideas and build on them in a way that brings Pakistan’s 
nuclear assets under a more ve rifiable, transparent regime.  
 5. The new national security team will eliminate Section 
S of the ISI charged with maintaining relations to the Taliban, 
Haqqani network, etc. This will dramatically improve relations 
with Afghanistan.  
 6. We are prepared to cooperate fully under the new 
national security team’s guidance with the Indian government 
on bringing all perpetrators of Pakistani origin to account for 
the 2008 Mumbai attacks, whether outside government or 
inside any part of the government, including i ts intelligence 
agencies. This includes handing over those against whom CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  5 
sufficient evidence exists of guilt to the Indian security 
services.  
 
Pakistan faces a decision point of unprecedented importance. We, who 
believe in democratic governance and buildin g a much better 
structural relationship in the region with India AND Afghanistan, seek 
US assistance to help us pigeon -hole the forces lined up against your 
interests and ours, including containment of certain elements inside 
our country that require appro priate re -sets and re -tasking in terms of 
direction and extent of responsibility after the UBL affair.  
We submit this Memorandum for your consideration collectively as the 
members of the new national security team who will be inducted by 
the President of Pakistan with your support in this undertaking.”   
 
4. Petitioners invoked original jurisdiction of this Court by means of 
Constitution Petitions, questioning therein the contents of above Memo 
on stated allegations that question of public importance invol ving their 
fundamental rights under the Constitution has been made out as 
according to the version of Mansoor Ijaz -respondent, Memo was 
prepared/drafted for the purpose of delivering the same to Chairman 
of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen through Gen. 
(Retd.) James Logan Jones, former US National Security Advisor.  
5.  All the petitions were taken up for hearing on 1st 
December, 2011 when after hearing the petitioners, either through 
counsel or in person, notices were issued to the responde nts for filing 
of their replies and to conduct a probe regarding the Memo, Mr. Tariq 
Khosa, former Secretary Narcotics/DG, FIA, subject to his consent, 
was directed to act as a Commission. On the same day, by means of 
press -conference held in PID office by  Dr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC along 
with two Ministers and others, the order of the Court was criticized 
contemptuously. Inasmuch as, brother of Mr. Tariq Khosa, namely, Mr. 
Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, a learned Judge of this Court, who 
although was not memb er of the Bench, was referred in terms which 
prima facie  are contemptuous, therefore, for such reasons, Mr. Tariq 
Khosa recused to act  as a Commission. In this context, reaction of the 
Chief Executive/Prime Minister of Pakistan had been obtained and 
appropriate directions shall be passed in the later part of the order.  
6. Parties, including the Chief of Army Staff, DG, ISI, Mansoor Ijaz 
as well as Mr. Husain  Haqqani and the Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary Interior, Foreign Secretary represented by learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan, filed their replies. No separate reply has been 
filed by the President of Pakistan.  
7. With a view to narrow down the controversy between the 
parties, directions were issued to them to file counter affidavits/re -
joinders to the replies of each others vide order dated 19.12.2011. A 
perusal of the pleadings suggests: -  
(i) After the publication of above Article along with 
Memo in Financial Times, London on 10th of 
October, 2011, DG, ISI (Mr. Shujah Pasha) 
established  his contact with Mansoor Ijaz in London 
and on his return to Pakistan shared his views with 
the Chief of Army Staff, General Ashfaq Parvez 
Kayani, thus, both of them in their replies to the 
petitions as well as affidavits have maintained that 
Memo dated 1 0th May, 2011 exists.  
(ii) On 16th November, 2011 Mr. Husain  Haqqani 
addressed a letter to the President of Pakistan 
wherein after mentioning certain facts, he desired CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  6 
to tender his resignation from the post of 
Ambassador of Pakistan in United States and 
expressed to probe into the matter.  
(iii) About 3 to 4 meetings were held between the 
Prime Minister and Chief of Army Staff, the 
President and Chief of Army Staff and joint meeting 
between the President, Prime Minister, Chief of 
Army Staff, DG ISI and Mr. Husain  Haqqani, 
whereafter, Mr. Husain  Haqqani on account of their 
persuasion tendered his resignation on 22.11.2011, 
which was accepted vide notification dated 
23.11.2011.  
(iv) Former Ambassador, Mr. Husain  Huqqani has 
denied categorically about his role in preparat ion of 
the Memo who at the same time has relied upon an 
affidavit tendered by James Jones, to establish that 
Mansoor Ijaz has concocted this story that such 
Memo was sent by him for delivering to Admiral 
Mike Mullen before 9th May, 2011.  
(v) In the meanwhile, vide letter dated 28.11.2011, 
issued under the signatures of Mr. Khushnood 
Akhter Lashari, Principal Secretary to the Prime 
Minister referred the matter to the Parliamentary 
Committee to conduct probe on the subject issue. 
The proposed terms of the referen ce are as under: -  
a. To probe into the memo purportedly written 
and sent by Mr. Mansoor Ijaz.  
b. To give consequential recommendations.  
(vi) Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
had not denied the existence of the Memo in their 
counter affidavits except  raising technical flaws in 
respect of undertaking journey by DG, ISI to 
London to conduct a meeting with Mansoor Ijaz 
without permission of the Prime Minister.  
(vii) Mansoor Ijaz in his reply and in counter affidavit 
has contradicted the stand taken by Mr . Husa in 
Haqqani, former Ambassador and he has offered to 
provide further evidence to substantiate his plea 
that allegedly on persuasion of Mr . Husain  Haqqani, 
Memo dated 10th may, 2011 was drafted to be 
delivered to Mike Mullen through James Jones.  
8.  On 1st of December, 2011 the Court itself raised the 
question about the maintainability of the petitions and at the same 
time it was observed that it would be appreciated if the outcome of the 
proposed inquiry by the Parliamentary Committee on National Security 
is shared with the Court, if possible.  
9.  After having heard the parties and having taken into 
consideration the relevant provisions of the Constitution and the law, 
judgments cited on behalf of both the sides and the pleadings of the 
parties carefully, we  hold as under: - 
(a) In exercise of powers of Judicial Review, we hold 
that in these petitions, petitioners have succeeded 
in establishing that the issues involved are 
justiciable and question of public importance with 
regard to enforcement of fundamental righ ts, prima 
facie, under Articles 9, 14 and 19A of the 
Constitution has been made out. Thus, the CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  7 
petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
are maintainable.  
(b) To delineate measures with a view to ensure 
enforcement of the fundamental rights noted in 
para ibid, a probe is called for to ascertain the 
origin, authenticity and purpose of 
creating/drafting of Memo for delivering it to 
Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral 
Mike Mullen through Gen. (Retd.) James Logan 
Jones, former US National Sec urity Advisor. Thus, 
in exercise of powers conferred upon this Court 
under Article 187 of the Constitution, Order XXXII, 
Rules 1 and 2 read with Order XXXVI of the 
Supreme Court Rules, 1980 coupled with the 
principle of Civil Procedure Code, a Commission i s 
appointed. As the due process of law is the 
entitlement of all the stakholders, therefore, to 
ensure probe into the matter in an transparent 
manner the Commission shall be comprising of:  
(i) Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa,    (Chairman)  
 Chief Justice of Balo chistan High Court  
 
(ii) Mr. Justice Iqbal Hameed -ur-Rehman  (Member)  
 Chief Justice, Islamabad High Court  
 
(iii) Mr. Justice Mushir Alam    (Member)  
 Chief Justice, High Court of Sindh  
 
Raja Jawwad Abbas Hassan, District & Sessions Judge, 
Islamabad is appo inted as Secretary to the Commission.  
(c) The Commission shall hold its meetings in the 
building of Islamabad High Court. The Commission 
shall be exercising all the powers of Judicial 
Officers for the purpose of carrying out the object 
mentioned hereinabove an d it shall be free to avail 
services of advocates, experts of forensic science 
and cyber crimes. All the Federal Secretaries, 
including Interior Secretary, Secretary Cabinet, 
Secretary Foreign Affairs; Chief Secretaries of all 
the provinces; DG, FIA; Inspe ctor Generals of 
Police of all the provinces and Ambassadors of 
Pakistan in USA and UK, shall provide necessary 
assistance to the Commission.  
(d) Government of Pakistan through Secretary Cabinet 
Division shall provide logistic support to the 
Commission, subje ct to its demands through the 
Secretary of the Commission.  
(e) The Commission shall be authorized to collect 
evidence within and outside Pakistan according to 
prevailing laws on the subject.  
(f) The Commission shall provide full opportunity of 
hearing to all the parties.  
(g) The Commission is required to complete this task 
within a period of four weeks after receipt hereof.  
10.  It is to be noted that the reply submitted before the Court 
by Mr. Mansoor Ijaz, inter alia, comprises of certain documents 
including excha nge of e -mails and other communications using the 
BlackBerry Messaging service commonly known as BBM between them 
i.e. Mansoor Ijaz and Mr. Husain  Haqqani were in constant touch either CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  8 
through BBM, e -mails or voice calling w.e.f. 9th to 12th May, 2011. In 
fact during relevant days, as many as 85 BBMs, voice calls and e -mails 
were exchanged between the two. Prima facie these communications 
form the most important piece of evidence regarding purported 
contacts between the two for the purposes of drafting the alleged 
Memo. In addition to these dates, Mansoor Ijaz also claims that he had 
electronic/telephonic interactions with Mr. Husain  Haqqani on October, 
28 and November, 1 2011. Therefore, in the interest of justice, it is 
appropriate to get the confirmation about the veracity and authenticity 
of these communications from the original company known as 
Research in Motion (RIM) based in Canada being the sole and 
exclusive custodian of such information. Therefore, the learned 
Attorney General is directed to conta ct the said Company RIM through 
Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs for getting confirmation about the 
authenticity of the above mentioned electronic communications 
exchanged between Mansoor Ijaz and Mr. Husain  Haqqani. This 
confirmation may be obtained  at the earliest and in order to save and 
protect the forensic evidence and to scrutinize the same it should be 
produced before the Commission. As forensic evidence is likely to be 
collected from the company Research in Motion (RIM) based in 
Canada, theref ore, the High Commission of Pakistan in Canada is 
directed to cooperate and assist the Commission as well.  
11.  Vide order dated 1st December, 2011, Mr.  Husain  Haqqani 
was directed not to leave the country without the permission of the 
Court. This order is  kept intact.  
12.  Office is directed to put a separate note in the Chambers 
of Chief Justice of Pakistan along with the transcription of the press -
conference dated 1st December, 2011 of Mr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC 
along with replies/reactions of the Prime Min ister of Pakistan dated 
23rd December and 26th December, 2011 for passing appropriate 
orders.  
13.  The petitions are adjourned for a date to be fixed by the 
office after receipt of the report from the Commission. ”   
 
2.  Detailed marshaling of the facts of  instant  case are not 
called for because of the settled principle  of law  with regard to exercis e 
of jurisdiction under Art icle 184(3)  of the Constitution  that the Court 
should not enter into disputed question s of fact involving appreciation 
of voluminous e vidence. However, to decide the question brought 
before the Court relating to the public importance and enforcement of 
fundamental rights , there is no prohibition to consider fact s, which do 
not require consider ation of  voluminous evidence . Reference may b e 
made to the cases of  Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 
SC 473), Pakistan Muslim League (N) v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  9 
2007 SC 642),  Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 879),  Dr. Mubashir Hassan v. Fed eration of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC  265) and Al-Jehad Trust v. Lahore High Court  
(2011 SCMR 1688 ). It is also settled practice of the Court that 
proceedings are not undertaken for academic purposes but on the 
basis of admitted or proven facts to resolv e the c ontroversy [ Dr. 
Mubash ir Hassan’s case(supra) ]. 
3.  According to the contentions of Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC in 
respect of Memo dated 10th May, 2011 originated/drafted by Mansoor 
Ijaz in the circumstances, which have already been noted hereinabove 
information whereof was communicated by the media. Therefore, he 
instituted petition No.78/2011 on 21st of November, 2011 wherein 
inter alia  it was prayed to constitute high level Commission to 
investigate  into the matter of Memo written to US Government and to 
fix the  responsibilities for damaging the sovereignty of the country. 
Prior to filing of this petition, another petition was filed by Wattan 
Party through Barrister Zafarullah Khan, ASC on 19th November, 2011 
wherein inter alia it is stated that text of the Memo,  which contains six 
points, are regarding the concession s, which will be given to America  
so that all the desired demands of American Army are met and 
Pakistan will change its security team and new national security team 
will make arrangements, provided th e pressure of Pakistan Army on 
civilian gove rnments is released or control  by the Army on civilian 
government is removed through America’s interference , etc. It was 
prayed that issue of secret Memo, issued after the approval of 
government and President be determined whether it is treasonous 
document or fabrication imputed to the government of day/President CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  10 
and Judicial Commission be appointed for its investigation. Similarly, 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and others submitted petition s on 
23.11.2011 wherein other important fact s were  disclosed that copy of 
the transcript of the said conversation released by said Mansoor Ijaz 
as published in the issue of 18th November, 2011 of the Daily “the 
News” was available which was  appended as annexure P/II. However, 
it was mentioned that in the meantime frightfully disturbing comments 
also came from the spokesman of Admiral Mike Mullen to the effect 
that:- 
“Admn.  Mullen had no recollection of the Memo and no 
relationship with Mr. Ijaz. After the original Article 
appeared o n Foreign Policy’s website, he felt it incumbent 
upon himself to cheque his memor y. He reached out to 
others who he believe d might have had knowledge of such 
a Memo, and one of them was able to produce a copy of 
it”. 
It was prayed that the ones responsible  and/or involved in initiating 
the process leading to the said memorandum; authoring the same; 
providing any assistance whatsoever in the process and the ones 
blessing or approving the said act, may graciously be identified.  
4.  Undisputedly, an Article h as been published in Financial 
Times , London  on 10th October, 2011, reference of which has been 
made in the short order, reproduced hereinabove. Subsequently , on 
22nd October, 2011, DG ISI (Lieutenant  General Ahmad Shuja Pasha)  
contacted the author of Arti cle (Mansoor Ijaz, respondent) in London. 
The Federation , through  Secretary Interior in counter affidavit , has not 
denied this fact except raising the objection that  the DG ISI had gone 
to London  without permission of Chief Executiv e/Prime Minister . It has  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  11 
also not been disputed by the Federation that on 13th November, 2011 
the Chief of Army Staff advised the Prime Minister that details of the 
Memo were gradually coming to light and that contents of the Memo , 
so far leaked , were highly sensitive i n nature, therefore, position would  
have to be taken on the veracity or otherwise of the said issue. It was, 
therefore, important that complete details be collected as early as 
possible. He strongly recommended to the Prime Minister that 
Ambassador of Pakistan in the United States, who was best suited and 
informed on the matter, be called to brief the Country’s leadership , as 
the time was of essence and that earlier they knew the truth, the 
better it would be to address the negative fall out for the country . On 
15th November, 2011, the President asked him for a meeting. He met 
him at the Presidency at 1400 hours  on the same day . The Prime 
Minister had already informed the President about his 
recommendations. The President told him that he had already decided 
to call Mr . Husain  Haqqani for a briefing. On 16th November, 2011, 
another meeting was held between Chief of Army Staff, President and 
Prime Minister , wherein , it was decided that Mr.  Husain  Haqqani should 
come to Islamabad as early as possible. On 22nd November, 20 11 at 
1500 hours, a meeting was held in the Prime Minister House, which 
was attended by President, Prime Minister, Chief  of Army Staff and 
DG, ISI,  whereby , Mr. Husain  Haqqani was called in to brief. 
Thereafter , the Prime Minister took the decision to ask for Mr. Husain  
Haqqani’s resignation and also order ed for investigation.  
5.  Likewise , a copy of the letter dated 16th November, 2011  
address ed to Mr. Asif Ali Zardari, President of Pakistan has been  filed  
in   Court  by respondent  Mr. Husain    Haqqani    through     his CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  12 
learned counsel Ms. Asma Ja hangir , ASC . The letter, which has been 
relied  upon  by the respondent himself, needs to be reproduced 
hereinbelow  as it discloses important aspects of the case :- 
 
 
“EMBASSY OF PAKISTAN  
3517 Internation al Court, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 200 08 
November 16, 2011  
Dear Mr. President,  
 
Since my appointment as Ambassador of Pakistan to the United 
States in 2008, I have strived to serve the country and 
represent it forcefully in the country of my accreditation. I have 
faithfully followed the directions of the Prime Minister and the 
government in executing my duties and dealt with many crises 
that have bedeviled US -Pakistan ties.  
It is unfortunate that I have been consistently vilified by those 
who oppose the democratically elected government as well as 
the opponents of good relations between the United States and 
Pakistan. This vilification has often included the baseless charge 
that somehow I undermine or defame the armed forces of 
Pakistan even though many members of my fa mily have 
faithfully served the country as military officers. Like many 
Pakistanis, I have consistently opposed military intervention in 
politics but I have never connived, conspired or sought to 
undermine our armed forces or their leadership.  
Most recentl y allegations have been made that I wrote a letter 
or memo on your behalf to the US Chairman Joint Chiefs, 
Admiral Michael Mullen, soon after the May 2 raid in Abbottabad 
that resulted in the killing of Al -Qaeda leader Osama Bin Laden. 
The alleged memo/let ter proposed US support for civilian rule in 
return for changes in Pakistan’s military leadership. I want to 
categorically state that at no point was I asked by you, or 
anyone else, in the government of Pakistan to writ e such a 
letter or memo and that I di d not draft or deliver such a letter or 
memo nor di d I ask a nyone to do so  on my b ehalf or that of the 
government or President of Pakistan . CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  13 
I may add that as ambassador it is my official duty to 
communicate with US officials at all levels and I am perfectl y 
capable of drafting and delivering all official communications 
myself.  
It has been my privilege to serve Pakistan as its ambassador in 
the US but I cannot do so effectively under the shadow of 
suspicion and vilification. I, therefore, request that an inq uiry be 
set up to ascertain the veracity of any specific allegations 
against me. Pending ascertainment of facts I propose to resign 
to your will in the national interest.  
I am a Pakistani patriot who serves as ambassador at the 
pleasure of the Prime Minis ter and yourself. I do not wish to be 
a distraction from the more important challenges faced by  our 
country and its government.  As instructed, I am preparing to 
travel to Islamabad for consultation.  
  
With highest consideration and regards.  
Yours sincerely , 
 
Sd/- 
Mr. Husain  Haqqani  
      Ambassador  
 
His Excellency Asif A. Zardari  
President of Pakistan  
Islambad”  
 
 
Two things are very prominent from the recitation of the above letter ; 
(i) he ha d taken upon himself to make the reference of the 
letter/memo wit h reservation that he had not associated himself to 
originate/draft it on behalf of the President of Pakistan ; (ii) he had 
made the reference to the incident, which took place on 2nd May, 
2011, which resulted in killing of Al -Qaeda leader, Osama Bin Laden . 
Said incident generated the public interest in the l ength and breath of 
the country  as a whole  and the nation  vociferously condemned the 
incident publically, as a consequence whereof a joint session of CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  14 
Parliament was held on 13th and 14th May, 2011 to con sider the 
situation in depth and as a result of discussion including presentation 
made on the relevant issues, a unanimous resolution was passed,  
which  called upon the government to appoint an independent 
Commission of Inquiry for the said purpose. Accordi ngly, on 31st May, 
2011 vide notification No.NIL/2011, Government of Pakistan, Ministry 
of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, a Commission was 
constituted u/s 3 and 5(1) of the Pakistan Commission s of Inquiry Act, 
1956 headed by Mr. Justice Javed Iqba l, senior most Judge of the 
Supreme Court as President with four other members. The notification 
was followed by another notification dated 21st June, 2011 in 
supersession of earlier notification as the former notification was 
issued for the appointment of  a learned Judge as President/Chairman 
of the Commission, without approval of the Chief Justice of Pakistan 
and such action apparently seemed to be contrary to the principle of 
independence of the judiciary, hence rectified. The Commission so 
constituted, in respect of incident of Abbottabad, continue s its probe, 
which has not so far been concluded.  
6.  It might not be out of context to mention that the 
Memorandum does not disclose the name of any of the person s, who 
allegedly got it originated . However, s ubject to all just exceptions and 
without causing prejudice to the case of any of the parties, the letter 
of Mr.  Husain  Haqqani reproduced hereinabove, relied upon by th e 
respondent’s counsel herself discloses that  Mr. Husain  Haqqani  was 
being involved on having written a letter or Memo on behalf of the 
President  of Pakistan  to Chairman US Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike 
Mullen soon after the 2nd May,  2011 raid in Abbottabad that resulted in CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  15 
the killing of Al -Qaeda leader Osama Bin Laden. It is also not disputed 
that in the meeting between high -ups i.e. President, Prime Minister, 
Chief of Army Staff and DG ISI, resignation was tendered by Mr. 
Husain  Haqqani, addressed to the Prime Minister at Islamabad on 22nd 
November, 2011, contents whereof read as unde r:- 
 
“Islamabad, November 22, 2011  
 
Resignation  
 
Having served as Ambassador of Pakistan to the United States 
since 2008, I have faithfully fulfilled my obligations under your 
direction and guidance.  
2. I serve at your pleasure and pursuant to your instruc tions and 
under the terms of the contract of my appointment, I hereby 
tender resignation from the position entrusted to me by you.  
 
 
Sd/- 
Mr. Husain  Haqqani  
The Honorable Prime Minister”  
 
 
7.  As far as an Ambassador  of Pakistan is concerned,  
including  the one who is on contract appointment is deemed to be 
holding the post in connection with the affairs of the Federation and is 
to be governed by the rules applicable to the general body of civil 
servant s, such as the Government Servants (Efficiency and Disci pline) 
Rules, Government Servants Conduct Rules and the Civil Services 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules. Reference may be made to 
the case of Abida Hussain v. Tribunal for N.A.69  (PLD 1994 SC 60).  
8.  A perusal of resignation  of Mr. Husain  Haqqan i reveals that 
pursuant to the instructions of the Prime Minister and under the terms 
of contract of his appointment, he tendered resignation, which was 
accepted on 23rd November, 2011 vide notification No.Estt(I) -
10/177/2008 w.e.f. 22nd November, 2011. It  is equally significant to CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  16 
note that in the letter dated 16th November, 2011, Mr. Husain  Haqqani 
also requested to the President Asif Ali Zardari that an inquiry be set 
up to ascertain the veracity of any specific allegations against him. 
Further, pending ascertainment of facts , he proposed to resign in the 
national interest.  
9.  It may not be out of context to infer from the facts and 
circumstances of the case that existence of the Memo has been 
accepted because otherwise there was no necessity for holdin g four 
consecutive meetings between the Constitutional figures i.e. President, 
Prime Minister and the Chief of Army Staff as well as DG ISI and Mr. 
Husain  Haqqani , and as a cons equence of these meetings, resignation 
was tender ed by  the latter and order was also passed by Prime 
Minister for initiating probe in the matter.  
10.  Barrister Zafarullah  Khan , ASC appearing in Constitution 
Petition No.77/2011, has contended that as a matter of right being a 
citizen, he has right to have access to information in re spect of the 
Memo. He contended that Articles 5, 9 and 14 of the Constitution, deal 
with security of person; if there is no security, there is no liberty of 
individuals. The action of originating/drafting Memo in relation to the 
affairs of Pakistan, as has  been mentioned therein, is tantamount to 
compromising security and sovereignty of Pakistan and if such effort 
had succeed ed, American s would have been  allowed to control our 
security, the independent character of the government of the country 
would be  totally lost. Thus, the security of life and dignity of citizens 
and of persons, which are  fundamental right guaranteed under the 
Constitution, shall have seriously been violated. He placed reliance 
upon the cases of Malik Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  17 
SC 161), Wattan Par ty v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2006 SC 697) 
and in Re: Corruption in Hajj Arrangements  (PLD 2011 SC 963).  
11.  Mr. Tariq Asad, learned ASC appearing in CP No. 78/2011 
has stated that when citizens know that their rulers were conspiring 
against people, Army, Intelligence Agencies, etc., it is against the 
dignity of man. Further, Articles 14 and 19 A of the Constitution  have 
to be read together to ascertain as to whether fundamental rights of 
citizens guaranteed under both thes e Articles have been violated or 
not. He further contended that Federation while denying the existence 
of the Memo, is not coming forward with the truth about the 
circumstances  which led to issuance of Memo dated 10th May, 2011 . 
Though the article publishe d in the Financial Times suggests that the 
Memo was prepared on 10th May, 2011 outside the country, but it 
shows concern about the security inside Pakistan and security agencies 
of Pakistan. He further emphasized that seeking intervention, as is 
evident fr om the contents of the Memo, is against the dignity of the 
people and he being a citizen has no source to collect the information 
about genuineness or otherwise of the Memo, therefore, he has 
impleaded in his petition the COAS, DG ISI and others. He referr ed 
Sura Al-Mumta ĥanah wherein it has been ordained as under: - 
“O you who have believed, do not take My enemies and your 
enemies as allies, extending to them affection while they have 
disbelieved in what came to you of the truth, having driven out 
the Proph et and yourselves [only] because you believe in Allah, 
your Lord. If you have come out for jihad in My cause and 
seeking means to My approval, [take them not as friends]. You 
confide to them affection, but I am most knowing of what you 
have concealed and w hat you have declared. And whoever does CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  18 
it among you has certainly strayed from the soundness of the 
way.” [60:1]  
In Sura Al -Mā'idah it has been said that: -   
“But the Jews and the Christians say, "We are the children of 
Allah and His beloved." Say, “Then why does He punish you for 
your sins?” Rather, you are human beings from among those He 
has created. He forgives w hom He wills, and He punishes whom 
He wills. And to Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and 
the earth and whatever is between them, and to Him is the 
[final] destination.” [5:18]  
12.  Mr. Rashid A. Razvi, learned Sr. ASC contended that the 
fact noted  in the petitions as well as replies on behalf of the 
respondents in CMAs, touches the question of security, independence 
and sovereignty of this country; therefore, apparently, Article s 9 and 
14 of the Constitution ha ve been violated. There are so many ca ses, 
which indicate that this Court is bound to enforce the fundamental 
rights. Reliance was placed in the cases of Miss Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416), Pakistan Muslim Leag ue 
(N) v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2007 SC 642), Shahida Zaheer 
Abbasi v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 632), and Zulfiqar Mehdi 
v. Pakistan International Airlines Corporation (1998 SCMR 793) and in 
Re: Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010  (PLD 2011 SC 963). As in 
the instant case fundamental rights  have been violated, therefore, this 
Court is bound to enforce the same because an important question of 
public importance has been raised before this Court  and Court has no 
discretion to decline the relief as it is possible under Article 199 of the 
Consti tution. And principle of judicial restraint cannot be applied to 
deprive the citizens as their security/integrity of the entire country is 
involved.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  19 
13.  He further stated that objection raised by the learned 
counsel for Mr. Husain  Haqqani that issue pres ented before the Court 
falls within the definition of sensitive political question, therefore, the 
Court may not go into the same, has no relevance as there is 
absolutely no political question and the matter relates to civil liability 
as well as criminal r esponsibility subject to establishing that Memo was 
originated and executed to compromise the integrity/security of this 
Country. He has referred the case of Mehmood Khan Achakzai v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1997 SC 426) in support of his arguments.  
14.  Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar, appeared in person in 
Constitution Petition No. 80/2011 and contended that overall 
perspective  is linked with violation of fundamental rights. None of the 
respondents ha s disputed the contents of the Memo, however, without 
disclosing the name, what was the object and motivation of its 
dissemination . He further stated that probe of the Memo has been 
conceded by all of them except raising the dispute in respect of forum. 
He stated that he had written a letter to Parliamentary Com mittee on 
National Security for the purpose of taking up the issue, but on having 
seen that no progress was made out, he approached this Court for 
redressal of his grievance. He further has contended that the 
Committee [of which he himself is a member]  was originally comprised 
of 17 -members but presently strength of the Committee has reduced 
to 14 -members. He was also of the opinion that in view of the rules 
framed by the Committee and considering the past history of the 
Committee, it would not be able to a chieve the progress beyond a 
threshold. He explained that this Committee was notified on 11th 
November, 2008, whereas, the Memo Issue  cropped up on 10th May, CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  20 
2011 and was brought to the lime light after publication of Article 
written by Mansoor Ijaz on 10th October, 2011 in the Financial Times, 
London. Therefore, the Committee would not be authorized to look into 
this matter. Without prejudice to the arguments,  he added that not a 
single report so far has been received from the Committee and like 
other Comm ittees it has failed to deliver, therefore, suggestions made 
by the respondent in his reply that let the matter be probed into by 
the Parliamentary Committee on National Security, is not in 
accordance with its mandate.  
15.  Mr. A ttique Shah ASC and Mr. Mu hammad Rafiq Rajwana, 
ASC learned counsel in Petition No. 81/2011  framed following two 
questions: - 
(i) Whether it is a case in which question of infringement of 
fundamental rights arises?  
(ii) Whether the present lis involves controversy relating  to 
judicially dis coverable and manageable standards?  
They have referred to the case of Powell v. McCormack  [395 US 
486(1969)] to substantiate  their plea  that the issue presented before 
the Court is justiciable and is to be resolved by the Judicial Forum. 
They have  also re lied upon the cases of Mehmood Khan Achakzai  
(supra), Darshan Mas ih v. the State  (PLD 1990 SC 513) and 
Muhammad Yasin v. Federation of Pakistan  (Civil Petition No.42 of 
2011).  
16.  Mr. Attique Shah learned  ASC  also made a categorical 
statement that in the  past few years, the people of Malakand Division 
have suffer ed atrocities and miseries, and have sacrificed life an d CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  21 
honour. In the operation of S wat, etc. , apart from other damages and 
destruction suffered by the people of Malakand, two million people  
became IDPs and had lived in camps, only for the sovereignty and 
integrity of this country. Out of them, 4000 were members of the legal 
fraternity. The Memo contains concessions on the one hand, and the 
destruction on the other. This court is to appreciate th at right from 
1979 till date, only Peshawar is having the burden of 3 million Afghan 
migrants. We have lost dignity, profession and finances for the sake of 
integrity and sovereignty of this nation. At present on western borders 
spreading over 500 km, due to the activities of the troops, 21000 
civilian casualties have occurred for the honour, integrity and 
sovereignty of the country, but through the Memo the concessions are 
being given. This is the result of serious active  connivance amongst 
the responsible  persons . There are drone attacks and activities of 
militants. Thu s it is a case of serious violation of Fundamental Rights.  
17.  Dr. Salahuddin Mengal, ASC stated that by means of 
Article 2A, which is now the substantive part of the Constitution, 
adequat e provision to safeguard the interests of judiciary have been 
provided including the sovereignty, security and dignity of this 
country; that the crux of the Memo is admitted by Mansoor Ijaz; DG 
ISI travelled to UK, inspected BBM and other computer material , 
submitted report to the President; a meeting was convened in the 
President House; Paras 1,  2, 3 of the Memo speak of the new National 
Security Team, etc.; this falls within the definition of violation of 
fundamental right of the people of this country. P reviously, Amal Kansi 
was handed over to Americans, which was very unfortunate and it also 
needs to be probed. The Memo has shaken the entire nation. He has CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  22 
stated that he is representing the elected members of the National 
Assembly who belong to Balochist an. His emphasis was mainly on the 
violation of Article 9 of the Constitution.  
18.  Sardar Asmatullah Khan, ASC has appeared in Constitution 
Petition No. 83/2011 and argued that the petitioners are former 
President and Speaker of Azad Jummu & Kashmir and are also citizen 
of Pakistan. It is a matter of violation of Article s 9 and 19A of the 
Constitution. He also referred to the case of Shehla Zia v. WAPDA  (PLD 
1994 SC 693).  
19.  Syed Ghous Ali Shah, ASC has appeared in Constitution 
Petition No. 84/2011 and adopted the arguments of other counsel for 
the petitioners, however, has added two things; firstly, it is absolutely 
incorrect that if the matter is decided by this Court, supremacy of the 
Parliament will be affected, because except the Court or a Tribunal  
constituted by it, no other forum would be in a position to conduct a 
thorough probe; secondly, the issue of Memo has affected every 
citizen of Pakistan and not just merely one or two institution s of the 
State. Thus, it is a matter of public importance wi th reference  to 
enforcement of fundamental right.  
20.  Rana M. Shamim, ASC has appeared in Constitution 
Petition No.84/2011 and adopted the arguments of other learned 
counsel while relying upon the judgments cited by them. He, however, 
added that COAS has filed affidavit in this Court requesting for a probe 
into the matter, as sovereignty and integrity of the country is involved.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  23 
21.  Mr. Naseer Ahmad Bhutta, ASC has appeared in 
Constitution Petition No.85/2011 . He has adopted the arguments of 
other learne d counsel for the petitioners.  
22.  Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan appeared on behalf of the Federation a nd contended that as 
the Court has observed that respondents, COAS and DG ISI also fall 
within the definition of Federation , therefore, he is appearing on behalf 
of all of them. It is a matter of record that replies dated 14th 
December, 2011 on behalf of respondents Chief of Army Staff and DG 
ISI were duly filed under covering letter No.1(3)/2011 -AGP dated 15th 
December, 2011 before this Court through the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan. Similarly, affidavits of Chief of Army Staff and DG 
ISI dated 21st December, 2011, which were delivered by the M/o 
Defence vide letter No.1/603/Dir (Legal)/11 to the office of Attorney 
General for Pakistan, were filed in Court vide C.M.As No.5625/2011 
and 5691/2011 respectively.   
He further contended that there is no existence of Memo  
because a person , whose name  is Mansoor Ijaz , is sitting outside the 
country who is an American National . And he on  his own, 
originated/drafted a Memo allegedly to involve Ambassador of Pakistan 
in US,  for which no cogent and tangible reason s exist . He contended 
that the Federal Government as well as the Presidency has already 
denied the contents of the said A rticle published on 10th October, 2011 
and having taken notice of the same, proper steps have already been 
initiated by the competent authority, on the executive side as well as 
at Parliamentary Forum, for the purpose of conducting probe in the 
issue. The Parliamentary Committee is fully empowered not only to CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  24 
probe into the matter but also to ensure production of such evidence 
as it deems necessary. He stated that the former Ambassador of 
Pakistan to US has put in his resignation on the call of Chief Execut ive 
and its acceptance has been notified.  
23.  Mr. Mansoor Ijaz has sent his reply through e -mail along 
with attached documents to substantiate the plea that Memo dated 
10th May, 2011 originated at the behest of Respondent No.4, Mr. 
Husain  Haqqani .  
24.  Ms. Asma Ja hangir, Learned counsel appearing on behalf 
of Mr. Husain  Haqqani has vehemently contested the petition for want 
of infraction, violation and breach of any of the fundamental rights of 
the petitioners, as according to her, absence of such elemen ts is 
sufficient to render the petition s liable to be dismissed being not 
maintainable. She  has contended that question of public importance 
and enforcement of fundamental rights should have direct link with 
each other, enabling this Court to exercise juri sdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution. There must be bona fides  of the petitioners 
to approach this Court for a relief under  Article 184(3). This Court has  
to safeguard the fundamental rights  on the basis of cogent evidence,  
as merely on the ba sis of assumption s and presumption s, jurisdiction 
cannot be exercised as the same is likely to create chaos, if ultimately 
it is found that the declaration is not enforceable. Exercise of 
jurisdiction must not be vague and based on hypothesis. The remedy 
sought should strengthen and enforce the fundamental rights. 
Jurisdiction under Article 184(3) is remedial in character and exercise 
of the jurisdiction under this provision is conditioned by following three 
pre-requisites; namely, there is a question of pu blic importance; such CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  25 
question involves enforcement of the fundamental rights; and 
fundamental rights to be enforced are conferred by Chapter 1, Part II 
of the Constitution. When there is a question of fact, which is disputed, 
copious or too intricate, the n restraint has to be exercised while 
exercising jurisdiction under Article 184(3). Actions or inactions of the 
State, which result in actual breach of fundamental right s, would 
warrant exercise of jurisdiction. The fundamental rights have to be 
establishe d in tangible terms for establishing bona fides . Safeguard 
provided under the Constitutional jurisdiction for the due process of 
law has to be adhered to strictly, as now through Article 10A of the 
Constitution, it has become a fundamental right of the cit izens. No 
infraction, breach or violation of Article 9, 14, and 19A, as is alleged, 
has been involved in the instant case. Therefore, petitions deserve to 
be dismissed with special costs. She has relied upon the judgments in 
the cases of Miss Benazir Bhutt o v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 
SC 416), Pakistan Muslim League (N) v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2007 SC 642), Corruption in Hajj Arrangements, 2010:  (PLD 2011 SC 
963), Mrs. Shahida Zaheer Abbasi v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 
SC 632), Syed Zul fiqar Mehdi v. Pakistan International Airlines 
Corporation through M.D.  (1998 SCMR 793),  K.B. Threads ( Pvt.) 
Limited v. Zila Nazim, Lahore  (PLD 2004 Lahore 376), Jamat -e-Islami 
v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2008 SC 30), Ch. Muhammad 
Siddique v.  Government  of Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 1), Haji 
Muhammad Saifullah Khan v. The Federation of Pakistan  (1989 SCMR 
22), Grp. Capt. (Retd.) Cecil Sohail Chowdhry v . Federation of Pakistan  
(1989 SCMR 523), Al-Jehad Trust v. The President of Pakistan  (PLD 
2000 SC 84), Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2004 SC 583), Al-Jehad Trust v. Lahore High Court  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  26 
(2 01 1  S C MR  1688), In Re: Suo Moto Case No.10 OF 2007  (PLD 
2008 SC 673), Nawaz Sharif  v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 
473), State Life Insurance E mployees Federation v. Federal 
Government of Pakistan  (1994 SCMR 1341) and Ashok Kumar Pandey 
v. The State of West Bengal  (AIR 2004 SC 280) = [(2004) 3 SCC 349].  
25.  Learned counsel for the parties have no serious 
reservations about the question of public  importance  in this matter  to 
be one of the components to attract the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution coupled with the fact that three 
elements i.e. question of public importance, question of enforcement 
of fundamental r ight and fundamental rights sought to be enforced as 
conferred by Chapter 1, Part II of the Constitution, are required to be 
satisfied.  
26.  Learned Attorney General, however , conceded that 
petitions relate  to matter of public importance.  
27.  According t o the dictionary  meaning , the term “public 
importance” could be defined that the question, wh ich affects and has 
its repercussions on the public at large and it also includes a purpose 
and aim, in which the general interest of the community, particul arly 
interest of individuals is  directly or vitally concern ed. In Words and 
Phrases Vol. 18 -A, ‘Great Public Importance ’ has been defined as 
under: - 
“A case in which a court is proceeding without jurisdiction of 
person or subject matter involves a matter of ‘gre at public 
importance’ within rule providing that relief in nature of 
prohibition will not be granted by Supreme Court except in 
matters of great public importance.”  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  27 
28.  This Court had undertaken exercise to define this phrase in 
the cases of  Manzoor Ela hi v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1975 SC 
66), Miss Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416), 
Maqbool Ahmad v. Pakistan Agricultural  (2006 SCMR 470), Mian 
Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2004 SC 
583) and Shahid a Zaheer Abbasi v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 
SC 632).  In the case of State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Bakshi 
Ghulam Mohammad  (AIR 1967 SC 122) some of the actions of Bakshi 
Ghulam Mohammad (the then Chief Minister) were challenged before 
the High Court and  the High Court expressed the view that such acts 
would have been acts of public importance if he was in office but they 
ceased to be so, as he was out of office, when the notification was 
issued. The Supreme Court reversed the finding while observing that  
this wa s a misreading by the High Court  and held that what is to be 
inquired into in any case are necessarily past acts and it is because 
they have already affected the public well -being or their effect might 
do so, that they became matters of public impo rtance . It was further 
held that it is of public importance that public men failing in their duty 
should be called upon to face the consequences. It is certainly a 
matter of importance to the public that lapses on the part of the 
Ministers should be expose d. In the case of Sohail Butt v. Deputy 
Inspector General of Police (2011 SCMR 698) it was held that the word 
‘public importance’ can only be defined by a process of judicial 
inclusion or exclusion because the expression public importance is not 
capable of  any precise definition and has not a rigid meaning, 
therefore, each case has to be judged in the circumstances of that 
case as to whether the question of public importance is involved. But it 
is settled that public importance must include a purpose or aim  in CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  28 
which the general interest of the community as opposed to the 
particular interest of the individuals is directly and vitally concer ned.  
29.  This Court in Manzoor Elahi ’s case (supra)  has observed 
that in order to acquire public importance the case mu st obviously 
raise a question, which is of interest to, or affects the whole body of 
people or an entire community. In other words, the case must be such 
as gives rise to questions affecting the legal rights or liabilities or the 
public or the community at  large, even though the individual, who is 
the subject matter of the case, may be  of no particular consequence . 
In the case of Munir Hussain Bhatti advocate v. Federation of Pakistan 
and others ( PLD 2011 SC 407) it has been held that a wealth of 
jurisprude nce is available on this subject. The issue, therefore, which 
has to be addressed while deciding the respondent’s preliminary  
object ion is whether or not these petitions raise issues of public 
importance. Furthermore, in making this determination, the Cour t is 
not to be swayed by expressions of public sentiment nor is it to 
conduct an opinion poll to determine if the public has any interest in 
an issue being agitated before the Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution. Instead, a whole range of factor s need to be kept in 
mind, which have, over the years, been expounded in numerous 
precedents of this Court. It is important to keep these precedents in 
view because, as  noted in an earlier judgment, i t is through the use of 
precedent that the contours of t he law are constantly d efined. In the 
case of Muhammad Sha hbaz Sharif (PLD 2004 SC 583)  it has been 
held that in order to acquire public importance the case must obviously 
raise a question, which is of interest to, or affects the whole body of 
people or an  entire community. What is essential is that the question CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  29 
so raised must relate to the interest of whole body of the people or an 
entire community. To put it in other words, the case must be such, 
which raises a question affecting the legal rights or liabi lities of the 
public or the community at large, irrespective of the fact that who 
raised such question. In the case of Kellner v.  District Court  [256 P.2d 
887 (1953) 127 Colo 320], the Supreme Court of Colorado has laid 
down that as to the question of what  is of great public importance, 
sole determination in all cases, according to the peculiar features of 
each, is within the province of the court. In some cases there may be 
an adequate remedy at law, but not speedy. In some instances, and 
we believe applic able here it is apparent on the face of the pleadings 
and record before us . The Supreme Court of J udicature, UK in the case 
of the Queen on the Application of Compton v. Wiltshire Primary Care 
Trust [(2008) EWCA Civ 749]  has held that the first governing 
principle requires the judge to evaluate the importance of the issues 
raised and to make a judgment as to whether they are of general 
public importance. In the case of Jamat -e-Islami v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 549), the dual office of General Pe rvez 
Musharraf  as Chief Executive and the Chief of Army Staff was 
challenged. Although the petitions were dismissed being not 
maintainable, however, in the majority view, it was he ld that the 
condition precedent  for following the precedent must be questio n of 
public importance. The learned Judge, who authored the  majority  
judgment, accepted the principle that jurisdiction under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution cannot be exercised unless the matter is of public 
importance involving the fundamental rights conferred by Part-II 
Chapter 1 of the Constitution. In the case of Muhammad Yasin v. CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  30 
Federation of Pakistan  (Civil Petition No.42 of 2011) it has been held 
as under: -  
“It is clear from the text of this article that the Court’s powers 
and jurisdiction are broad in scope. We have elaborated the 
contours of our jurisdiction in a recent judgment wherein it has 
been held that “Article 184(3) ibid empowers this Court to 
exercise jurisdiction thereunder whenever the Court considers a 
matter to: (i) be of public i mportance and (ii) that it pertains to 
the enforcement of fundamental rights. The determination on 
both these counts is made by this Court itself keeping the facts 
of the case in mind”. The exercise of jurisdiction by the Supreme 
Court, thus is not depende nt on the existence of a petitioner. We 
have also before us precedent where this Court has exercised 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) even where a legal proceeding 
in respect of the same matter was pending or had been finally 
decided by a High Court. Refe rence in this behalf can be made to 
Suo Moto Case No.10 of 2009, (2010 SCMR 8845).”  
 
30.  As noted above, existence of  Memo  dated 10th May, 2011  
has not been denied by the Federation, otherwise there was no 
necessity for holding four meetings between the C onstitutional and 
other senior figures i.e. President, Prime Minister , the Chief of Army 
Staff and DG ISI  as well as Mr. Husain  Haqqani and as a consequence 
of these meetings tendering of resignation by Mr. Husain  Haqqani and 
initiation of  probe by the Pri me Minister. What was the nature of 
discussion between all of them is not available as only the Chief of 
Army Staff and DG ISI have submitted their replies  as well as counter 
affidavit s whereas the Federation through the Secretary Interior has 
also not dis puted this fact but without sharing information with the 
Court on account of which two important decisions referred to 
hereinabaove were taken. The persons who represent t he masses, are 
bound by the Constitution but when any decision is taken, it also 
creates curiosity amongst masses to know the real ity about the 
event s, which persuaded  the Constitutional figures  to take prima facie 
extreme steps like obtaining resignation  from respondent No.4 ( Mr. CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  31 
Husain  Haqqani)  and directing the probe. We may mention her e that 
this angle of the case has been examined in view of the admitted facts 
as it has been pointed out hereinabove. The body of the people, who 
are the citizen s of this country, are always interested in well being and 
security of their beloved country. T here are not only many people who 
are interested to know the reality but the media, both electronic and 
print, had highlighted the issue extensively. Rightly so , because as a 
living nation, they have every right to know about the affairs of their 
country.  
31.  In view of above principle/observations and after 
considering  the nature of the issue  it is observed that the expression 
"public importance"  is tagged with  the enforcement of the 
Fundamental Rights as a precondition of the exercise of the power. 
This should not be understood in a limited sense, but in the gamut of 
the constitutional rights of freedoms and liberties, their protection and 
invasion of such freedoms in a manner which raises a serious question 
regarding their enforcement. Such matters can be viewed as of public 
importance, whether they arise from an individual's case touching his 
honour , liberty and freedom, or of a class or a group of persons as 
they would also be legitimately covered by this expression. Thus, it is 
held that  “to delineate  measures with a view to ensure enforcement of 
fundamental rights, a probe is called for to ascertain the ORIGIN, 
AUTHENTICITY and PURPOSE  of creating/drafting for delivering it 
to Admiral Mike Mullen through James Jones” , thus, a question 
squarely  fallen  within the definition of term ‘public importance ’.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  32 
32.  Now next question for examination  is as to whether the 
matter involves the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights 
conferred by Chapter 1, Part -II of the Constitution  of Pakistan.  
33.  Ms. Asma Jahangir, learned ASC has vehemently 
contended that the petitioners have failed to show the infringement of 
any of their fundamental rights as they have prayed for conducting 
inquiry/probe into the matter, and such prayer does no t confer any 
fundamental ri ght as per Constitution.  
34.   On the other hand , learned counsel for the petitioners in 
rebuttal have stated that in the petitions they have categorically stated 
that the matter involves the sovereignty and integrity of the country, 
therefore, their right  to life is involved. Further, they contended that 
this Court has jurisdiction in case of any threat to the fundamental 
rights of the petitioners , to conduct probe to enforce fundamental 
rights envisaged by the Constitution .   
35.  On having gone through f acts of the case and the 
judgments cited by the learned counsel for the parties, following 
principles  are highlighted to exercise jurisdiction under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution: - 
(1) It is not necessary that who has approached the Court for 
the enforcem ent of fundamental rights as an information 
has to be laid before the Court, may be by an indivi dual or 
more than one person . 
(2) The case must involve decision on an issue in which the 
public -at-large is interested .  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  33 
(3) The case also relates to the enforcement/v iolation of any 
of the fundamental rights mentioned in Chapter I, Part -II 
of the Constitution, namely , Articl es 8 to 28 . 
(4) If it is permissible for the next friend to move the Court on 
behalf of a minor or a person under disability, or a person 
under detenti on or in restraint , then why not a person , 
who were to act bona fide  to activise a Court for the 
enforcement of the Fundamental Rights of a group or a 
class of persons who  are unable to seek relief.  
(5) Under  Article 184(3) , it is not a  traditional litigation which, 
of course, is of an adversary character where there is a lis 
between the two contending parties, one claiming relief 
against the other and the other resisting the claim.  
(6) The Court while dealing with a case under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution is  neither bound by the procedural 
trappings of Ar ticle 199  nor by the limitations mentioned in 
the said Article for exercise of power by the High Court . 
(7) The provisions of Article 184(3) of the Constitution are 
self-contained and they regulate the jurisdicti on of this 
Court on its own terminology.  
(8) In a given case where a question of public importance with 
reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II  is involved, it 
should directly interfere, and any rigid or  a strait -jacket 
formula prescribed for enforcement of the Rights would be 
self-defeating.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  34 
(9) In order to  ascertain  the violation of a fundamental right, 
the Court has to consider the direct and inevitable 
consequences of the action which is sought to be rem edied 
or the guarantee of which is sought to be enforced.  
36.  It is also significant to note that the Court seized with the 
inquisitorial kind of proceedings is bound to be careful while examining 
the matter placed before it, lest it should cause injustic e or prejud ice 
to any of them and shall mak e reference of the material/ documents or 
circumstances, which are not disputed between them. As in the instant 
case reference has only been made to the documents in respect 
whereof the parties before the Court ha ve no controversial attitude 
against each other and despite it , final determination about the civil 
liability and criminal culpability has to be made by the forum 
empowered to determine the extent of the involvement subject to 
following the due process as defined in Articles 4 and 10A of the 
Constitution. In short order dated 30.12.2011 except appointing a 
Commission to probe into the matter for the purpose of delineat ing 
measures with a view to ensure enforcement of fundamental rights i.e. 
Articles 9, 14 a nd 19A to ascertain the origin, authenticity and 
purpose of creating/drafting of Memo for delivering it to Chairman 
of Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mike Mullen through General (R), 
James Logon Jones, Former US National Security Advisor. No reference 
concerning involvement of any of the respondents has been made. 
Inasmuch as in the earlier order dated 1st December, 2011 after 
having observed that no sooner the issue of Memo came to limelight, 
former Ambassador of Pakistan tendered his resignation. We do no t 
want to attribute to him anything adverse on account of his CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  35 
involvement as he is entitled to due respect but we desired that he 
should fully cooperate with the Commission and during pendency of 
the cases before this Court he would not be leaving the coun try 
without prior permission of this Court. As far as later portion of leaving 
the country without permission of this Court is concerned, it shall be 
dealt with later separately, in the l ight of arguments of Ms. Asma 
Jahangir, ASC. However, in view of the fact that instant proceedings 
are inquisitor ial in nature, t he expression in contradiction to 
adversarial proceedings has been defined in following paras in Watan 
Party’s case  (PLD 2011 SC 997): - 
 “42. Adversarial proceedings are defined as proceedings 
relating to, or characteristic of an adversary or adversary 
procedures. The term ""adversarial" has been defined in the 
Concise Oxford English Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, Revised, as 
under: -. 
"1. Involving or characterized by conflict or opposition. 2. 
Law (of legal proceedings) in which the parties involved 
have the responsibilities for finding and presenting 
evidence."  
In "Advanced Law Lexicon" the term "Adversarial Process" has 
been defined as under: - 
"A process in which each party to a dispute puts forw ard 
its case to the other and before a neutral judge, soliciting 
to prove the fairness of their cases."  
In the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, 
Fourth Edition: Published by Houghton Mifflin Company, the term 
is defined as under: - 
"Rela ting to or characteristic of an adversary; involving 
antagonistic elements: "the chasm between management 
and labor in this country, an often needlessly adversarial 
…..atmosphere" (Steve Lohr)."  
In Collins English Dictionary - Complete and Unabridged, it i s 
defined as under:  
"1. Pertaining to or characterized by antagonism and 
conflict  
2. (Law) Brit having or involving opposing parties or 
interests in a legal contest US term adversary"  
The adversarial system (or adversary system) is a legal system 
where two  advocates represent their parties' positions before an 
impartial person or group of people, usually a jury or judge, who 
attempt to determine the truth of the case, whereas, the 
inquisitorial system has a judge (or a group of judges who work 
together) who se task is to investigate the case.  
 
43. The adversarial system is a two -sided structure under CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  36 
which criminal trial courts operate that pits the prosecution 
against the defence. Justice is done when the most effective and 
rightful adversary is able to conv ince the judge or jury that his 
or her. perspective on the case is the correct one.  
 
44. As against the above, the term "inquisitorial" is defined in 
"Concise Oxford English Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, Revised as 
under: - 
"1. Of or like an inquisitor.  
2. Law (of performing an examining role)"  
In "Advanced Law Lexicon" 3rd Edition, 2005, it is defined in the 
following words:  
"The system of criminal justice in most civil law nations, 
where judges serve as prosecutors and have broad powers 
of discovery."  
Webster's New World College Dictionary Copyright 2010, by 
Wiley Publishing, Inc., Cleveland,. Ohio defines it as under -- 
"1. of or like an inquisitor or inquisition  
2.  inquisitive; prying"   
Collins World English Dictionary defines it as under: - 
"1.  of or p ertaining to an inquisitor or inquisition.  
2.  exercising the office of an inquisitor.  
3.  law. 
a. pertaining to a trial with one person or group 
inquiring into the facts and acting as both 
prosecutor and judge.  
b.  pertaining to secret criminal prosecutio ns. 
4.  resembling an inquisitor in harshness or 
intrusiveness.  
5.  inquisitive; prying.  
 
45. The Free Dictionary describes it in part, as "a method of 
legal practice in which the judge endeavours to discover facts 
whilst simultaneously representing the in terests of the State in a 
trial". Under the inquisitorial model, the obligations of a Judge 
are far greater and he is no longer a passive arbiter of 
proceedings but an active member of the fact finding process.  
 
46. An inquisitorial system is a legal syste m where the court or 
a part of the court is actively involved in investigating the facts 
of the case, as opposed to an adversarial" system where the role 
of the court is primarily that of an impartial referee between the 
prosecution and the defense. Inquis itorial systems are used in 
some countries with civil legal systems as opposed to common 
law systems. Also countries using common law, including the 
United States, may use an inquisitorial system for summary 
hearings in' the case of misdemeanors such as mi nor traffic 
violations. In fact, the distinction between an adversarial and 
inquisitorial system is theoretically unrelated to the distinction 
between a civil legal and common law system. Some legal 
scholars consider the term "inquisitorial" misleading, an d prefer 
the word "non -adversarial".  
 
47. The inquisitorial system applies to questions of criminal 
procedure as opposed to questions of substantive law; that is, it CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  37 
determines how criminal enquiries and trials are conducted, not 
the kind of crimes for whi ch one can be prosecuted, nor the 
sentences that they carry. It is most readily used in some civil 
legal systems. However some jurists do not recognize this 
dichotomy and see procedure and substantive legal relationships 
as being interconnected and part of  a theory of justice as applied 
differently in various legal cultures.  
 
37.  Thus, following the principle/judicial consensus that while 
interpreting Article 184(3) of the Constitution , the interpretative 
approach should not be ceremonious observance of th e rules or usages 
of the interpretation but regard should be had to the object and 
purpose for which this Article is enacted i.e. the interpretative 
approach must receive inspiration from the triad of provisions which 
saturate and invigorate the entire Con stitution including the Objectives 
Resolution (Article 2 -A), the fundamental rights and the directive 
principles of State policy so as to achieve democracy, tolerance, equity 
and soci al justice according to Islam. The t erm as defined in article 9, 
14 and  19A of the Constitution is interpreted hereinbelow with 
reference to matter under discussion.  
38.  It is observed that the preamble which is now the 
substantive part of the Constitution by means of Article 2A, commands 
that it is the will of the people of Pakistan to establish an order 
wherein the integrity of the territories of the Federation, its 
independence and all its rights, including its sovereign rights on land, 
sea and air, shall be safeguarded; so that the people of Pakistan may 
prosper and attain  their rightful and honoured place amongst the 
nations of the World and made their full contribution towards 
international peace and progress and happiness of humanity .  These 
words of the Constitution comprehensively define the stature of an CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  38 
independent P akistan where the people of Pakistan may prosper and 
attain their rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the 
world. Undoubtedly, this provision of Constitution has overwhelming 
nexus with the fundamental rights of the citizen s of Pakistan (peop le) 
specifically guaranteed under Articles 9 and 14 of Chapter 1, Part -II of 
the Constitution.  
39.  The expression ‘life’ implied in Article 9 of the Constitution , 
is also used in the corresponding Article 21 of the Indian Constitution. 
Article 9 of the C onstitution of Pakistan prescribes that “no person 
shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law”. 
Whereas in the Indian Constitution it reads that “no person shall be 
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedur e 
established by law”. Fourteenth Amendment of the American 
Constitution provides, “no State shall deprive any person of life, 
liberty, or property without due process of law”. In Shehla Zia’s case  
(ibid), it is held that the word  “Life” used in  Article 9 of the 
Constitution is very significant as it covers all facets  of human 
existence. The word “life” has not been defined in the Constitution but 
it does not mean nor can it be restricted only to the vegetative or 
animal life or mere existence from concepti on to death. Life includes 
all such amenities and facilities which a person born in a free country 
is entitled to enjoy with dignity, legally and constitutionally. In the 
case of Munn v. Illinois  (100 U.S. 1) Field, J., in his dissenting opinion 
has held t hat by the term "life," as here used, something more is 
meant than mere animal existence. The inhibition against its 
deprivation extends to all those limbs and faculties by which life is 
enjoyed. The provision equally prohibits the mutilation of the body b y CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  39 
the amputation of an arm or leg, or the putting out of an eye, or the 
destruction of any other organ of the body through which the soul 
communicates with the outer world. The deprivation not only of life, 
but of whatever God has given to everyone with li fe for its growth and 
enjoyment, is prohibited by the provision in question if its efficacy be 
not frittered away by judicial decision . The Indian Supreme Court in 
Francis Coralie Mullin v.  The Administrator  (AIR 1981 SC 746) has held 
that any act which da mages or injures or interferes with the use of any 
limb or faculty of a person either permanently or even temporarily, 
would be within the inhibition of Article 21 . Fundamental right to life 
which is most precious human right and which forms the ark of all  
other rights must therefore be interpreted in a broad and expansive 
spirit so as to invest it with significance and validity endure for years 
to come and hence the dignity of individual and the worth of human 
person . It was further observed as under: -  
"It is the fundamental right of ever yone in this country ... to live 
with human dignity  free from exploitation. This right to live 
with human dignity enshrined in A. 21 derives its life breath from 
the Directive Principles of State Policy and particularly cl auses 
(e) and (f) of A. 39, A. 41 and A. 42 and at least, therefore it 
must include protection of the health and strength of the 
workers men and women, and of the tender age of children 
against abuse, opportunities an facilities for children to develop 
in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity , 
educational facilities , just and humane conditions of work and 
maternity  relief. These are the minimum requirements which 
must exist in order to enable a person to live with human dignity 
and no St ate  has the right to take any action which will deprive 
a person of the enjoyment of these basic essentials." [emphasis 
supplied]  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  40 
In this case , the term “life” has been defined with an expansive spirit, 
according to which every limb or faculty , with which  life is enjoyed is 
protected by Article 21 and a  fortiori , which would include the faculties 
of making and feeling. The expression “life” in this Article  does not 
connote  mere animal existence or continuing drudgery through life. It 
means something much m ore tha n just physical survival. It has a 
much wider meaning which includes right to live lihood, better standard 
of living, hygienic conditions in the work place and leisure.  It would be 
advantageous to reproduce relevant extracts from the case of Bandhua 
Murti Morcha v. Union of India  [1984 (3) SCC 161]: - 
“It is the fundamental right of everyone in this Country, assured 
under the interpretation given to Arty. 21 by this court in 
Farancis Mullin's case (1981) 1 SCC 608 to live with human 
dignity , free from exploitation . This right to live with human 
dignity enshrined in Art.21 derives its life breath from the 
Directive principles of State Policy and Particularly cls. (e) and 
(f) of Art. 39 and Arts. 41 and 42 and at the least, therefore, it 
must include prot ection of the health and strength of the 
workers, men and women, and of the tender age of children 
against abuse, opportunities an facilities for children to develop 
in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity, 
educational facilities , just  as human conditions of work an d 
maternity relief. These are the minimum requirements which 
must exist in order to enable a person to live with human 
dignity  and no state neither the central Government has the 
right to take any action which will deprive a person of the 
enjoyment of these basic essentials.”  [emphasis supplied]  
Similarly, in the case of Sunil Batra v. Delhi Administration  (AIR 1978 
SC 1675) t he word “life” has been defined as  “every act which offends 
against or impairs human dignity  would con stitute deprivation 
protanto of this right to live and it would have to be in accordance with CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  41 
reasonable, fair and just procedure established by law which stands 
test of other fundamental rights.  In the case of Bira Kishore Naik v. 
Coal India Ltd . (AIR 198 6 SC 2123) it has been held that Article 21 of 
the Constitution guarantees right to life, which right would be 
meaningless unless the citizen has a right to live with dignity. In the 
case of Common Cause v. Union of India  (AIR 1999 SC 2979) it has 
been hel d that the rights also include the right to live with human 
dignity and all that goes along with. Same view was taken in the case s 
of Bandhua Mukti Mor cha v. Union of India  (AIR 1984 SC 802) = 
[(1984)2SCR 67]  and N. P. S. NPC Teachers' Association v. Union  of 
India (AIR 1993 SC 369) . 
40.  In the case of Shehla Zia (ibid) citizen having 
apprehension against construction of a grid station in residential area 
sent a letter to the Supreme Court for consideration as human rights 
case raising two questions; namel y, whether any Government agency 
has a right to endanger the life of citizens by its actions without the 
latter’s consent; and secondly, whether zoning laws vest rights in 
citizens which cannot be withdrawn or altered without the citizen’s 
consent. The Cou rt declared the petition to be maintainable on the 
ground that if there are threats  of serious damage, effective 
measures should be taken to control it and it should not be postponed 
merely on the ground that scientific research and studies are uncertain 
and not conclusive. The word ‘life’ constitutionally is so wide that the 
danger and encroachment complaint would impinge fundamental right 
of a citizen.  In the case of  Bank of Punja b v. Haris Steel Industries 
(PLD 2010 SC 1109),  the m atter was related to one of the gravest 
financial scams in the banking history of Pakistan as a result of which CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  42 
the Bank stood cheated of an enormous amount of around eleven 
billion rupees which amount of money in fact belonged to around one 
million innocent depositors includi ng depositors of small amounts of 
money whose life savings and property had come under serious 
threat , therefore, it was held that the facts cast  an obligation on the 
Supreme Court to move in to protect and defend the right of property 
of such a large sect ion of the population i.e. about one million 
depositors and customers of the Bank which right of property stood 
guaranteed to them by Art.24 and Art.9 of the Constitution and it was 
in view of the facts and circumstances that the Bank had felt 
compelled to  approach Supreme Court under Art. 184(3) of the 
Constitution read with O.XXXIII, R. 6 of the Supreme Court Rules, 
1980 through Constitutional petition . It was further held that  Supre me 
Court was possessed of power  to make any order of the nature 
mentioned  in Art.199 of the Constitution, if in its opinion, a question of 
public importance relating to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights was involved in the matter . In the case of D. A. V. 
College, Bhatinda v. The State of Punjab  [AIR 1971 SC 1731]   the 
Indian Supreme Court has held that w hether or not ultimately any 
fundamental right in fact is threatened or violated so long as a prima 
facie case of such a threat or violation  is made out a petition 
under Art. 32 must be entertained. So long as the petitioner makes 
out a prima facie case that his fundamental rights are affected or 
threatened he cannot be prevented from challenging that the law 
complained of, which affects or invades those rights, is invalid because 
of want of legislative competence. In the case of Shri Ram Krishna 
Dalmia v. Shri Justice S. R. Tendolkar  (AIR 1958 SC 538)  it has been 
held that q uite conceivably the conduct of an individual person or CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  43 
company or a group of individual persons or companies may assume 
such a dangerous propor tion and may so prejudicially affect or 
threaten to affect the public well -being as to make such conduct a 
definite matter of public importance urgently calling for a full inquiry.  
41.  The term ‘life with dignity’, defined by the Superior Courts, 
pointed out hereinabove, prima facie  suggests that a citizen who is 
constitutionally under the obligation to be loyal to State, the 
Constitution and the law, whatever his status may be, also remains 
under the command of the Constitution to have an honoured place 
amongst the nations of the world. The  attempt/act of threatening to 
the dignity of the people, collectively or individually, concerning the 
independence, sovereignty and security of their country, prima facie , 
raises a serious question tagged/linked with th eir fundamental rights. 
The existence of Memo dated 10th May, 2011 may have effects of not 
only compromising national sovereignty but also its dignity . The loyal 
citizens have shown great concern, to live in the comity of nations with 
dignity and honour, a s according to expanded meanings of ‘life’, the 
citizen have a right to ask the State to provide safety to their lives 
from internal as well as external threats. Undoubtedly this nation ha d 
achieved independence at the cost of great sacrifices. Inasmuch as , at 
present security forces are fighting against the unscrupulous persons 
involved in terrorism, not in a particular part but throughout the 
country, without any distinction.  
42.  Learned counsel for respondent No.4 emphasized that 
there must be a seriou s question involving enforcement of the 
fundamental rights. Prima facie, what could be more threat to the life 
of citizens who are loyal to this c ountry and the Constitution w here on CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  44 
the basis of activities, which resulted in originating Memo dated 10th 
May, 2011 . Its existence, as discussed above, has been established . 
Inasmuch as, the Federation itself, is of the opinion that the matter 
requires to be probed into and the initiative apparently has been taken 
in view of the letter dated 16th November, 2011,  copy of which has 
been produced by lear ned counsel for respondent No.4, in which 
besides mentioning other facts he himself has offered for a probe into 
the issue of the Memo, therefore, in such like cases when cogent, 
concurrent  and undisputed facts have come on record about the 
existence of the Memo dated 10th May, 2011 and contents whereof 
have threatened the independence, sovereignty and security of the 
country, the loyal citizens are, prima  facie, justified to raise a voice 
about the de nial of their  fundamental rights under Articles 9, 14 and 
19A of the Constitution, which are tagged with the question of public 
importance , thus, call for their enforcement . Learned counsel, 
however, stated that for enforcement of the “Fundamental rights to 
have access to  information , under Article 19A of the Constitution ”, 
alternate remedy is available under the Freedom of Information 
Ordinance, 2002 (Promulgated on 26th October, 2002). On having 
gone through the scheme of the Ordinance, we are not inclined to 
agree with her, as in the instant case , enforcement of fundamental 
rights in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution has been prayed 
for.  
43.  Subject to all just exceptions , Mansoor Ijaz has shared  
with DG ISI evidence to prove that he had  written Memo , which the 
latter  brought into the notice of Chief of Army Staff, so on and so 
forth. But s urprisingly, in the reply submitted by Mr. Hussain Haqqani, CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  45 
he has not mentioned about the briefing  given to the President in the 
presence of Chief of Army Staff and D.G. IS I on 22nd November, 2011 
in Prime Minister House, nor has he stated about the resignation. As 
far as D.G. ISI is concerned, he has furnished complete 
detail /description of his meeting held by him in London with 
respondent Mansoor Ijaz. On receipt of reply from Chief of Army Staff 
and D.G., ISI, copies of the same were handed over to all the parties 
for re -joinders, if any, by means of order dated 15.12.2011. No reply 
contradicting statement of both the respondents was filed, except vide 
CMA 5539/2011 Ms. As ma Jahangir  filed affidavit, received from James 
Logan Jones, which he has not sent though Embassy of US nor the 
Government or to the Registrar of this Court. This affidavit , however , 
has been contradicted by Mansoor Ijaz, copies of which have  also been 
supplied to all  concerned . Interestingly, the Federation despite  
knowing all these facts had not taken position in respect of events 
which have been pointed in the concise statement of the Chief of Army 
Staff and D.G. ISI. For sake of arguments and to be on  safe side at the 
moment without discussing or taking into consideration the statement 
of Mansoor Ijaz  (respondent No.4)  and J ames Jones, prima  facie it is 
established that a Memo was drafted and prepared, which was sent to 
Mike Mullen, who initially denie d its existence but later he admitted 
that he received such  a Memo . Reference to the statement has been 
made in Constitution Petition No.79/2011 (Mohammad Nawaz Sh arif v. 
Federation of Pakistan).  These assertions are important to, prima 
facie, draw an infe rence that the memo episode has an impact on 
national security. The contents of memo, if believed to be true, prima -
facie, are tantamount to compromis ing the security, sovereignty and CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  46 
independence of the country. It is not desirable to discuss its contents , 
lest it should cause prejudice to either parties.  
44.  In all these petitions specifically amongst the respondents, 
no one has been sought to be he ld liable to take brunt of the civil 
liability or criminal culpability, except praying to probe into the ma tter 
and to identify those who are responsible in issuance of the derogatory 
Memo , though they have alleged threat to life, security, dignity as well 
as denial of fundamental right to have complete information about the 
issue wherein allegedly independence , sovereignty and security of the 
country i s likely to be compromised. Seeking no relief against any of 
the respondents suggests that in accordance with the provisions of 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution , this Court is empowered to make a 
declaratory ord er to enforce any of the fundamental rights conferred 
by Chapter -I, Part II. Such kind of litigation falls within the category of 
inquisitorial proceedings and not adversarial, which is generally 
undertaken by t he litigants against each other  for determina tion of 
their respective rights in the common  law countr ies. 
45.  Ms. Asma Jahangir , learned ASC also has not resisted the 
question of probe into the issue of Memo dated 10th May, 2011 and 
she made a categorical statement that as it is not a fundamental ri ght 
of the petitioners to insist for inquiry according to their own choice , 
thus, subject to following the principle of due process of law , a probe , 
whether  conducted by a Commission appointed by the Federal 
Government under Commission s of Inquiry Act, 195 6 or by the 
Parliamentary Committee to whom the job is assigned by the Prime 
Minister o f Pakistan , or by means of the departmental inquiry against CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  47 
Mr. Husain  Haqqani  can be held . However, she opposed the probe by a 
body or the Commission constituted by thi s Court.  
46.  Learned Attorney General stated that the Parliamentary 
Committee on the National Security on the request of one of the 
petitioners , namely , Senator Ishaq Dar vide letter dated 21st 
November, 2011 addressed to the Chairman of the Committee 
constituted under a  Joint Resolution of both the Houses has already 
commenced probe into the matter and its first meeting has been held 
on 25th November, 2011, therefore, let the Committee accomplish  its 
assignment . As such , all the petitions being pre -matur e, may be 
dismissed. As far as this aspect of the case is concerned, on the first 
day of hearing i.e. 1st December, 2011, the learned Attorney General 
for Pakistan  had advanced the same arguments and without any 
reservation we had observed: - 
“We are told t hat the Prime Minister of Pakistan has also 
announced that the Parliamentary Committee on National 
Security will probe into the matter. We do not know the 
mandate of the Committee. However, we have been 
informed that as far as this Committee is concerned, it has 
no constitutional backing, i.e. it has not been constituted 
under any provision of the Constitution. Be that as it may, 
if any incriminating evidence is collected by the Committee 
both for civil and criminal action by probing into the 
matter, we wou ld welcome the same. During the pendency 
of the proceedings, we would appreciate if the outcome of 
the proposed inquiry by the Committee is shared with us, 
if possible.”  
As in the instant case in view of the facts noted hereinabove, 
contain ed in the letter  dated 16th November, 2011 addressed by the CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  48 
former Ambassa dor Hu sain Haqqani to the President of Pakistan, the 
letter dated 28th November, 2011 and the request made in 
Constitution Petitions No.77 and 78/2011 as well as by other 
petitioners during course o f the arguments including the learned 
Attorney General as well as the counsel for respondent No.4 Mr. 
Husain  Haqqani all are one on the point that probe should be 
conducted in the matter. This fact itself indicates the importance of the 
issue, otherwise re spondent No.4 and the Prime Minister in the letter 
dated 28th November, 2011 would have not referred the matter for 
probe by the Parliamentary Committee on National Security.  
47.  The mandate of the Parliamentary Committee as conferred 
by the Consensus Re solution passed at the conclusion of the Joint 
Sitting of Parliament (8th to 22nd October, 2008) is given below: - 
“This in -camera joint session of Parliament has noted with great 
concern that extremism, militancy and terrorism in all forms and 
manifestatio ns pose a grave danger to the stability and integrity of the 
nation -state. It was recalled that in the past the dictatorial regimes 
pursued policies aimed at perpetuating their own power at the cost of 
national interest. This House, having considered the i ssue thoroughly 
and at great length is of the view that in terms of framing laws, 
building institutions; protecting our citizens from violence, eradication 
of terror at its roots, re -building our economy and developing 
opportunities for the disadvantaged, we all commit to the following: - 
1. That we need an urgent review of our national security 
strategy and revisit the methodology of combating terrorism 
in order to restore peace and stability to Pakistan and the 
region through an independent foreign policy.  
2. The challenge of militancy and extremism must be met 
through developing a consensus and dialogue with all 
genuine stakeholders.  
3. The nation stands united to combat this growing menace, 
with a strong public message condemning all forms and 
manifestations of te rrorism, including the spread of sectarian 
hatred and violence, with a firm resolve to combat it and to 
address its root causes.  
4. That Pakistan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity shall be 
safeguarded. The nation stands united against any incursions 
and invasions of the homeland, and calls upon the 
government to deal with it effectively.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  49 
5. That Pakistan’s territory shall not be used for any kind of 
attacks on other countries and all foreign fighters, if found, 
shall be expelled from our soil.  
6. That dialogue  must now be the highest priority, as a principal 
instrument of conflict management and resolution. Dialogue 
will be encouraged with all those elements willing to abide by 
the Constitution of Pakistan and rule of law.  
7. That the development of troubled zone s, particularly the 
tribal areas, and NWFP (Pukhtoonkhwa), must also be 
pursued through all possible ways and legitimate means to 
create genuine stakeholders in peace. New economic 
opportunities shall be created in order to bring the less 
privileged areas at par with the rest of Pakistan.  
8. That a political dialogue with the people of Balochistan, the 
redressal of grievances and redistribution of resources shall 
be enhanced and accelerated.  
9. That the state shall maintain the rule of law, and that when it 
has t o intervene to protect the lives of its citizens, caution 
must be exercised to avoid casualties of non -combatants in 
conflict zones.  
10. That the federation must be strengthened through the 
process of democratic pluralism, social justice, religious 
values and tolerance, and equitable resource sharing 
between the provinces as enshrined in the Constitution of 
1973.  
11. That the state shall establish its writ in the troubled zones, 
and confidence building mechanisms by using customary and 
local communities (jirga) and  that the military will be 
replaced as early as possible by civilian law enforcement 
agencies with enhanced capacity and a sustainable political 
system achieved through a consultative process.  
12. That Pakistan’s strategic interests be protected by developing 
stakes in regional peace and trade, both on the western and 
eastern borders.  
13. That mechanisms for internal security be institutionalized by; 
paying compensation for victims of violence; and rehabilitate 
those displaced from their homes as soon as possible; that 
spill-over effects of terrorism be contained throughout the 
country and that public consensus be built against terrorism 
through media and religious participation.  
14. That a Special Committee of Parliament be constituted to 
periodically review, provide g uidelines and monitor the 
implementation of the principles framed and roadmap given 
in this Resolution. This House authorizes the Speaker to 
constitute the said Committee in consultation with the 
parliamentary leaders of both Houses. The Committee will 
frame its own rules upon meeting. ”  
 CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  50 
48.  Senator Ishaq Dar explained that despite filing  of 
application before the Parliamentary Committee no action was 
initiated, therefore, he ha d to file a petition before this Court on 
23.11.2011 as according to his conte ntion the  first meeting of the 
Committee was convened  after issuance of letter dated 28th 
November, 2011 , the Principal Secretary to Prime Minister,  whereby 
the matter was referred to Parliamentary Committee on National 
Security  for probe . Reference to this letter has already been made in 
the short order dated 30.12.2011. He however, further stated that in 
pursuance of consensus resolution passed at the conclusion of in -
camera Joint Sitting of Parliament (8th to 22nd October, 2008) a 
Committee was constitut ed. As per contents of the resolution , the joint 
session of Parliament noted with great concern that extremism, 
militancy and terrorism in all forms and manifestations pose d a grave 
danger to the stabil ity and integrity of the nation /state. It may be 
recalled that in the past, the dictatorial regimes pursued policies  aimed 
at perpetuating their own rule at the cost of national interest, 
therefore, the Committee would not be empowered for conducting 
probe in this matter.  
49.  Following the above consensus resolution dated 22nd 
October, 2008 the rules of procedure for the Parliamentary Comm ittee 
on National Security were framed on 17th November, 2008. It s preface 
categorically stated that the Parliamentary Committee on National 
Security was constituted with sp ecific terms of reference to 
periodically review, provide guidelines and monitor the 
implementation of the principles framed and roadmap given in 
the Resolution . Essentially, these rules and resolution are self CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  51 
explanatory, which  calls for no interpretatio n by this Court with 
reference to  undertak ing a  probe into the issue of Memo dated 10th 
May, 2011.  Despite  serious issues raised qua its jurisdiction to probe  
into the orig in of Memo dated 10th May, 2011,  in the order dated 1st 
December, 2011 and 30th Dece mber, 2011, it was observed that if 
evidence was collected, it may be shared with this Court , if possible,  
and we again reiterate the same in the interest of country and the 
nation.    
50.  Apprehension of the learned counsel about non -observ ance 
of the principle  of due process by the commission set up by the Court , 
as it has been argued by her , is unfounded. I nstant proceedings are 
inquisitorial in its nature and the Commission to whom job of probing 
into the matter is entrusted, shall be b ound to discharg e its function to 
draw its proceedings following the judicial norms, i.e. fair opportunity 
of hearing, right to participate in the proceedings with a view to assist 
the Commission for reaching at a correct  conclusion. Learned counsel 
in support of her cont ention relied upon the judgment in the case  
of Aftab Shaban Mirani  v. President of Pakistan (1998 SCMR 1863), 
relevant para wherefrom is reproduced hereinbelow: -  
12. ……….. It may be observed that by now it is a well  
settled proposition that a person can not be condemned 
without providing him a  fair opportunity to meet rte 
allegation. In this regard reference may be made to the case 
of Government of Balochistan through Additional Chief 
Secretary v Azizullah Memmon and 16 others (PLD 1993 SC 
341), wherein after referring certain case law the following 
conclusion was recorded by this Court as to the right of 
access to Courts and justice: --  
"12.  Another aspect …………… This aspect of the case 
was considered in Sharaf Faridi v Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (PLD 1989 Karachi 404) when after referring to 
Syed Abul A'la Maudoodi's case (PLD 1964 SC 673 at CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  52 
710) and Ms. 13enazir Bhutio s ease (PLD 1989 SC 
416) observed as follows: - 
'The right of 'access to justice to all' is a well -recognised 
inviolable right enshrin ed in Article 9 of the 
Constitution. This right is equally found in the doctrine 
of 'due process of law'. The right of access to justice 
includes the right to be treated according to law, the 
right to have a fair and proper trial and a right to have 
an imp artial Court or Tribunal. This conclusion finds 
support from the observation of Willoughby in 
Constitution of United States, Second Edition, Vo1.II at 
page 1709 where the term 'due process of law' has 
been summarised as follows: -- 
(1)  He shall have. due n otice of proceedings which 
affect his rights.  
(2)  He shall be given reasonable opportunity to 
defend.  
(3)  That the Tribunal or Court before which his rights 
are adjudicated is so constituted as to give 
reasonable assurance of his honesty and 
impartiality , and 
   (4)  That it is a Court of competent jurisdiction. "  
13.  The above extract indicates what are the basic 
requirements of the doctrine "due process of law", which is 
enshrined inter alia in Article 4 of our Constitution. It is 
intrinsically linked with the right to have access to justice, which 
this Court has held inter alia in the above report as a 
fundamental right. This right inter alia includes the right to have 
a fair and proper trial and a right to have an impartial Court or 
Tribunal. A person  cannot be said to have been given a fair and 
proper trial unless he is provided a reasonable opportunity to 
defend the allegation made against him. In the instant case the 
Returning Officer was seized of the question, whether 
respondent No.1 was qualified  to be a candidate for the office of 
the President. His decision that respondent No.1 was not 
qualified to be elected as a member of the Parliament would 
have entailed his non -seating as a member of the Senate, which 
was a question of the nature, which cou ld not have been 
adjudicated upon in a summary inquiry under Rule 5(3)(a) of the 
rules, particularly when the correctness of the contents of the 
interview was not admitted by respondent No.1.  
 
She also relied upon the case of Muhammad Nadeem Arif 
 v. Inspe ctor-General of Police, Punjab, Lahore   (2011 SCMR 408),  
wherein it has been observed that the right of “access to justice to all ” CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  53 
is a well recognized inviolable right enshrined in Article 9 of the 
Constitution and is eq ually found in the doctrine of “ due process of 
law”. It includes the right to be treated according to law, the right to 
have a fair and proper trial and a right to have an impartial court or 
tribunal .  
51.  The crux of the above judgments persuades us to hold that 
right of due process, inter alia , envisages  the right to have a fair and 
proper  trial and right to have impartial court or tribunal. The 
phrase/expression in the principle highlighted therefrom are referable 
to the basic judicial function, which necessarily are known to judicial 
minded persons. For the safe administration of justice we may observe 
that the principle discussed in both the judgments can only be adhered 
to strictly by the forums manned by the persons responsible to deliver 
judicial findings subject to following princi ple of natural justice . 
52.   It was strenuously argued by Ms. Asma Jahangir  that the 
question of probe into origin, authenticity and purpose  of 
creating/drafting of Memo is a political question, therefore, 
Parliamentary Committee on the National Security  is a competent 
forum to look into this issue. This aspect of the case has also enga ged 
our attention during the hearing. In this context , Mr. Rash id A. Ra zvi, 
learned Sr. ASC contended that issue of probe into the Memo is  a 
question, which is justiciable only by the Judicial forums, being a 
question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any 
of the fundamental rights conferred by Chapter 1, Part -II of the 
Constitution, as it has been highlighted hereinabove.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  54 
53.  Arguments so raised in this behalf give rise to the 
proposition namely, as to whether question of ascertainment of the 
origin, authenticity and the purpose of creating/drafting the Memo 
dated 10th May, 2011 is justiciable or non -justiciable by the  Court in 
exercise of its power  of judicial review, and if jurisdiction is not vested 
in the judicial forum then essentially the matter has to be decided by a 
forum other than it .  
54.  Thus, s o far as the question of justiciability or non -
justiciability of  the issue is concerned, it wou ld provide a test for the 
purpose of exercising the jurisdiction or otherwise ?  
55.  The h istory of the judiciary  in our country  indicates that in 
the past, the c ourt had been approached from time to time for 
granting relief in which political issues are i nvolved, either to express 
its opinion under Article 186 or to exercise jurisdiction or under Article 
184(1) or 184 (3) of the Constitution. Reference in this behalf may be 
made to the cases of Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
1988 SC 416) and  Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 1993 SC 473), where dissolution of the Assemblies were 
challenged before the Court notwithstanding the fact that such issues 
may give rise to a political question. Similarly, at times, references 
have be en made for the purpose of getting permission to make 
expenditure out of consolidated fund  in absence of Parliament . 
Inasmuch as, a Reference was sent to this Court to adjudicate upon 
purely political matter regarding formal recognition of Bangladesh. The 
Court considered the issue and expressed its opinion that there was no 
legal bar in considering or adopting such resolution. Similarly, in the 
case of Benazir Bhutto’s case (PLD 1988 SC 416), the amendments in CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  55 
the Political Parties Act, 1962 regarding comp ulsory registration of 
political parties were challenged. The Court declared certain provisions 
of the law to be void being inconsistent with the fundamental rights.  
56.  At this junct ure, reference may be made to the case of 
Baker v . Carr [369 U.S. 186 ( 1962)], wherein the complainant sought 
a declaration that Tennessee Apportionment Act, 1901 was 
unconstitutional followed by the relief of injunction restraining the 
defendants from conducting any further election under the Act. It was 
their case that Act violated the Fourteenth Amendment i n its disregard 
of the slander , thereby affecting a gross disproportion of the 
population to vote and place the complainant  in a position 
constitutionally unjustifiable in equity. The District Court, presided 
over by three Judges, dismissed the action on the ground that it lack ed 
jurisdiction of the subject matter and the complainant failed to state 
that the claim was justiciable and the relief could be granted. On 
appeal , the Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the Dis trict Court 
and remanded the case. Brennan J. , expressing the view of six 
members of the Court, held that the D istrict Court possesse d 
jurisdiction over the subject matter; that a justiciable cause of action 
was stated upon which plaintiff would be entitle d to appropriate relief 
and that the plaintiff had standing to challenge the Tennessee 
Apportionment Act. Two Hon’ble Judges Douglas and Clark con curred 
with the Brennan J. in separate opinion stating that in their view a 
case for relief was established if  the allegations in the complaint could 
be sustained. Stewart J. also concurred in separate opinion and made 
it clear that in his view the merits of the case were not before the 
Supreme Court. However, Frankfurter J. , with the concurrence of CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  56 
Harlan J. diss ented on the ground that case involved the class of 
political controversy, which by the nature of its subject is unfi t for 
federal judicial action, w hereas Whittaker J. did not participate. This 
case in fact went down in history  as one of the most importan t 
decisions ever. The matter involved a delineation of the extent of the 
judicial review, while dealing with whether ‘equal protection of law’ 
was violated by the borders of a district not being redrawn 
appropriately to adjust for population movement. The issue placed 
before the Court was whether it could , in fact , investigate and 
adjudicate on such issues, giving the existence of a strict separation of 
powers between the legislation and the judiciary.  Mr. Rafiq Rajwana 
also cited the case of Powell v. McCo rmack [395 US 486 (1969)] , 
which has in fact proceeded as the principle laid down in Baker’s case.  
57.  It is to be noted that precisely question raised in the said 
petition before the Supreme Court was whether appellants’ allegations 
of impairment of the ir votes by the 1901 Apportionment Statute will 
ultimately, entitle them to any relief, in order to hold that they have 
standing to seek it. If such impairment did  produce a legally 
cognizable injury, they would be among those who had  sustained it. 
They were asserting “a plain, direct and adequate interest in 
maintaining the effectiveness of their votes,” not merely a claim of 
“the right, possessed by every citizen, to require that the Government 
be administered according to law…”. The Supreme Court, after having 
taken into consideration the principles which were highlighted by the 
learned counsel granted relief to the appellant , inter alia , observing 
that the challenge to an apportionment present ed no non -justiciable 
“political question”. It was further hel d that:  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  57 
(1) The claim pleaded here neither rests upon nor 
implicates the Guaranty Clause and that its 
justiciability is therefore, not foreclosed by our 
decisions of cases involving that clause. The District 
Court misinterpreted Cole -grove v Green and other 
decisions of this Court on which it relied. Appellants’ 
claim that they are being denied equal protection is 
justiciable and if discrimination is sufficiently shown, 
the right to relief under the equal protection clause is 
not diminished by the fact that the  discrimination 
relates to political rights.  
(2) That to show why reject the argument based on the 
Guaranty Claus, we must examine the authorities 
under it. But because there appears to be some 
uncertainty as to why those cases did presently 
political question s, and specifically as to whether this 
apportionment case is like those cases, we deem it 
necessary first to consider the contours of the 
“political question” doctrine.  
(2) That re -view reveals that in the Guaranty Clause 
cases and in the other “political que stion” cases, it is 
the relationship between the judiciary and the 
coordinate branches of the Federal Government, and 
not the federal judiciary’s relationship to the States, 
which gives rise to the “political question.”  
(3) In determination whether a question falls within[the 
political question] category, the appropriateness 
under our system of government of attributing 
finality to the action of the political departments and CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  58 
also the lack of satisfactory criteria for a judicial 
determination are dominant consid erations.”  
(4) Non-justiciability of a political question is primarily a 
function of the separation of powers. Much confusion 
results from the capacity of the “political question” 
label to obscure the need for case by case inquiry. 
Deciding whether a matter ha s in any measure been 
committed by the Constitution to another branch of 
government, or whether the action of that branch 
exceeds whatever authority has been committed, is 
itself a delicate exercise in constitutional 
interpretation, and is a responsibility  of this Court as 
ultimate interpreter of the Constitution.  
(5) To demonstrate this requires no less than to analyze 
representative cases and to infer from them the 
analytical threads that make up the political question 
doctrine.  
 
In the Corpus Juris S ecundum Volume 16, it has been stated that: -  
"It is not easy to define the phrase 'political question', nor 
to determine what matters fall within its scope. It is 
frequently used to designate all  questions that lie outside 
the scope of the judicial power. More ' properly, however, it 
means those questions which, under the Constitution, are 
to be decided by the people in their sovereign capacity, or 
to regard to which full discretionary, authority has been  
delegated to the legislative or executive branch of the 
Government. A political question encompasses more than 
a question about politics, but the mere fact that litigation 
seeks protection of a political rights, might have political 
consequences does not mean it presents a political 
question."  
It was further ob served :  
"The doctrine is based on Constitutional provisions relating 
to the distribution of powers among the branches of 
Government, and it is as a function of the separation of 
powers that political questions are, not' determinable by 
the judiciary . th us, the limitations on judicial review  
imposed by the political question doctrine apply only when 
the Court is M faced with a challenge to action by a 
coordinate branch of the Government, and not where the 
issue involved falls within the traditional role accorded to 
Courts to interpret the law or the Constitution. "  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  59 
In Ballentines Law Dictionary "political question" means: - 
"A question, the determination of which is a prerogative of the 
legislative or executive branch of the Government, so as not to 
be  ap propriate for judicial inquiry or adjudication."  
58.  This Court has always emphasize d that it has no concern 
with powers of other organs of the State . In the case of Muhammad 
Nawaz Sharif vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1993 SC 47 3) Shafi -ur-
Rahman J. obs erved that it was not easy to draw a line of demarcation 
between a political and a non-political question. This has to be 
determined by the Court on the facts of each case. The Courts’ 
function is to enforce, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution. 
Any action taken, act done or policy framed, which followed the 
provisions of the Constitution are not permissible under the 
Constitution or law. The Court irrespective of the fact that it is a 
political question must exercise power of judicial review. Abu se, excess 
or non -observance of the provisions of the Constitution has to be 
checked by the Court unless its jurisdiction is barred by the 
Constitution or law. In the case of Mahmood Khan Achakzai v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1997 SC 526) a larger Bench  held that a 
political question is one, which, because of its political sensitivity, is 
not fit for adjudication by the Court or the Constitution requires it to 
be determined finally by any other organ of the State. This ‘political 
question doctrine’ is bas ed on the respect for the Constitutional 
provisions relating to separation of power s among the organs of the 
State. But where in a case the Court has jurisdiction to exercise power 
of judicial review, the fact that it involves political question, cannot 
compel the Court to refuse its determination.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  60 
59.  In view of the above discussion it is held that this Court 
enjoys jurisdiction to proceed in all those matters which are justiciable. 
However, if there is an issue, which is alleged to be non-justiciable it  
would be the duty of the Court to examine each case in view of its 
facts and circumstances, and then to come to the conclusion whether 
it is non -justiciable or otherwise.  
60.   The arguments raised before this Court pose two 
questions; firstly, to conduc t probe to ascertain the origin, authenticity 
and effect of Memo, for the purpose of enforcement of Fundamental 
Rights; and secondly, consequent ial effect of such probe, which would  
determine civil and criminal liability against the person(s) , who were 
responsible for it . In view of the test laid down hereinabove, such 
questions, in exercise of power of judicial review are justiciable by this 
Court  treating it to be proceedings of criminal nature as in exercise of 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, Court i s seized with the ca se which 
falls in category of inquisitorial nature .  
61.  Learned counsel also suggested for probe through a 
Commission to be constituted under the Pakistan Commission of 
Inquiry Act, 1956. It is to be noted that the Federal Government is 
empowered to constitute an Inquiry Commission but the same has not 
been done because the matter has been referred to Parliamentary 
Committee, reference of which has been made hereinabove. She also 
pointed out that the petitioner who is in service of Pak istan can be 
subjected to disciplinary proceedings as he has tendered resignation 
pursuant to the directions of the Prime Minister, therefore, it would be 
for the department to initiate any proceeding if permissible under the 
law, which so far have not bee n commenced, as such, this argument CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  61 
has no substance  to be considered at this stage.  Therefore, t he points 
so raised need no e laborate discussion. In these circumstances , for the 
foregoing reasons, we are of the considered opinion that issue of probe 
to as certain the origin, authenticity and purpose  of 
creating/drafting of the Memo is justiciable.   
 
62.  As far as jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to initiate 
proceedings in the cases with the object of enforce ment of 
fundamental rights guaranteed under Chap ter 1 Part II of the 
Constitution, relating to a matter of public importance is concerned, 
the Court enjoys ample powers to constitute Commission. Same is the 
position in the neighbouring country.   
63.  The Supreme Court of India , under Articles 32 and 131  of 
the Indian Constitution, exercises in variably  such powers, whereas, 
under Article 184(3) , more power/jurisdiction is conferred upon  the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan  as compar ed to Indian Constitution  for 
enforcement of fundamental rights, relating to the question of public 
importance. Before citing any judgment from our own jurisdiction, 
reference to the case of Vineet Narain v. Union of India  (AIR 1998 SC 
889) may be made, which is commonly known as ‘Jan Havala case’. In 
this case , jurisdiction of the Sup reme Court was invoked under Article 
32 of the Constitution in the public interest for the enforcement of rule 
of law. In the said case, an alleged terrorist was arrested in Delhi. 
During the raids conducted by the Central Bureau of Investigation 
(CBI), In dian and foreign currency as well as two diaries and two note 
books were seize d, containing the details of accounts of vast payments 
made to some persons, allegedly high ranking politicians in power and CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  62 
out of power, and of high ranking bureaucrats. The wr it petitions were 
filed in the public interest under Article 32 of the Constitution of the 
India, as nothing was being done in the matter of investigation. The 
gist of the allegations in the writ petitions was that Government 
agencies like the CBI and the revenue authorities had failed to perform 
their duties and legal obligations inasmuch as they had failed to 
investigate matters arising out of the seizure of the "Jan diaries"; that 
the apprehension of terrorists had led to the discovery of financial 
suppo rt to them by clandestine and illegal means using tainted funds 
obtained through `havala' transactions; that this had also disclosed a 
nexus between politicians, bureaucrats and criminals, who were 
recipients of money from unlawful sources, given for unlaw ful 
consideration ; that the CBI and other Government agencies had failed 
to investigate the matter, take it to its logical conclusion and prosecute 
all persons who were found to have committed the offence; that this 
was done with a view to protect the pers ons involved, who were very 
influential and powerful; that the matter disclosed a nexus between 
crime and corruption at high levels  in public life and it posed a serious 
threat to the integrity, security and economy of the nation; that 
probity in public li fe, the rule of law and the preservation of democracy 
required that the Government agencies be compelled to duly perform 
their legal obligations and to proceed in accordance with law against 
every person involved, irrespective of where he was placed in the  
political hierarchy. The Court observed that: - 
“8. The sum and substance of these orders is that the CBI and 
other Governmental agencies had not carried out their public 
duty to investigate the offences disclosed; that none stands 
above the law so that an  alleged offence by him is not required 
to be investigated; that we would monitor the investigations, in CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  63 
the sense that we would do what we permissibly could to see 
that the investigations progressed while yet ensuring that we did 
not direct or channel tho se investigations or in any other manner 
prejudice the right of those who might be accused to a full and 
fair trial. We made it clear that the task of the monitoring court 
would and the moment a charge -sheet was filed in respect of a 
particular investigati on and that the ordinary processes of the 
law would then take over. Having regard to the direction in 
which the investigations were leading, we found it necessary to 
direct the CBI not to report the progress of the investigations to 
the person occupying th e highest office in the political executive . 
This was done to eliminate any impression of bias or lack of 
fairness or objectivity and to maintain the credibility of the 
investigations. In short, the procedure adopted was of 
"continuing mandamus".”  
 
64.  Above judgment was followed in so many other cases by 
the Indian Supreme Court including Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of 
Gujrat and others [(2010)2 SCC 200], Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. 
State of Gujrat [(2006) SCC 374] and Common Cause, Registered 
Society  v. Union of India (Air 1999 SC 2979).  
65.  Similarly, superior courts in Pakistan in the case of Pervaiz 
Elahi v. Province of Punjab (PLD 1993 Lahore 595), Sindh High Court 
Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2009 SC 879), Dr. 
Mubashir Hassan v . Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265), in Re: 
Construction of Fast Food Chain in F.9 Park  (PLD 2010 SC 759), Bank 
of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries (PLD 2010 SC 1109), In Re: Suo 
Moto Case No.18 of 2010 (PLD 2011 SC 9 97), In Re: Corruption in Hajj 
Arrangements (PLD 2011 SC 963) and Munir Hussain Bhatti v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 407) have  exercised jurisdiction 
with reference to enforcement of fundamental rights.  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  64 
Our consensus remain that following the trichotomy of 
powers, all the three organs of the State i.e. Legislature, 
Executive and the Judiciary have to exercise their powers 
within their respective spheres. Most importantly, the 
Judiciary could not remain oblivious from its duties nor can 
compromise the mandate of the Constitution i .e. 2A, 
because it is the will of the people of Pakistan to establish 
an order wherein independence of judiciary shall be fully 
secured. However, in view of its distinction and difference, 
a separate character has been bestowed upon it under 
Article 175(3)  of the Constitution. This aspect of the case 
has been highlighted in the case of Government of 
Balochistan v. Azizullah (PLD 1993 SC 341).  
 
66.  In the case of In Re: Corruption in Hajj Arrangements  (PLD 
2011 SC 963) the power of judicial review of the S upreme Court  
discussed in detail . Relevant paragraphs from the said judgment are 
mentioned hereinbelow: - 
“27. The power of judicial review which was exercised in the 
case of Sindh High Court Bar Association (supra) has been 
accepted by the Government as it  has not supported the actions 
of 3rd November, 2007. As far as Parliament is concerned, we 
have also admired it as a body, which for the first time in the 
history of the country did not validate the actions taken on 3rd 
November, 2007, whereas in the past  the situation had been 
different. A number of judgments can be cited for assuming 
jurisdiction and exercise of power of judicial review available to 
this Court under the Constitution, to which we need not make 
reference here, but going through the same on e can well 
understand that this Court has always been enjoying the 
jurisdiction of judicial review against administrative actions of 
the executive which is a settled law by now. If any reference is 
required, right from Madison up to the case of Sindh High Court 
Bar Association, there are chain of authorities where the 
Supreme Court has assumed jurisdiction of judicial review, which 
even otherwise is the final arbiter of disputes in order to 
maintain check and balance. For these reasons, the 
independence of the judiciary has been guaranteed and the very 
preamble of the Constitution provides that the people of Pakistan 
and the independence of judiciary shall be fully secured. The 
judiciary cannot compromise at any cost its independence as 
guaranteed under the Constitution, as such compromises would 
lead us to the situation of the last, so many years. It is for the 
first time the judiciary asserted its authority and as a result 
thereof the' democratic system is prospering in the country. In 
the case of Dr. Mubas hir Hasan v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
2010 SC 265) whereby NRO was declared to be illegal, 
unconstitutional and void ab initio, this Court has exercised its 
constitutional jurisdiction of judicial review.  
  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  65 
28. At times, present case was fixed for the p urpose of seeking 
implementation of the order, but we postponed in order to 
ensure that the democratic system under the Constitution must 
prevail and avoid chaos. However, when the cases of massive 
corruption, not only one, but so many came for hearing, 
therefore, this Court in the exercise of its constitutional 
jurisdiction had enforced fundamental rights of the citizens under 
Articles 4, 9, 14 and 25 of the Constitution. It is quite heartening 
to observe that even the worthy Parliamentarians had also 
approached 1 this Court, like in the case of Rental Power 
Projects where one of the sitting Ministers namely, Makhdoom 
Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat had approached the Court. Likewise, 
Ms. Marvi Memon, MNA, approached this Court in the matter of 
Breach of embankment s of rivers in floods causing damages. 
Similarly, Khawaja Muhammad Asif MNA brought the case of 
OGDCL, all of them acknowledge power of judicial review of this 
Court. In matters of the steal Mills, LPG case, National Police 
Foundation, NICL, Hajj arrangeme nts and RPPs are under 
consideration including the Bank of Punjab case where, in 
exercise of the power of judicial review for the enforcement of 
fundamental rights millions of rupees have been recovered which 
were being looted by government officials and o thers. 
Undoubtedly, whenever the Court will notice that there is 
corruption or corrupt practices, it would be very difficult to 
compromise or digest it because the public money of the country 
cannot be allowed to be looted by any one whatsoever status he 
may have.  
  
29. The jurisdiction of this Court is always exercised judiciously 
and with judicial restraint. All those cases which are quoted 
hereinabove clearly indicate that in the matter of exercise of 
power of judicial review in Pakistan we have not trav elled so far 
as is the position in the neighboring' country. By now, the 
parameters of the Court's power of judicial review of 
administrative or executive action or decision and the grounds 
on which the Court can interfere with the same are well settled. 
Indisputably, if the action or decision is perverse or is such that 
no reasonable body of persons, properly informed; could come 
to or has been arrived at by the authority misdirecting itself by 
adopting a wrong approach or has been influenced by irrelevant  
or extraneous matters the Court would be justified in interfering 
with the same. [Commissioner of Income Tax v. Mahindra (AIR 
1984 SC 1182)]. The exercise of constitutional powers by the 
High Court and the Supreme Court is categorised as power of 
judicial  review. Every executive or administrative action of the 
State or other statutory or public bodies is open to judicial 
scrutiny and the High Court or the Supreme Court can, in 
exercise of the power of judicial review under the Constitution, 
quash the execu tive action or decision which is contrary to law 
or is violative of Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution. With the expanding horizon of Articles dealing with 
Fundamental Rights, every executive action of the Government 
or other public bodies, if arbitrary, unreasonable or contrary to 
law, is now amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the Superior 
Courts and can be validly scrutinised on the touchstone of the CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  66 
Constitutional mandates. [Common Cause, A Regd. Society v. 
Union of India (AIR 1999 SC 29 79)]. In the case of Union 
Carbide Corporation v. Union of India [AIR 1992 SC 248 = 1991 
SCR (1) Supl. 251], the Court while taking up the issues of 
healthcare and compensation to the victims, supervised the 
distribution of the money among the victims of B hopal gas 
tragedy and monitored the hospitals set up to treat the victims. 
In Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan [AIR 1997 SC 3011] = [(1997) 
6 SCC 241], the Court laid down guidelines to make the 
workplace safer for women making a grievance redressal 
mechanism  in all private and public offices mandatory. In the 
case of Vineet Narain v. Union of India (AIR 1998 SC 889), 
commonly known as Hawala case, the Supreme Court of India 
had taken over the charge of CBI to ensure transparent 
investigation into corruption a nd corrupt practices under its own 
supervision. In the case of Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v. State of 
Gujarat [(2006) 3 SCC 374], the Court reopened several cases 
and set up a special investigation team where the police 
deliberately botched up the probe to h elp perpetrators of the 
post Godhra mob violence against Muslims in 2002, including 
overseas investigations into the Sohrabuddin fake encounter 
case of 2005 whereby several senior police officers and key 
politicians were put in the dock. In the Case of Rubabbuddin 
Sheikh v. State of Gujarat [(2010) 2 SCC 200] petitioner wrote 
a letter to the Chief Justice of India complaining about the killing 
of his brother in a fake encounter and disappearance of his 
sister -in-law at the hands of the Anti -Terrorist Squad (ATS) 
Police (Gujarat) and Rajasthan Special Task Force (STF). Taking 
notice of this letter, the Court forwarded it to the Director 
General of Police, Gujarat to take further action. The CID 
(Crime) conducted an enquiry and the statements of a number 
of wi tnesses, including the petitioner, were recorded. The 
learned Attorney General for -India submitted that in view of the 
serious nature of the offence in which some highly placed police 
officials of the State of Gujarat were alleged to be involved, 
orders m ay be immediately passed directing the CBI to take 
charge of the investigation and report .to this Court. The CBI 
Authorities were directed to investigate all aspects of the case 
relating to the killing of the deceased including the alleged 
possibility of a larger conspiracy.' The report of the CBI 
Authorities was directed to be filed in the Court when the Court 
would pass further necessary orders in accordance with the said 
report, if necessary. Ultimately, it was held that accusations 
were directed agains t the local police personnel in which high 
police officials of the State were involved. Therefore, it was 
directed that if investigation was allowed to be carried out by the 
local police authorities, all concerned including the relatives of 
the deceased ma y feel that investigation was not proper and in 
the circumstances it would be fit and proper that the petitioner 
and the relatives of the deceased should be assured that an 
independent agency should look into the matter and that would 
lend the final outcom e of the investigation credibility. In the case 
of Center for Pil v. Union of India [Appeal arising out of SLP (C) 
No. 24873 of 2010 decided on 16 -12-2010], the Court ordered 
probe into a mega crore scam against the sitting Telecom CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  67 
Minister. In the case of  Center for Pil v. Union of India [Writ 
Petition (C ) No. 348 of 2010, decided on 3 -3-2011], the Court 
quashed the illegal appointment of P J Thomas as Central_ 
Vigilance Commissioner because of a charge -sheet pending 
against him in Kerala. The Court also laid d o n guidelines for 
future appointments to this post. In the case of Radhy Shyarn v. 
State of UP (Civil Appeal No.3261 of 2011, decided on 15 -4-
2011), the Supreme Court quashed Government's notification to 
acquire land for the planned industrial develo pment in District 
Gautam Budh Nagar through Greater Noida Industrial 
Development Authority, which appeared to be a device to grab 
the land of the poor farmers. In the case of Nandini Sundar v. 
State of Chattisgarh [Writ Petition (Civil) No. 250 of 2007 dec ided 
on 5-7-2011], the Court disbanded and disarmed Special Police 
Officers involved in anti -Naxal operations in many states. Thus, 
the Supreme Court of India has been monitoring public 
distribution system, treatment at hospitals and conservation of 
forest s for more than two decades. It also set up a judicial 
commission to examine the public distribution system and 
directed the Government to provide more facilities in the poorer 
districts.  
  
67.  In the Bank of Punjab’s case  (PLD 2010 SC 1109), this  
Court o bserved that not only a colossal amount of money/property 
belonging to a large section of the public but the very existence of the 
Bank of Punjab was at stake, thus not only the right of the Court but in 
fact its onerous obligation was to intervene to forestall the assault on 
the said fundamental right to life and property of the public.  
68.  In the recent past, a decision has been given by the 
Supreme Court in Suo Moto Case No.16/2011, in respect of non -
adherence to the Constitutional provision and provid ing guarantee to 
life and security in target killing in Karachi. The said judgment has 
been welcomed by all and sundr y. The effect of the proceedings and 
the judgment passed in the said case have brought calm and peace in 
Karachi and the jurisdiction, exer cised by this Court in the said case 
was also under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Inter alia such 
jurisdiction is exercised to ensure effectiveness of the orders passed 
by the Court under Article 190 of the Constitution, which commands  CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  68 
that all the e xecutive and judicial authorities throughout Pakistan to 
act in aid of Supreme Court. In the case of Tirupati Balji Developers 
Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Bihar (AIR 2004 SC 2351), while interpreting 
Article 144 of the Indian Constitution, which is corresponding  Article of 
the Constitution of Pakistan, the Supreme Court observed that under 
Article 144 all the authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of 
India— and that would include High Court as well — shall act in aid of 
the Supreme Court.  
69.  The issue  of probe through experienced judicial officers 
who are Chief Justices of three High Courts itself is sufficient to attach 
importance with the case from two angles (i) that the matter relates to 
sovereignty, independence and security of Pakistan and during  course 
of probe procuring of evidence shall be helpful to determine civil 
liability as well as criminal culpability based on  forensic evidence and 
other material , which is likely to be produced before the Commission. 
Thus, senior judicial office holders  in view of their experience would 
conduct thorough probe into the matter in order to ascertain the 
correct facts.  
70.   Thus, for the foregoing reasons, we are of the opinion that 
issue of probe to ascertain the origin, authenticity and purpose of 
creating /drafting Memo is required to be determined by holding a 
Judicial Probe. Therefore, in exercise of judicial powers conferred upon 
this Court under Article s 187 and 190 of the Constitution, Order XXXII, 
Rules 1 & 2 read with Order XXXIII, Rule I of the Supr eme Court 
Rules, 1980 (in short order inadvertently typed as Order XXXVI) 
coupled with the principles of Civil Procedure Code including Order CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  69 
XXVI, Rule 10 and following the principles/observations discussed 
herein above, a High Powered Commission has been  constituted . 
71.  Learned counsel for respondent  No.4  contended that the 
petitions submitted on behalf of the petitioners are benami  petitions as 
the plea s taken by the respondents Chief of Army Staff and DG, ISI 
seem to be the case of the petitioners and the petitions have been 
filed with  a mala fide intention . We failed to appreciate the argument 
of the learned counsel except observi ng that the defence functionaries 
under the Constitution are bound to discharge their functions strictly in 
accordance with the Constitution. The affidavits/counter affidavits filed 
by both the high -ups of the Pakistan Army the event s, which took 
place after 10th October, 2011 , details whereof have been mentioned, 
and such events have not been denied by the Federation through 
learned Attorney General. As certain  facts have been placed before the 
Court, it does not mean that they are supporters of the petitioners . In 
addition to it, ascertainment of origin , authenticity and the 
purpose  of the drafting/creating the Memo is a matte r of public 
importance  and prima facie calls for enforcement of their Fundamental 
Rights provided under Articles 9, 14 and 19A of the Constitution, 
hence, whosoever has laid information before the Court, calls for due 
consideration as the object is to see  what he is speaking , and not who 
is speaking the same.  In this behalf w e cannot do better than to 
reproduc e a para from the judgment in Civil Petition No.42 of 2011 
composed by  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja :- 
24. Before concluding our discussion on the iss ue of 
maintainability of this petition we need to address the 
respondent’s submission that the petition has been filed 
mala fide . We have found no lawful basis for this 
submission. Simply because the petitioner may have been 
a contender for the office of C hairman, OGRA, does not per CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  70 
se translate into mala fides. The petitioner can genuinely 
consider himself to be a suitable candidate for the position 
while simultaneously holding the view that the respondent 
does not meet the eligibility criteria set out in section 3 (4) 
of the Ordinance. Furthermore, we have already held in 
the case titled Moulvi Iqbal Haider versus Capital 
Development Authority and others (2006 SC 394 at 413) 
that the contents of a petition under Article 184 (3) ibid 
will override concerns arising on account of the conduct or 
antecedents of a petitioner. This approach is reflective of 
the sagacity of wise men such as Maulana Jalaluddin Rumi 
who have emphasized the importance of the message 
rather than the messenger. Learned counsel for the 
respondent then cited the Indian case titled Dattaraj 
Nathuji Thaware v. State of Maharashtra and others 
[(2005) 1 Supreme Court Cases 590] to support his plea 
that the petition had been filed mala fide and should, 
therefore, be dismissed. We have gone thro ugh the cited 
judgment and find the same to be wholly irrelevant. In 
that case it was determined by the Indian Supreme Court 
that the petitioner therein ”had resorted to blackmailing 
the respondents . . . and was caught red -handed accepting 
‘blackmailing m oney” . No such circumstances arise, or 
were even suggested in this case. In view of this 
discussion, we are satisfied that this petition is not liable to 
dismissal on the ground of mala fides of the petitioner.  
 
Thus, objection being unfounded is accordin gly repelled . 
72.  Learned counsel for respondent No.4 vehemently 
contended that instant petitions lack bona fides . She relied upon news 
clippings filed by her with C.M.A. No. 5440/2011 as under: -  
 Haqqani detain. (Dawn Thursday, May 6, 1999)  
 Haqqani reman ded in FIA custody for 4 days. (Dawn 
Tuesday, May 18, 1999.)  
 Haqqani’s medical record ‘goes missing’. (Dawn 
Wednesday, May 19, 1999)  
 Ehtesab Bureau decision in Haqqani case 
embarrasses  FIA”  (Dawn May 21, 1999)  
 CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  71 
 
 
 
Reliance is placed on the case of Ms. Benazir Bhutto (PLD 1988 SC 
416). On the other hand, Mr. Rashid A R azvi, learned counsel 
vehemently denied the allegations and contended that the mala fides 
are required to be proved through cogent evidence. He has relied upon 
the cases of Lt. Col. Farzan d Ali v. Province of West Pakistan  (PLD 
1970 SC 98), Federation of Pakistan v. Saeed Khan (PLD 1974 SC151) 
and Tabassum Shahzad v. I.S.I. and others (2011 SCMR 1886).  
 
It is to be noted that allegation of mala fides  has been raised in 
Constitution Petition s No.79 & 80/2011, whereas, there are other 
petitions bearing Constitution Petitions No.77 -78/2011, etc., reference 
of which has been made hereinabove, wherein no such allegation is 
leveled. This Court in the case of Government of West Pakistan v. 
Begum Ag ha Abdul Karim Shorish Kashmiri  (PLD 1969 SC 14) has held 
that bona fides are to be presumed unless the party challenging the 
action is able to substantiate that the action was mala fide or without 
any grounds whatsoever. The petitioner in Constitution Pet ition CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  72 
No.79/2011 cannot be attributed mala fides because he has not 
claimed any relief against respondent No.4. In addition to it, except 
filing news clippings, no other cogent evidence has been produced. 
Moreover, there are other petitioners as well who h ave also joined 
Respondent No.4 as party. Thus, objection being without substance, is 
repelled.  
73.  Learned counsel vociferously stated that respondent No.4 
is a law abiding citizen and his  liberty  has been curtailed by placing his 
name on the ECL. She h as relied upon the judgments in the cases of  
Munir Ahmad Bhatti  v. Government of Pakistan, Ministry Of Interior 
through Secretary   (2010 CLD 1829 ), Govt. of Pakistan  v. Dada Amir 
Haidar Khan  (PLD 1987 SC 504)  and Satwant Singh Sawhney v. D. 
Ramarathnam, A ssistant  (AIR 1967 SC 1836) .  
74.  There is no cavil with the above propositions  of law , but in 
the instant case no restraint has been placed on his movement vide 
order dated 1st December, 2011 except  that he has been  asked not to 
leave the country without  prior permission of this Court  as to ascertain 
origin, authenticity and affect of memorandum is under probe 
before a Commission .  
75.  Thus, instant petitio ns have raised serious question  of 
public importance , which , prima facie is linked with the enforce ment of 
fundamental rights under Articles 9,  14 and 19A of the Constitution 
based on cogent material available on record.  Therefore, petitions 
being maintainable, empowered this Court to make declaration for the 
enforcement of fundamental  rights based on t he report of probe 
through the Commission, which has already been constituted to CONST P 77 -85, 89/2011, etc.  73 
ascertain the origin, authenticity and purpose  of creating/drafting 
Memo dated 10th May, 2011 .  
  Above are the reasons for the short order dated 
30.12.2011.  
 
 
 IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
 
 
 
 
MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN, J.   TASSADUQ MR. HUSAIN  JILLANI, J.  
 
 
 
 
JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA, J.   TARIQ PARVEZ, J.    
 
 
 
 
MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J.    EJAZ AFZAL KHAN, J.   
 
 
 
 
IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY, J.   MUHAMMAD ATHER SAEED, J.  
 
Islamab ad, the  
30th December, 2011  
 
   Approved For Reporting . CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO.77 TO 85 & 89 OF 2011 & CMA NO.5505/2011  IN CONST.P.79 OF 2011  
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  “And ye shall know the Truth, and the  Truth shall set  you free ” 
(John 8:32) . Thus spa ke Hazrat Isa, the Messiah and champion of the oppressed . In 
the same vein, the Persian sa vant Hakeem  Sinai Ghaznavi said: “embrace the truth 
and be come free of grief and torment” . It is these Biblical and sage sentiments  and 
other similar sensibilities  which appear to have inspired  an important change in 
the Constitution  - the recent incorporation of Article 19A in the Chapter on 
fundamental rights . The said Article stipulates that “every citizen shall have the right 
to have access to information in all matters of public importance subject to regulation and 
reasonable restrictions imposed by law ”. Most petitioners and respondents, and their 
learned co unsel  seem to have ignored or glossed o ver the significance of this major  
constitutional change .  While t he circumstances in which these cases arise  have 
been elaborated in fair detail in the reasoning of Hon’ble the Chief Justice , I only  
reiterate this salient  aspect of the case . 
2. It is an unfortunate facet of our history that during the 64 years since 
Pakistan’s independence in 1947, the people of Pakistan have been , at times, 
disserved by  a non -inclusive governance paradigm where information critical t o 
them  has been withheld from them. Pakistan has faced many crises  of public 
importance. This, in itself, is not  unexpected in the life of a State . What has, 
however, been aggravating  for the People is that numerous inquiries and probes 
have been undertake n by Governments which have spent  substantial amounts of 
public time , money  and effort, but the citizens of Pakistan , the most direct 
affectees , have  remained clueless  and uninformed  as to the causes or the 
progenitors of the multiple crises  in our history . 
3. Major events in our history in the past six decades since 1947 have included 
the dismemberment of the country  in 1971 and  the murder of one incumbent and 
one former Prime Minister  of Pakistan . We have witnessed the extraordinary case 
of those in the seats of governance in December 1971 informing us that all was 
going well in East Pakistan even after the surrender of forces in Dhaka.  The results      2 
 
 
of probes into such events have almost invariably been withheld from the people 
of Pakistan  or, at times, sel ectively disclosed . The people  in quest of the truth  have  
mostly been left with  conje ctures, rumours and half truths. Concealment of 
information has, in turn led to a distorted history of the country and to a 
destabilizing division in the polity.  
4.  This paradigm has shifted through the recent incorporation of Article 19A 
in the Constitution. By virtue of the said Article the right of a citizen to have 
information “in all matters of public importance”  is made  a fundamental right  which 
is guaranteed by the Constitution. Article 184 (3) of the Constitution stipulates, 
inter alia,  that this Court shall have jurisdiction to pass an order in a case “if it 
considers that a question of public importance  with reference to the enforcement of any of 
the fundamental r ights  conferred by Chapter   I of Part II [of the Constitution] is involved”.  
Article 184 (3) read in conjunction with Article 19A has empowered the citizen s of 
Pakistan by making access to information a justiceable  right  of the People rather 
than being largesse bestowed by the State at  its whim. Article 19A has thus, 
enabled every citizen  to become independent of power centres  which,  heretofore , 
have been in control of information  on matters of public importance .  
5. Many of  the arguments that came up  durin g the hearing of these petitions  
are premised on a lack of appreciation  not just for this aspect of our constitutional  
law,  but also  for the intrinsic worth of Truth  as a value in itself . What , it may be 
asked,  is the intrinsic worth of information as a st and-alone fundamental right? 
The answer to this is simple. The very essence of a democratic dispensation is 
informed choice.  It is through such choice th at the political  sovereign, the P eople 
of Pakistan acquire the ability to reward or punish their electe d representatives or 
aspirants to  elected office, when it is time  for the People  to exercise their choice. If 
information on matters of public importance is not made available to citizens, it is 
obvious they will not have the ability to evaluate available choices.  Information on 
matters of public importance thus, is a foundational bedrock  of representative      3 
 
 
democracy and the accountability of chosen representatives of the people.  It is in 
this context , both historical and conceptual , that the fundamental rig ht to 
information has to be seen. Through  Article 19A in the Constitution, the citizen s of 
Pakistan have also been freed from the caprice of a sorry fate and have become 
independent of whistle -blowers in foreign lands  or the magnanimity of the likes of 
WikiLeaks or biographies  of political actors , to get to the information they are now 
entitled to  as of right  under the Constitution. This provides for and makes good a 
crucial missing element of  responsible  state governance  in our Constitutional 
scheme . 
6. At this point it is necessary to highlight an important aspect of our 
Constitution which is often over -looked. The Constitutio n of 1973 has not been 
bestowed  as a matter of grace on the People of Pakistan by a monarch or a foreign 
Parliament as , for instance , is the case with Canada, Australia and a number of 
other countries. Our Constitutional Order has been established by “ the will of the 
people of Pakistan”.  All State functionaries have to understand that in a very real 
sense, they are employed in the serv ice of the People of Pakistan and are paid for 
by them. The loyalty, therefore, of these State functionaries has to be to the 
Constitutional Order established by the People . Once this context is understood, 
the issue in these petitions stands greatly simpl ified.  There is no contention 
between the parties arrayed before us that the Memo and the events surrounding 
it are “ matters of public importance” . The parties are also agreed that these events 
should be prob ed. It is, therefore, clear that a petition unde r Article 184 (3) to 
enforce the fundamental right granted by Article 19A is maintainable.  
7. We are cognizant that there may be situations where the Government may 
want to justify non -disclosure of information  on a matter of public importance . 
That plea, however, does not arise and nor has it been taken in these cases . It is, 
therefore, not necessary to comment on the same as a mere speculative exercise. 
Learned ASC for Mr. Haqqani contended that these petitions raise a political      4 
 
 
question and the Court sho uld, therefore, avoid deciding  the same. This argument 
has been adequately discussed in the reasoning of Hon’ble the Chief Justi ce. I 
would only add that the conduct of a government’s foreign policy is indeed, by 
and large,  a political question. But the fa ct is that the present petitions do not 
require us to devise the country’s foreign policy or to direct the government in 
that regard. These petitions only seek to enforce the People’s right to know the 
truth about what their government, and its functi onari es, are up to. And that is  by 
no means, a political question. It is a fully jusiticiable fundamental right 
enumerated in Chapter II,  of the Constitution  no less. We need not look any 
further than Article 19A, for this  conclusion .   
8. This  brings me to  a consideration of  the Freedom of Information Ordinance, 
2002 (“ FIO, 2002 ”) and to see if there is anything therein which can support the 
contention advanced on behalf of Mr. Haqqani, that the information  sought by the 
petit ioners should be denied to them in these proceedings or that the FIO 2002 is 
an adequate and complete alternate to Article 19A. Section 3 (1) of the FIO 2002 
specifies the substantive right provided for thereunder. It is couched in restrictive 
language and reads as under: - 
“3. Access to inf ormation not to be denied: - (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, and subject to the provisions of this 
Ordinance, no requester shall be denied access to any official 
record other than exemptions as provided i n Section 15.”   
 
In stark contrast Article 19A in affirmative  and expansive  language avows 
as under:  
“19A.  Every citizen shall have the right to have access to 
information in all matters of public importance subject to 
regulation and reasonable restriction s imposed by law. ” 
 
9. It is clear from a reading of Article 19A and section 3 (1) ibid, that the 
Constitutional right is much broader and more assertive than the statutory right       5 
 
 
which by its own terms is restricted to disclosure of official record only . 
Furthermore, the principle of law is that the fundamental right under Article 19A 
is a grant of the Constitution and, therefore, cannot be altered or abridged by a 
law enacted by Parliament.  The submissions of learned ASC for Mr. Haqqani, 
based on the FIO 2 002 are , therefore,  misconceived and have no merit.  
10. At this point it may also be added that when the quest is for the truth under 
Article 19A, and nothing but the truth, the Court cannot foresee the result  of the 
probe  which has been ordered. The argu ments on behalf of Mr. Haqqani  amount 
to asking the Court to adjust its opinion according to some anticipated 
consequences of such inquiry. As an objective enforcer of fundamental rights we 
cannot do that. Whether the petitioners or the respondents stand t o benefit from 
our order  or which institution  or functionary  of the State ends up being indicted 
by the Truth, we are not called upon to say. In fact, that is the very point of the 
inquiry; the only calculus this Court is entitled to engage in is the calcu lus of true 
information  and its availability to the citizens of Pakistan . 
11. The Truth will indeed be critical if the nation is to achieve the goal the 
Constitution, in its Preamble, sets for all organs of the state: viz. “ the preservation of 
democracy ac hieved by the unremitting struggle of the people against oppression and 
tyranny. ” It, therefore, will not do for this Court to deny to the citizens their 
guaranteed fundamental right under Article 19A by limiting or trivializing the 
scope of such right  through an elitist construction whereby information remains 
the preserve of those who exercise state power . 
 
(Jawwad S. Khawaja)  
  Judge  
 
 
8:32 

  

  19A

 


 19A 

 1947  2




1CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO. 77 TO 85 & 89 OF 2011 & CMA NO. 5505/ 2011 IN CONST. P. 79 OF 2011 3
 1971 
  


 19 A  4



 5







2 choice 



 6
 19A 
 (Wikileaks) 

 7
 
 






3 184(3) 

 8 



  







 19A 
Freedom of Information Ordinance, 2002   9
19A  ("FIO")
4 19A 

 3  FIO


15 

 19A 


 10
 FIO  
 19A

 FIO
 11

5





 (Preamble)  12
 

 19A 



6  EJAZ AFZAL KHAN, J. - I have gone through the judgment authored 
by my lord the Chief Justice. It is complete and comprehensive in all respects. Reasons 
recorded  and the case law referred are so persuasive and powerful that one cannot have 
any other choice  but to agree therewith. I respectfully agree with the judgment thus 
authored. However, I would like to add a few words to illustrate nexus between security 
of person and State  and dignity of person and State and also nexus between a right and 
its differen t implications and manifestation s. 
2.  The r ight to vote , for instance , is not a right  confined to cast ing a ballot . 
It is a wider and  more  comprehensive term. If it, on the one hand , aims at choosing  the 
representative, it on the other includes the right to participate in the electoral process, 
political activity consisting in forming a political  party , projecting a programme through 
a manifesto  and propa gating  it and thereby persuading the people to accept it. In the 
case of Benazir Bhutto v. Federation o f Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416)  and many other 
cases cited in the main judgment this Court  has interpreted the expression fundamental 
right as of much greater amplitude  and of much wider ring and connotation . It has been 
extended to include  all the possible i mplications and manifestation s of such right. 
Apparently registration of a political  party has no nexus with a fundamental right. The 
more so when the vires of a statute making its registration compulsory is challenged in a 
Court of law . But since it is one of the manifestations and one of the consequential 
effects of such right, it was extended to cover the same.  
3.  Security of person  is one of the  most important fundamental rights. It is 
inextricably linked with the security of the State. If and when a p erson performing 
functions in connection with the affairs of the Federation acts in a manner which 
imperils the very existence of the State a writ of pro hibition or any other appropriate 
writ, according to the circumstances of the case could be issued agai nst him. A petition 
filed by a citizen asking for the issuance of an  appropriate  writ cannot be declined  
simply because his  fundamental right has not yet been infringed . A narrow and pedantic 
interpretation may le nd support to the argument that security of  person is n ot imperiled 
or infringed  by a mere threat to the security of the State , but actually it is otherwise. 
Security of person in the absence of  a strong, secure and stable State  would be   2 
inconceivable. It would be  as imaginary as drinking water from a mirage. Therefor e, 
fundamental right of person would stand  infringed the  moment something tending to 
imperil  the security of State is done.   
4.  Why  is loyalty to  the State the basic duty of every citizen? Why is 
obedience to the Constitution and law the inviolable obligation  of citizens ? Why are  
funda mental rights suspended when  security of the State is at stake? Because  the State 
is a f ortress  protecting such right s. Because the Constitution and the law are the 
fountain s of such rights.  So long as the  fortress is intact fundamental rights shall remain 
protected.  So long as the fountain s are secure fundamental rights would continue 
flowing from it.  It would thus be naive  to say that  threat to  security of the State has 
nothing to do with fundamental righ ts of person . A threat to  the fortress  prot ecting such 
rights would , therefore,  be a  threat to  the security of  person . A citizen with seeing eyes 
and thinking mind would not sit  relaxed and relieved till the fall of such fortress by 
seeking refuge in the belief that security  of person  is yet to be attacked or assaulted. 
Such belief seems  have originated from no other state except that of self -deception . A 
person  hacking a branch of a tree another is sitting on , does not harm the latter but when 
the branch i s hacked , its fall would coincide with the fall of the  person sitting thereon .   
5.  The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan not only guarantees 
the security of person but also his right to live with dignity. The word “dignity” has 
various sha des of meaning s. It, according to  Chambers 21st Century Dictionary means 
“stateliness, seriousness and formality of manner and appearance, goodness and ability 
of character, calmness, self -control and high rank and position.” This right has various 
effects  and implications ranging from individual life to the collective national life. 
Within the confines of his individuality he may be respectable but he cannot live with 
his head high within or outside his country , when the country does not command 
respect in  the comity of nations . If the dignity of State which cannot be detached  from 
the dignity of  person , appears to have been compromised or made negotiable by express 
or implied terms  he not only loos es his moorings but also ceases to live with dignity and 
respect. His right thus stands infringed . In the case of Benazir Bhutto vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 388 ) this Court while highlighting this aspect held in no  3 
uncertain terms that the right to live includes the right to live with respect, honour a nd 
dignity. Therefore, dignity of person being commingled with the dignity of State cannot 
be dealt with  as something  apart from  the latter . Wherever an act or omission of a 
person who is at the helm of affairs in any department of life tends to compromise  or 
even negotiate the dignity of the state that would be an affront to the fundamental right 
of the citizen  guaranteeing  his dignity, notwithstanding his person  may not  be subjected 
to any indignity. This is what has been portrayed in the preamble of the Constitution in 
the words as follows: - 
 “So that the people of Pakistan may pro sper and attain their 
rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the World and 
make their full contribution towards international peace and 
progress and happiness of hum anity;”  
 
6.  What is sovereignty  and what does it mean ? Sovereignty means supreme 
and independent power o r authority. According to the preamble of the Constitution, 
authority over the entire universe belo ngs to Almighty Allah alone. This has been 
delegated  to the people as a trust. It is to be exercised  by the m through their chosen 
representatives within the limits prescribed  by Him . Principles of democracy, freedom, 
equality, tolerance and social justice as enunciated by Islam are the norms to be 
follow ed. Those who are chosen are  not given carte blanche to rule according to their 
whim and caprice but according to the provisions of the Constitution and law. Any 
chosen representative who does not exercise th is authority in accordance with the 
provisions of t he Constitution shall betray the mandate given  to him  pursuant to the 
exercise of right  to vote . Such  a course though does not infringe  a right at its primary 
level but it does so in its ultimate form and manifestation.  Because the very condition 
for the e xercise of  such right is that those who are chosen shall exercise their authority 
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.  
7.  Consent  to, connivance  at or complicity in the infringement of security 
of person  may not be so criminal, as an act , an omission or an attitude evincing the 
aforesaid attribute s in the infringement of security of State . It is rather pedantic, 
perverse and preposterous  to detach or disassociate security, solidarity and sovereignty 
of the State from fundamental rights. S ecurity of person and security of State are  4 
integral part of each other. Existence of one cannot be conceived without existence of 
the other.  All this is a part of an organic, integrated and indivisible  whole. As an injury 
to a limb of one’s body can ’t be considered in isolation, so can ’t be an injury to a vital 
organ like the brain or the heart when it tend s to paralyze or benumb all the limbs . One 
cannot keep them in water tight compartment s or away from or independent of each 
other.  Security of the State  is like a ship . One cannot have a safe and smooth sailing in 
the ship by permitting others to drive a hole into that.  Such an approach  or outlook,  we 
are afraid , would be dangerous, devastating and even catastrophic  for all those who live 
in the hard  worl d of reality and, of course not in fool’s paradise . Partial  and piecemeal  
approach or  outlook in such matters cannot be approved of.  It, therefore,  follows that 
the nexus between  security  of person and State and dignity of person and State cannot 
be lost s ight of while hearing  a lis for enforcement of fundamental rights . The probe 
ordered by us is a prelude thereto as it aims  at uncovering the truth for taking remedial 
measures before the situation goes beyond repair . 
     
        (Ejaz Afzal Khan)  
                  Judge  
             12 .01.2012  