IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 13-P/201 5 
(On appeal from the judgment dated 
13.02.2013 passed  by the Peshawar High 
Court, Mingor Bench in Criminal Appeal 
No.97 of 2010) . 
 
 
Wajahat  …Appellant(s)  
VERSUS  
Gul Daraz  & another  …Respondent(s)  
 
  
For the Appellant(s)  : Mr. Ansar Nawaz Mirza, ASC  
   
For the Respondent  No.1  : Mr. Abdul Munir Khan, ASC  
   
For the State  : Mr. Mujahid Ali Khan, 
Additional Advocate General, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  
   
Date of Hearing  : 30.04.2019  
 
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Touheed 
Begum met homicidal death in her home; Wajahat, appellant 
herein, was blamed for  the crime  by Gul Daraz, PW , no other 
than his father -in-law; domestic differences were cited as 
motive for the crime.  The learned trial Court returned guilty 
verdict to the appellant; he was convicted under clause (b) of 
Section 302 of Pakistan Penal Code  and sentenced to 
imprisonment for life along side direction for payment of diyat 
to the tune of rupees six lacs to the legal heirs with benefit of 
Section 382 -B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  vide 
impugned judgment dated 2 8.1.2010  affirmed by the  learned 
Peshawar High Court  vide judgment dated 13.2.2013 , albeit 
with conversion of diyat  into compensation .  Criminal Appeal No.13 -P/2015 .       2 
 
2.  Learned counsel for the appellant contends that 
judgments of the Courts below  are erroneously premised on 
misconception of law inasmuch as i n the absence of positive 
proof , the appellant could not have been convicted  on the 
basis of presumptions or his failure to satisfactorily explain 
circumstances  leading towards his wife’s death . Similarly, 
appellant’s absence from law cannot be equated  with his guilt , 
complained the learned counsel , positions vehemently 
contested by the learned Law Officer.   
3.  The complainant, thoug h seemingly with no axe 
to grind , nonetheless has not himself witnessed the 
occurrence; crime report , is structured upon his strong belief  
that no one else other than the appellant  could be the possible 
assassin , a conviction based upon hearsay queries , most 
important being one furnished by his second daughter 
Nazakat PW married in the same household ; she appeared as 
PW-5 and i n the witness box  pleaded ignorance  about the 
culprit , responsible for her sister ’s death. She merely deposed 
about crime without reference  to the assailant . Her evidence is 
not of much benefit to the prosecution  leaving in the field 
suspicion alone to sus tain the charge . Appellant’s belated plea  
of the suicide even if rejected outrightly  by itself would not 
absolve the prosecution to drive home the charge , on its own 
strength  and same goes for appellant’s absconsion; people 
avoid to face process of law or their adversaries for a variety of 
reasons , not necessarily inclusive of their guilt; Appellant’s 
reticence  to satisfactorily explain  as to what befell upon  his 
better half under the same roof , though somewhat intriguing, 
however cannot be equated to quali fy as evidentiary certainty, 
essentially required  in order to saddle him  with formidable 
corporal consequences ; his failure would not give rise  to an 
adverse presumption  within the contemplation of Article 121 
of the Qanoon -e-Shahadat Order, 1984  and thus it would be 
grievously un safe to maintain the conviction, without potential 
risk of error  as well as diametrical departure  from adversarial 
nature of criminal trial . The appeal is allowed, the impugned Criminal Appeal No.13 -P/2015 .       3 
 
judgment is set aside and the appellant shall be set a t liberty 
forthwith , if not required in any other case.  
 
 
 
     
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
Peshawar , the 
30th of April, 2019  
Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
 