SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed , CJ 
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
   Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
   Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
  
   
S.M.C. 01/  2020 
(SUO MOTO ACTION REGARDING COMBATING THE PANDEMIC OF CORONA VIRUS 
(COVID -19) 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed  Khan ,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood , DAG  
Dr. Tanveer Qureshi,  
Secretary M/o National Health  
Asif Suhail, Director (Lit)  
G.M. Jakhrani, Dy. Director (Lit)  
(All from M/o National Health)  
Mirza Mahsoo d, J.S. M/ o Interior  
Shams -ur-Rasool SO Interior.   
   
For ICT  : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi,  
A.G., I slamabad  
Hamza Shafqat,  D.C., (I.C.T.A.)  
Azhar Hussai n Shah, DSP Legal.  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, A.G., P unjab  
Javed Yaqoob, Addl.AG, P unjab  
Cap (R) M. Usman, Secy. Primary &  
Secondary Health Deptt. P unjab  
Mr. Aamar Jan, Secretary Labour &  
HR Department Lahore.  
Mr. Alamgir Ahmed, Secretary Za kat.  
M. Nabeel Ahmed Awan,  
Secy. Specialized, Health Care &  
Medical Education Deptt  
 (Via Video link from Lahore Branch)  
Ch. Faisal Fareed,  
Addl.A.G. P unjab  (In Islamabad ) 
   
   
For Govt. of Sindh  
 : Mr. Salman Talibudin, A.G, Sindh  
Zahid Abbasi, Sec y. Health  
Muhammad Usman Chachar,  
Addl. Chief Secy -Home  
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi,  
(Focal Person to Chief Secy. Sindh)  
Syed Salman Shah, DG, PDMA  
Qazi Shahid Pervez, SMBR  
Iftikhar Shalwani, Commissioner Khi  SMC.01/20  
   2
Ahmad Ali Siddiqui, DC East.  
(All via Video link from Karachi Branch)  
 
Muhammad Kassim Mirjat AOR  
(At Islamabad)  
   
For Govt. of KP  
 : Mr. Shumail Butt, A.G. KP  
Syed Imtaiz Hussain Shah,  
Secy. Health, KP  
Mr. Kamran Rehman,  
Secretary Labour.  
Mr. Amir Latif, Secy. Industries.  
Dr. Muhammad Bilal, Secy.  WWB.  
Mr. Jajwali Said, Dir. Finance WWB.  
Haji Qudrat, AD Legal Labour. KP  
M. Abid Majeed,  
Secy. Relief Rehabilitation, KP  
Mian Shakeel Ahmed,  
Secy. Local Govt. KP  
Rooh -ul-Amin, Addl. Registrar, PHC  
Amir Sultan Tareen  
P&D Deptt - EHSAAS, Programme  
Idrees  Marwat Secretary Zakat.  
(All via Video link from Peshawar Br anch ) 
   
   
For Govt. of 
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir,  
A.G, Balochistan  
Amir Hamza Mengal, DPG Balochistan  
Capt.(R) Zafar Zaheer Abbasi,  
Spl. Secretary Health.  
 (Via Video link f rom Quetta Branch)  
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl.A.G.  
Mr. M. Fareed Dogar,  
AAG Balochistan.  
(In Islamabad ) 
   
For Govt. of GB  : Mr. Muhammad Iqbal, AG, G.B.  
   
  Syed Iqbal Hashmi, ASC for PMA.  
   
  Mr. Samuel Payara  
Chairman, Implementation of Minorit y 
Rights Forum  
(Via Video link from Lahore Branch)  
 
   
  Ch. Haseeb Muhammad, President IHCBA  
Mr. Saeed Khursheed Ahmed, ASC  
 
   
Date of Hearing  : 04.05.2020 . 
   
   
* * * * * *  SMC.01/20  
   3
 O R D E R 
  Gulzar Ahmed, CJ:  At the outset, we express our thanks to 
Mufti Muhammad Taqi Usman i for giving his valuable opinion in the 
matter of Zakat as per the order of this Court dated 20.04.2020. Such 
opinion of the learned Scholar has been read by us and we have found 
substantial material in it to provide guidance to t his Court in dealing 
with the subject. Further an opinion has also been received from the 
Council of Islamic Ideology signed by one Mr.Inamullah, Director General 
(Research) forwarded by Chairman vide his letter dated 30.04.2020. 
Such opinion has also been examined by us and found it to be helpful in 
considering the issue which is being argued before us. Both the opinions 
are kept on the record. We express our great appreciation for the two 
opinions.  
2.  Further, reports have been filed by the NDMA, Senate  
Standing Committee on Interior, SRAC, Cantonment Boards, ICT, 
Pakistan Bait -ul-Mal, Provinces of Punjab, Sindh, Balochistan and KP. 
The learned Advocate General for Gilgit -Baltistan states that he has filed 
the report only today in Court. We have heard th e arguments of the 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan and also the learned Acting 
Advocate General Pu njab, Advocate General Sindh, Advocate General KP 
and Advocate General Balochistan so also the Advocate Generals of ICT 
and Gilgit -Baltistan. We have al so heard the other officials appearing 
before us.  
3.  The Federal Secretary (Health) at the outset has pointed out 
that the Haji Camp Quarantine Centre has been closed down and it has 
been shifted to one Hostel City, where there are 48 rooms for 
accommoda ting the passengers who are to be kept in quarantine and 
facility in this Hostel City for quarantine is altogether free. He admits 
that Haji Camp was not a proper place where quarantine centre could 
have been setup for that it lacked all facilities which a re required for a SMC.01/20  
   4
quarantine centre. He states that Haji Camp Quarantine Centre was 
established by the NDMA. Let the head of the NDMA explain as to why 
the Haji Camp was declared a quarantine centre without even looking at 
it whether it can be used as quar antine centre or not. Any amount spen t 
on making it the quarantine centre be also disclosed and accounted for.  
4.  We have also heard the matter recording national policy on 
the Corona Virus Covid -19. We are informed that  in a policy decision 
dated 14.04.2 020 stakeholders of all the federating Provinces were 
present along with the Prime Minister and other relevant officials and 
decision on that day was taken and such decision is being implemented 
by all the Governments i.e. Federal Government and the Provin cial 
Governments so also the Government of Gilgit -Baltistan. It is informed 
by the learned Attorney General that the policy decision of 14.04.2020 
was not broad enough, therefore, another meeting is taking place in a 
short while wherein the issues will be addressed  more adequately . 
5.  While hearing the case, the learned Attorney General so also 
the learned Advocate General of the Provinces were asked as to the 
competency of the Provinces to affect taxation activity of the Federal 
Government in terms of Fed eral Legislative List provided in the 
Constitution or can such activities could at all be stopped by the 
Provinces. The response given by the learned Attorney General was that 
the Provinces cannot encroach upon the taxation activities of the Federal 
Govern ment. Learned Acting Advocate General Punjab acceded to the 
statement of the learned Attorney General. Learned Advocate General 
Sindh, however, referred to the Sindh Epidemic Diseases Act, 2014 but 
in principle agreed that such Act of the Province cannot o verride the 
provisions of the Constitution. Same is the response from the Advocate 
Generals of the other Provinces.  
6.  Where taxing activities from which Federal Taxes are 
generated have been stopped by the Provinces, in our view such matter SMC.01/20  
   5
requires con sideration of this Court and we expect the learned Attorney 
General so also the Advocate Generals of the Provinces and ICT and 
Gilgit -Baltistan to be ready to argue on this point on the next date of 
hearing , as we intend to pass order  on this very  legal question.  
7.  We have noted also that business activities all over the 
country on account of lockdown have been stopped. But pursuant to the 
policy decision dated 14.04.2020 some businesses are being allowed to 
open up. We have gone through the policy decisi on dated 14.04.2020 
and f ind that it does not contain much of the policy rather identify some 
subject s on which industries have been allowed to be open; that beside 
making reference to the SOPs  nothing more has been stated. In our view, 
this is not a trans parent manner in which a policy is made. We have 
found from the report submitted by the Province of Sindh that they are 
allowing opening of business activities of industries and shops on 
making of application by the business owner. We note that such a 
mann erism of allowing to do business is altogether contrary to the 
mandatory provisions of the Constitution i.e. fundamental rights and 
also against the very principle of transparency and thus needs to be 
revisited and re -examined and in this regard a comprehe nsive policy be 
drawn and announced instead of asking for the people to make 
applications to allow their businesses to open. That policy the 
government will be required to implement. We expect such policy 
decision will be taken with full consensus of the P rovinces at the national 
level and applied to the whole country.  
8.  It has also been noted that Zakat funds and funds of Bait -ul-
Mal are not being properly utilized. The Auditor General has submitted 
his report by way of CMA No. 2848 of 2020 in which he has found lot of 
irregularities in the funds of Zakat and Bait -ul-Mal. Let copy of the 
Auditor General’s report be supplied to all the Advocate Generals of the 
Provinces and ICT, who shall seek instruction and file reply to it. What SMC.01/20  
   6
further is to be done r egarding the Auditor General’s report that is of 
referring the matter to FIA or NAB, the same will be considered on the 
next date of hearing.  
9.  With regard to the Province of KP, the Court had asked the 
learned Advocate General so also the Provincial Sec retary (Health) about 
the incident that took place at Dubgari Garden, Peshawar where they 
have large number of clinics of Doctors and Consultants. It was stated 
that Clinics in that area are no t allowed to function and Police officials 
are maltreating the doctors and consultants and forcefully trying to close 
the Clinics. Learned Advocate General KP states that such incident is not 
in his knowledge and similar is the reply of the Provincial Secretary 
(Health). We are not satisfied with such replies and dire ct the Provincial 
Secretary (Health) to visit the Dubgari Garden and also the doctors’ and 
Consultants’ Clinics and enquire from them as to ill treatment given to 
them by the officials including the police. After such visit is made by the 
Secretary (Health ), he shall submit a report to this Court at the same 
time shall take action against all relevant officials who are found 
responsible in maltreatment of the doctors. In the meanwhile, the Clinics 
as per the SOPs shall be allowed to remain open and no obstr uction in 
this regard shall be  caused .  
10.  The learned Advocate General Balochistan has stated that 
although the Pandemic of Corona Virus is also present in the Province of 
Balochistan but in not in numbers which may cause disturbance to the 
Government o f Balochistan. He further states that all required facilities 
are being received for treatment of the Corona Virus patients and PP Es 
are provided to doctors and paramedics and there is no complaint 
regarding this aspect of the matter from the hospitals.  
11.  A complaint has also been made that Sanitary Staff are not 
being provided PP Es. All the Advocate Generals so also the learned 
Attorney General states that the requisite PP Es for the Sanitary Staff SMC.01/20  
   7
have been provided and if more are required the same wi ll also be 
delivered to ensure that the health of the Sanitary Staff is not 
compromised.  Learned counsel for the Pakistan Medical Association has 
also been heard.  
12.  The President of the Islamabad High Court Bar Association 
as well as Islamabad District  Bar Association have been heard. They 
state that so far the medical aspect of the matter is concerned, same has 
appropriately been provided by the ICT Administration but as they have 
some more grievance, they would like to see the Law Minister for the 
redressal of the same. Learned Attorney General has been asked to 
facilitate the meeting of the Presidents of the Bars with the Law Minister 
and such may be done as early as possible.   
13.  The matter is adjourned to a date after two weeks . In the 
meanwhile,  we expect that all the government stakeholders, Federal 
Government and Provincial Governments, shall sit together and frame a 
uniform national policy  in one week  regarding all aspect of the matter 
and shall ensure that such uniform policy is enforced all over the 
Pakistan. A report in this respect shall also be made available to the 
Court before the next date of hearing.  
 
   CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
Bench -I 
ISLAMABAD  
04.05.2020  
Irshad Hussian /*  
 