IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Review Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
 
Criminal Review Petition No. 2 of 2024  
In 
Criminal Petition No. 1054 -L of 2023  
 
The State through Prosecutor -General, Punjab.   … Petitioner  
     Versus  
Mubarik Ahmad Sani and another.     … Respondent s 
 
For the Petitioner :   Mr. Ahmed Raza Gillani,  
     Additional Prosecutor -General, Punjab.  
 
For Respondent  No. 1 :  Mr. Usman Karim -ud-Din, ASC.  
 
For the  Federation:   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
     Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 
For the Applicant:    Mr. Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, ASC.  
(In Cr.M.A No. 241/24)  
 
On behalf of JUI -P:  Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC.  
 
Date of Hearing:    26.02.2024.  
 
ORDER  
 Notices were issued to the respondent No. 1 and the learned 
Attorney -General for Pakistan pursuant to the order dated 23 February 
2024 and they are in attendance.  
 
2. Learned Mr. Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui has filed Criminal Misc. 
Application No. 24 1 of 2024 on behalf of a political party, J amat-e-Islami 
Pakistan through its President  and states that they may be arrayed as a 
party to these proceedings because the order dated 6 February 2024 
passed by this Court requires review. We are informed that ot hers have also 
submitted application s. Let all such applications be entertained by the 
office and put up alongwith this review petition on the next date of hearing.  
 Criminal Review Petition No. 2 of 202 4 
 
 2
3. All present agree that the parties to the case may take any objection 
to the order dated 6 February 2024 which is under review. However, all 
others, including those who want to be arrayed as parties , may file their 
written opinions with regard to the said order to the extent only of the 
interpretation of Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and/ or 
the Injunctions of Islam.  
 
4. We also consider it appropriate to issue notices alongwith copy of the 
order dated 6 February 2024  to the following institutions to seek their 
assistance with regard to the Injunctions of Islam:   
 
i) Council  of Islamic Ideology  Pakistan ; 
ii) Jamia Darul uloom, Karachi;  
iii) Jamia Imdadia, Faisalabad;   
iv) Jamia Naeemia, Karachi;  
v) Jamia Muhammadia Ghousia, Bhera;  
vi) Jamia Salafia, Faisalabad ; 
vii) Jamia Tul Multazir, Lahore ;  
viii) Jamia Urwat -ul-Wusqa , Lahore;  
ix) Quran Academy, Lahore ; and  
x) Al-Mawrid, Lahore.    
 
 In case anyone else wants to submit a written opinion for the 
guidance of this Court they may also do so . All w ritten opinions to be 
submitted within three weeks from today. To be fixed t hereafter.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
26.02.2024  
(M. Tauseef)   