Qazi Faez Isa, J . Criminal Original Petition No. 57/2015 has been 
filed by Muhammad Asjad Abbassi, Muhammad Fiaz and 
Muhammad Imran brin ging to the notice of th e Court that the 
order dated July 31, 2007 of this Court (“the petition ”, “the 
petitioners ” and “the said Order ” respectively ) passed in S uo 
Motu Case  No. 10  of 2005 (published in 2010 SCMR 361) was and 
is being violated .  The officers stated to be disobey ing the said 
Order are the Secretary Environment  of Punjab, the Director 
General Environment  Punjab and the Commissioner, Rawalpindi 
Division, arrayed by name  as respondent Nos.  1, 2 and 3 
respectively . In addition , the Chief Executive Officer s of 
Commoners Sky Gardens (Pvt.) Ltd. and Commoners Development 
(Pvt.) Ltd. , who are stated to be raising co nstruction in the area 
which had been prohibited by the said Order, are arrayed  as 
respondent Nos.  4 and 5 respectively .  
 
2. The said Order of this Court was passed exercis ing 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution as it involv ed a 
matter o f public importance affecting the Fundamental Rights of 
the people  on the basis of a note initiated by Justice Tassaduq 
Hussain Jillani (as he then was) , which is reproduced in the said 
Order. This Court had commenced proceedings because the 
Government of Punjab had decided to construct a project , the New 
Murree Project  (“the Project ”), in a forested area , which if allowed 
to go ahead would have resulted in clearing a portion of the Muree 
forest, including cutting a large number of trees, degrad ing the 
rainfall catchments  of the Simly and Rawal dams , causing silting 
and pollution of water channels, adversely impact ing wildlife and 
consequently being a  detriment  to the environment . The Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  2
apprehensions that were noted were further elaborated and 
confirmed by exp erts, therefore, the Government of Punjab decided 
not to proceed with the Project and also dissolved the New Murree 
Development Authority. This Court , however , apprehended that 
other projects may be launched, therefore (in paragraph 3 of the 
said Order) an d after noting that the Project had “ been disbanded ” 
and “ the New Murree Development Authority has been dissolved ” 
queried, “ What measures the Government of Punjab  has taken  to 
ensure that in future no project detrimental to the environment 
would be launch ed?”. In response to the query this Court was 
informed that, “ the following measures had been taken ” and 
enumerated twelve of them (reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said 
Order) .  The stated undertakings given to the Court by the 
Government of Punjab w ere incorporated in the said Order.  
 
3. The original five respondents were issued notices on October 
19, 2015 and all of them have filed replies thereto. Respondent 
Nos. 1 and 2 filed their reply through Crl. M. A. Nos. 1201/2015 
and 55/2017 , they have also fil ed Crl. M. A. No s. 1888/2016 and 
56/2017 .  Respondent No. 2 also filed a report in compliance with 
this Court’s order dated January 14, 2016 through Crl. M. A. No. 
208/2016 .  The r espondent No. 3 has filed his reply through Crl. 
M. A. No. 1216/2015 . The r espondent No. 4 has filed his reply 
through Crl. M. A. No. 1192/2015 . The respondent No. 5 has filed 
his reply through Crl. M. A. No. 1222/2015. The r espondent Nos. 4 
and 5 in their respective replies have not denied any of the facts 
alleged by the petition ers and also admit that they were raising 
construction, however, they state that  they did so, “ only after 
obtaining NOCs from the relevant departments and with the Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  3
permission of competent authority ”. The petitioners have also filed 
their objections to the reply filed by the respondent No. 2.  
 
4. This matter was heard for about an hour . At the outset Syed 
Rifaqat Hussain Shah, the learned AOR  for the petitioners , stated 
that two out of the three petitioners have filed Cr. M. A. Nos. 1292 
and 1293  of 2017  seeking to be disassociated from the petition . 
Their respective applications, which are identical, state that they 
are, “ satisfied from the report of the Environmental Protection 
Agency Punjab Lahore that the Commoners Sky Garden has 
obtained NOC from the Env ironmental Protection Agency  (EPA)  
Punjab  Lahore  and under the supervision of EPA Punjab as well as 
the Rawalpindi Development Authority (RDA)  … the petitioner do not 
want s to pursue the case and want to withdraw the same ”. In 
response to the query as to w hy the se petitioners wanted to 
withdraw the learned AOR stated that they had settled their 
dispute  with the private respondents. To the query , whether in a 
public interest  case, and after this Court had issue d notice s, did 
the petitioner s have a ‘right’ to bring the proceedings to an end , the 
learned AOR had no answer.  
 
5. In matter s of public interest and where some wrong doing is 
observed , as in the present case , and after notices have been 
issued to the respondents  the matter is one between the alleged 
contemnor and the Court .  Moreover, the public interest cannot be 
bartered for private gain  or ulterior motive , nor can a petitioner be 
harried to withdraw his petition . Sheela Barse v Union of India  
(AIR 1988 SC 2218)  was a public interest case which the petitioner 
wanted to withdraw , but her request was declined. In a public Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  4
interest case or litigation there is no ‘right’ in a petitioner , nor 
initiat ing such a case creates a ‘right’ in the petitioner, entitl ing 
him or her to determine the course of the proceedings . A petitioner 
in a public interest case is unlike a private litigant pursuing 
his/her private claim which he/she  can elect to withdraw .  In the 
case of Muhammad Alam v Planning and Development Department  
(PLD 2014 Balochistan 1 ) a Division  Bench of the Balochistan High 
Court, of which I was a member, did not permit some of the 
petitioners to withdraw their petition because, “ if such ‘right’ is 
recognized it may create a dangerous precedent and with it the 
attendant mischief .”  In matters of public  interest if it be accepted 
that a petitioner has such a ‘right’ or a ‘right’  is created in the 
petitioner because he/she advocated a cause or complained 
against some wrongdoing then this ‘ right’ may be used for personal 
ends, and the public interest  jeopardized, therefore, it can not be 
accepted or sanctioned . 
 
6. After filing the p etition the petitioner s filed additional 
documents showing that the National Park and forest were being 
devastated , as under:   
Cr. M. A . No. 1726 of 2016  brought photographs, n ewspaper 
reports, complaints and other documents  on record ; the 
photographs show forested land being cleared by bulldozers 
accompanied by men armed with automatic weapons . 
Cr. M. A. No. 58  of 2017  brought documents, maps and 
photographs on record showing that the said Order of this Court 
was being violated ; a notification dated September 15, 2009 issued 
under section 17 of the Punjab Wildlife  (Protection, Preservation, 
Conservation and Management) Act, 1974 declaring Murree, Kotli Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  5
Sattian and Kahuta areas as a National Park and prohibiting the , 
“clearing or  breaking up any land for cultivation, mining or for any 
other purpose ” was also attached . The notification was issued 
under the orders of the Governor of Punjab through the Secretary 
Forest, Wildlife and Fisheries Department.  
Cr. M. A. No. 1229 of 2016  through this application the 
petitioners strongly object ed to the veracity of the reply filed by the 
Environmental Protection Agency, Punjab (“ EPA”).  They state that 
EPA intentionally violat ed the said Ord er, and more specifically 
that the “approval ” dated October 9, 2015 granted by the EPA  
contravenes the said Order . Photographs are attached with the 
application which show  forest land is being cleared  of trees and all 
undergrowth , bulldozers are being used  extensively for flattening 
and compacting forest land, building activity is being undertaken 
and debris is being dispos ed of in water channels.  
 
7. Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, the learned senior counsel represents the 
persons who are stated to have invested in the  project s of 
respondent Nos. 4 and 5.  The learned senior counsel states that 
he has certain concerns with the said Order, however, answered in 
the negative when asked if its review was sought. He then stated 
that his clients had invested their money in th e project s and if the 
projects are not allowed to proceed they will lose the ir investment . 
To a query whether  his clients could not recover the money from 
the companies and the persons to whom the same was paid , if the 
projects were undertaken in disobedie nce of the said Order, and 
whether their private rights, if any, could be considered to prevail 
over public rights and whether their purported rights could be 
considered by this Court while exercising contempt jurisdiction, he Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  6
stated that his clients were not heard before passing of the said 
Order.  This Court had decided a public interest matter and an 
extraordinary effort to inform the public was also made in the said 
Order (as per clauses (vi) and (vii) of paragraph 4 of the said 
Order) . If anyone is eff ected, it does not mean that the said Order 
can not or should not be implemented, more so when the matter is 
one where the public interest  is seriously undermined . In any 
event if the said respondents were duped into investing in the 
project s of the respon dent Nos. 4 and 5 they c ould seek remedies 
against them in other appropriate forums.  
 
8. The petition was filed on June 16, 2015 and today is the 
thirteenth da te of hearing ; twenty seven months have elapsed . On 
the last date of hearing  (January 19, 2017) , which  was over eight 
months  ago, the matter was adjourned on the request of the 
learned senior counsel Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan , when this Court 
observed, “ let it be a final chance for all. Interim order of status -quo 
shall continue in the meanwhile. In case, if anyone does not turn up, 
we will proceed in this case being a matter of public importance… ”. 
But, still  there has been no real progress . From the stance taken 
by all the learned counsel as well as by the representatives of the 
Government of Punjab it appea rs that all interests have coalesced . 
The Advocate General of the province was directed to be present 
vide order dated November 15, 2016, but after appearing once 
disregarded the order. Surprisingly, even Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, the 
learned Additional Advocat e General  of Punjab,  supports the action 
of the various functionaries which negate the Government of 
Punjab’s undertaking s given to this Court and is in apparent 
disregard of the said Order .  The learned Additional Advocate Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  7
General  refers to the reply file d by respondent No. 3 (Cr. M. A. No. 
1216/2015) and the documents filed therein, including the 
“sanction ” accorded to Commoners Sky Gardens (Pvt.) Ltd. on 
January 26, 2015 by Mr. Jamshaid Aftab, Director  of the 
Metropolitan Planning and Traffic Engineering  Directorate of the 
Rawalpindi Development Authority , and the “approval ” dated 
September 17, 2015 regarding its infrastructure design. He also 
refers to the “decisions ” of the Punjab EPA dated May 28, 2014 and 
October 9, 2015  approving construction activit y.  
 
9. EPA “decisions” require the proponent of the project  to, 
“avoid cutting of trees ”, however, it is inexplicable how a project can 
be undertaken without cutting trees .  Photographs have been filed 
showing that many trees have been cut, and forest land cleared, 
flattened , bulldozed  and compacted . EPA “decision e” further 
stipulate that the proponent of the project, “ shall plant at least 
20000  trees of minimum height 6 -7 feet especially of indigenous 
species within six months ”. Considerably over six months have 
elapsed but there is no evidence whatsoever of the planting of even 
a single tree. EPA thus demonstrate s that it has no desire to 
ensure  that even its own decisions  are complied with . The National 
Park and forest land are being decimated. The referred  to 
permissions, approvals, sanctions and decisions were issued after 
the said Order. The EPA “decisions” apparently disobey the 
undertaking s given to this Court and the said Order. It also 
appears that to benefit private parties at the cost of the public and 
the environment, which EPA is mandated to protect and conserve, 
EPA is instead resorting to novel devices which may be categorized 
as a fraud on its own statute.  Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  8
10. The aforesaid purported sanctions , approvals  and decisions  
are in apparent disregard of the undertaking s given to a fourteen 
member Bench of this Court , reproduced hereunder :  
(1)  “Tehsil Murree, Kahuta and Kotli Sattian have been declared 
environmentally sensitive areas under the Pakistan 
Environment Protection Act, 1997” (clause (i) of the 
undertaking, reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said Order) ;  
(2)  “All Kinds of construction and development activities are 
banned in these areas ” (clause (ii) of the undertaking, 
reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said Order) ; 
(3)  “Across the board appl ication of sections 12 and 16 of the Act 
is being ensured in these areas. The District Officer 
(Environment), Rawalpindi has been directed to carry out 
effective monitoring of these areas ” (clause (iii) of the 
undertaking, reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said Order) ; 
(4)  “All kinds of development activities are banned along both 
sides of Murree Express Way ” (clause (iv) of the undertaking, 
reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said Order) ;  
(5)  “No construction is allowed within 100 meters along both 
sides of  the Murree Express Way ” (clause ( v) of the 
undertaking, reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said Order) ; 
(6)  “District Administration and Local Administration Authorities 
have been taken into loop for implementing directions / 
restrictions ” (clause ( viii) of the undertaking, reproduced in 
paragraph 4 of the said Order) ; and  
(7)  “Establishment of a National Park at Murree, Kahuta and Kotli 
Sattian is also in pipeline ” (clause (xii) of the undertaking, 
reproduced in paragraph 4 of the said Order) .   
 Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  9
11. The Gov ernment of the Punjab subsequently issued a 
notification dated September 15, 2009 declaring the aforesaid 
areas as a N ational Park under section 17 of the Punjab Wildlife 
(Protection, Preservation, Conservation and Management) Act, 
1974 . The following , amongst other acts, are prohibited  in a 
National Park : “felling, tapping, burning or in any way damaging or 
destroying, taking, collecting or removing any plant or tree there 
from” and  to “clear or break any land for cultivation, mining or for 
any other purpo se” (clause s (iii) and (iv) of subsection (4) of section 
17) and violation s attract criminal liability (section 21) .  
 
12. Many of the documents that have been filed, including 
photographs, show that large tracts of  the forest and a designated 
National Park are being destroyed and different projects are coming 
up with the apparent connivance of those who are supposed to 
safeguard the public interest and to protect the forest  and the 
National Park . Significantly, the documents filed by  the Secretary 
Environment and Director General  EPA point out that, other than 
the projects of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 , there are yet others 
carrying out “unapproved ” construction and making 
“encroachments ” into the designated National Park and the 
protected forest  area, but still n othing is being done to safeguard 
them .  
 
13. Having gone through the documents on record, including 
photographs and maps, it appears that the areas which were 
required to be protected are being destroyed at an alarming rate 
and the authorities designated to p rotect these areas are actively 
facilitating such destruction. The apparent disobedience of the said Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  10
Order continues and  the tactics employed by the respondents is to 
waste the time of this Court and delay the matter indefinitely ; in 
this regard to an exte nt they have succeeded as twenty seven 
months have elapsed since the filing of the petition.  With each 
passing day  the forest and the National Park is further destroyed . 
The concerned authorities , who are paid from the public 
exchequer , are apparently dis regard ing the said Order and the law , 
the consequence of which the people of Pakistan and future 
generations  bear and will suffer forever . We can also not be 
unmindful of the fact that there are commercial interests at play 
which appear to have made inroad s amongst the personnel of the 
departments of the Government of Punjab and designated 
statutory authorities to serve private profit at the cost of the public 
interest.  
 
14. The documents on record disclose that the official 
respondents (respondent Nos.  1, 2 a nd 3) , the Secretary Forest, 
Wildlife and Fisheries Department, Government of Punjab, the 
District  Officer (Environment) Rawalpindi  and Mr. Jamshaid Aftab , 
Director of the Rawalpindi Development Authority have violated  the 
undertaking s given to this Court and disobeyed the said Order  
whereas respondent Nos. 4 and 5 have apparently violated the said 
Order .  
 
15. Therefore, the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 , the Secretary Forest, 
Wildlife and Fisheries Department, Government of Punjab, the 
District Officer (Environment)  Rawalpindi  and Mr. Jamshaid Aftab, 
Director of the Rawalpindi Development Authority  are directed to 
be in attendance on the next date of hearing so that the y may be Crl. O. P. No. 57/2015, etc.  11
proceeded against in accordance with Article 204 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republ ic of Pakistan and the Contempt 
of Court Ordinance, 2003.   
 
16. The Advocate General of Punjab was earlier directed to be in 
attendance and he is cautioned to abide by the direction and to be 
in attendance  himself on the next  date and future dates, unless his 
attendance is specifically dispensed  with. 
 
 
Qazi Faez Isa , J. 
 