 
 
JUDGMENT    
MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL, J. -- I remain kept o n waiting 
for the majority judgment  by my learned brother Judges (Umar Ata 
Bandia l, CJ., Ijaz  ul Ahsan and Munib Akhtar, JJ.) but the same 
has not been delivered till  date. I am going to be superannuated  on 
13.07.2022; therefore, I decided to release my judgment (dissent 
note) comprising reasons in support of my short order dated  
17.05.2022  (PLD 2022 SC 488 ), accordingly.  
2.  Briefly, Dr. Arif  Alivi, the Hon’ble President of Islamic 
Republic Pakistan ( “the President ”) has filed this reference under 
Article 186 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
(“the Constitution ”) for the opinion of this Court on the following 
questions of law:  
“1. Whether keeping in view the scheme and spirit of the 
Constitution which enshrinesdemocratic values, customs 
and norms and provides for parliamentary form of 
government conducted through the chosen 
representatives of the peop le being carriers of Amanat, 
which of the following two interpretations of Article 63A 
of the Constitution is to be adopted and implemented to 
achieve the constitutional objective of curbing the 
menace of defections and purification of the 
electoral process  and democratic accountability namely:  
(a) Interpretation of Article 63A in a manner that 
Khiyanat  by way of defections  warrant no 
preemptive action save de -seating the member as 
per the prescribedprocedure with no further 
restriction or curbs from seeking election afresh; 
or 
(b) A robust, purpose oriented and meaningful 
interpretation of Article 63A which visualizes this 
provision as prophylactic enshrining the 
constitutional goal of purifying the democratic 
process, inter alia, by rooting out the mischief of 
defection by creating deterrence, inter alia, by 
neutralizing the effects of vitiated vote followed 
by lifelong disqualification for the member found 
involved in such constitutionally prohibited and 
morally reprehensible conduct;  
2. Where a Member engages in constitutionally prohibited 
and morally reprehensibleact of defection, can the 
member nevertheless claim a vested right to have his 
vote counted and given equal weightage or there exist or 
is be read into the Constitution restriction to exclude 
such tainted votes from the vote count?  
3. Where a member who could but did not hear the voice of 
his conscience byresigning from his existing seat in the 
Assembly and has been finally declared to have Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             2 
   
committed defection after exhausting the procedure 
prescribed in Article 63A of the Constitution including 
appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 63 A (5), he 
can no longer be treated to be sagacious, righteous, non -
profligate, honest and  ameen and, therefore, stands 
disqualified for life?  
4. What other measures and steps can be undertaken 
within the existing constitutional and legal framework to 
curb, deter and eradicate the cancerous practice of 
defection, floor crossing and vote buying? ” 
3.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and 
have go ne through the available record.  
Historical Background of Advisory jurisdiction  
4.  The c oncept of advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court goes back and originates from section 213 of Government of 
India Act, 1935, under which Governor -General could sen d a 
question of law, which was of such a nature and of such public 
importance to the Federal Court for consideration, if it was 
considered by him to be expedient to do so. After partition, article 
162 of the first Constitution 1956 provided the advisory ju risdiction 
of the Supreme Court to enable the President to obtain opinion from 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan if it appeared to him that question of 
law has arisen or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of 
such public importance. Thereafter, t he article 59 of the Constitution 
1962 provided that the President, if he considers desirable to obtain 
the opinion on any question' of law which he considers of public 
importance he may refer the question to the Supreme Court for 
consideration. Similarly,  the article 186 of the Constitution 1973 
provides the advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The advisory 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is different and distinct from the 
jurisdiction under Articles 184 and 185 of the Constitution .Therefore, 
it would not be fair to say that the opinion expressed by this Court on 
Presidential Reference under Article 186 of the Constitution has no 
binding. Reference may be made to judgment reported as Reference 
No.2 of 2005 by the President of Pakista n (PLD 2005 Supreme Court 
873). 
5.  No doubt, there was a need for introducing an anti -
defection provision in the Constitution and it was considered 
necessary to do so because of a desire to strengthen and bring about 
stability in our parliamentary democra cy. The purpose behind this 
was to regulate the party discipline in the business of parliament. Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             3 
   
This exercise, initially, was done by introducing Article 63A in to the 
Constitution by way of the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 
1997. Till 2010, def ection was to be attracted only by, a member who, 
inter alia : “1(b) votes or abstains from voting in the House contrary to 
any direction issued by the Parliamentary Party to which he belongs, 
in relation to, (i) election of the Prime Minister or the Chief Minister; 
or (ii) a vote of confidence or a vote of no -confidence; or (iii)    a Money 
Bill.” For ready reference , the provisions of the same are reproduced 
herein below:  
"63A(1). Disqualification on grounds of defection, etc. --If a 
member of a Parliamentary Party composed of a single political 
party in a House - 
(a)  resigns from membership of his political party or joins 
another Parliamentary Party; or  
(b)  votes or abstains from voting in the House contrary to any 
direction issued by the Parliamentary Party to which he 
belongs, in relation to -- 
(i)  election of th e Prime Minister or the Chief Minister; 
or 
(ii)  a vote of confidence or a vote of no -confidence; or  
(iii)  a Money Bill or a Constitution (Amendment) Bill;  
 he may be declared in writing by the Party Head to have 
defected from the political party, and the  Party Head may 
forward a copy of the declaration to the Presiding Officer and the 
Chief Election Commissioner and shall similarly forward a copy 
thereof to the member concerned:  
 Provided that before making the declaration, the Party 
Head shall provide su ch member with an opportunity to show 
cause as to why such declaration may not be made against him.  
Explanation. - "Party Head" means any person, by whatever 
name called, declared as such by the Party.  
 (2) A member of a House shall be deemed to be a member 
of a Parliamentary Party if he, having been elected as a 
candidate or nominee of a political party which constitutes the 
Parliamentary Party in the House or, having been elected 
otherwise than as a candidate or nominee of a political party, 
has beco me a member of such Parliamentary Party after such 
election by means of a declaration in writing.  
 (3) Upon receipt of the declaration under clause (1), the 
Presiding Officer of the House shall within two days refer, and in 
case he fails to do so it shall be deemed that he has referred, the 
declaration to the Chief Election Commissioner who shall lay the 
declaration before the Election Commission for its decision 
thereon confirming the declaration or otherwise within thirty 
days of its receipt by the Chief Election Commissioner;  
 (4) Where the Election Commission confirms the 
declaration, the member referred to in clause (1) shall cease to 
be a member of the House and his seat shall become vacant.  Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             4 
   
 (5) Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Election 
Comm ission may, within thirty days, prefer an appeal to the 
Supreme Court which shall decide the matter within ninety days 
from the date of the filing of the appeal.  
 (6) Nothing contained in this Article shall apply to the 
Chairman or Speaker of a House.  
 (7) For the purpose of this Article,  
(a)  "House" means the National Assembly or the Senate, in 
relation to the Federation; and a Provincial Assembly in 
relation to the Province, as the case may be;  
(b)  "Presiding Officer" means the Speaker of the National 
Assembly, the Chairman of the Senate or the Speaker of 
the Provincial Assembly, as the case may be.  
(8) Article 63A substituted as aforesaid shall come into effect 
from the next general elections to be held after the 
commencement of the Constitution (Eighte enth Amendment) Act, 
2010:  
 Provided that till Article 63A substituted as aforesaid 
comes into effect the provisions of existing Article 63A shall 
remain operative ." 
 
6.  The vires of this article were challenged before this Court 
in the case of Wukala  Mahaz  Barai  Tahafaz  Dastoor v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 Supreme Court 1263 ) and a 7 -member Bench 
(by Majority 6 -1) of this Court held that “ the Article 63A of the 
Constitution is intra vires ” of the Constitution as it addressed a 
prevalent malaise and was, therefore, helpful in furtheri ng the 
principles of democracy. Later on, some changes brought about in 
Article 63A by the Constitution (eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010 
i.e. in clause (1)(b)(iii), the words “or a Constitutional (Amendment) 
Bill” hav e been added after the words “a Money Bill”. Secondly, “a 
party head” has been invested with the power to make a declaration 
that a parliamentarian has defected. A party head has been described 
in Article 63A as “any person, by whatever name called, declar ed as 
such by the party”.  Again, newly amended Article 63A of the 
Constitution came for consideration before this Court in the case of 
District Bar Association, Rawalpindi v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2015 Supreme Court 401 ), the Court, while dismissing all the 
Constitutional Petitions challenging the validity of Eighteenth 
Amendment, held that the c hanges brought in Article  63A of the 
Constitution by t he Eighteenth Amendment appears  to be reasonable 
and also necessary for the maintenance of party discipl ine, stability 
and smooth functioning of democracy in Parliament.  Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             5 
   
7.  Now again this Article is under consideration before this 
Court th rough  the advisory jurisdiction. I am fully aware of the legal 
position that t he opinion by this Court on the reference by the 
President is not a decision between the parties but the Court, while 
answering the reference,  undertakes an extensive judicial exercise 
particularly when there is a question of interpretation of a 
constitutional provision is involved . For this reaso n, it has been given 
esteemed utmost by all the organs of the State .Our Constitution is a 
great social document, almost revolutionary in its aim of 
transforming a medieval,  hierarchical society into a modern, 
egalitarian democracy. Its provisions can be comprehended only by a 
spacious, social -science approach, not by pedantic, traditional 
legalism. When a country is endowed with a Constitution, there is an 
accompanying promis e which stipulates that every member of the 
country right from its citizens to the high constitutional functionaries 
must idolize the constitutional fundamentals. This duty imposed by 
the Constitution stems from the fact that the Constitution is the 
indisp ensable foundational base that functions as the guiding force 
to protect and ensure that the democratic setup promised to the 
citizenry remains unperturbed. The constitutional functionaries owe 
a greater degree of responsibility towards this eloquent instr ument 
for it is from this document that they derive their power and 
authority and, as a natural corollary, they must ensure that they 
cultivate and develop a spirit of constitutionalism where every action 
taken by them is governed by and is in strict confo rmity with the 
basic tenets of the Constitution.  
Interpretation of provision of Constitution  
8.  The democratic nature of our Constitution and the 
paradigm of representative participation are undoubtedly comprised 
in the "spirit of the Constitution". The spirit of the Constitution has 
its own signification. As I have used the words "spirit of the 
Cons titution", it becomes my obligation to clarify the concept 
pertaining to the same. The canon of constitutional interpretation 
that glorifies the democratic concepts lays emphasis not only on the 
etymology of democracy but also embraces within its sweep a 
connotative expansion so that the intrinsic and innate facets are 
included. Thus, while interpreting the provisions of the Constitution, 
the safe and most sound approach is to read the words of the 
Constitution in the light of the avowed purpose and spirit of the Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             6 
   
Constitution so that it does not result in an illogical outcome which 
could have never been the intention of the Constituent Assembly or of 
the Parliament while exercising its constituent power. Therefore, a 
Court, while adhering to the language emp loyed in the provision, 
should not abandon the concept of the intention, spirit, the holistic 
approach and the constitutional legitimate expectation which 
combinedly project a magnificent facet of purposive interpretation. 
The Court should pose a question to itself whether a straight, literal 
and textual approach would annihilate the sense of the great living 
document which is required to be the laser beam to illumine. If the 
answer is in the affirmative, then the courts should protect the sense 
and spirit of the Constitution taking aid of purposive interpretation 
as that is the solemn duty of the courts as the final arbiters of the 
Constitution. It is a constitutional summon for performance of duty. 
The stress has to be on changing society, relevant politic al values, 
absence of any constitutional prohibition and legitimacy of the end to 
be achieved by appropriate means.  
9.  The task of interpreting an instrument as dynamic as the 
Constitution assumes great import in a democracy. The Courts are 
entrusted wit h the critical task of expounding the provisions of the 
Constitution and further while carrying out this essential function, 
they are duty bound to ensure and preserve the rights and liberties of 
the citizens without disturbing the very fundamental princip les which 
form the foundational base of the Constitution. Although, primarily, 
it is the literal Rule which is considered to be the norm which governs 
the courts of law while interpreting statutory and constitutional 
provisions, yet mere allegiance to the dictionary or literal meaning of 
words contained in the provision may, sometimes, annihilate the 
quality of poignant flexibility and requisite societal progressive 
adjustability. Such an approach may not eventually subserve the 
purpose of a living document . 
10.  The most important aspect of modern constitutional 
theory is its interpretation. Constitutional law is a fundamental law 
of governance of a politically organized  society and it provides for an 
independent judicial system which has the onerous respon sibility of 
decisional process in the sphere of application of the constitutional 
norms. The resultant consequences do have a vital impact on the 
well-being of the people. The principles of constitutional 
interpretation, thus, occupy a prime place in the m ethod of Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             7 
   
adjudication. In bringing about constitutional order through 
interpretation, the judiciary is often confronted with two propositions 
-- whether the provisions of the Constitution should be interpreted as 
it was understood at the time of framing of  the Constitution 
unmindful of the circumstances at the time when it was 
subsequently interpreted or whether the constitutional provisions 
should be interpreted in the light of contemporaneous needs, 
experiences and knowledge. In other words, should it be historical 
interpretation or contemporaneous interpretation. In this regard, I 
think it appropriate to have a bird's eye view as to how the jurists 
and academicians of different jurisdictions have contextually 
perceived the science of constitutional interp retation. The theory of 
historical perspective found its votary in Chief Justice Taney who 
categorically stated in Dred Scott v. Sanford 60 U.S. ( 19 How.) 393 
(1857)  that as long as the Constitution continues to exist in the 
present form, it speaks not only in the same words but also with the 
same meaning and intent with which it spoke when it came from the 
hands of the framers. Similar observations have been made by 
Justice Sutherland  in Home Building and Loan Association v. 
Blaisdell, 290 U.S. 398 (1934) . Propagating a different angle, Chief 
Justice Marshall in McCulloch v. Maryland 17 US (4Wheat) 316 
(1819)  has observed that the American Constitution is intended to 
serve for ages to come and it should be adopted to various crises of 
human affairs. Justice Hughes in State v. Superior Court (1944) at 
547) observed that the constitutional provisions should be 
interpreted to meet and cover the changing conditions of social life 
and economic life. Justice Holmes in Gompers v. US 233 (1914)  
observed that the meaning of the constitutional terms is to be 
gleaned from their origin and the line of their growth. Justice Cardozo 
once stated in Benjamin N. Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial 
Process, Yale University Press, 1921  that a  Constitution states or 
ought to state not Rules for the passing hour but principles f or an 
expanding future.  
11.  It would be interesting to note that Justice Brandeis  of 
the Supreme Court USA in Burnett v. Coronado Oil and Gas Co., 285 
US (1932)  tried to draw a distinction between interpretation and 
application of constitutional provision s. The Constitution makers in 
their wisdom must have reasonably envisaged the future needs and 
attempted at durable framework of the Constitution. They must not Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             8 
   
have made the Constitution so rigid as to affect the future. There is a 
difference between modi fication and subversion of the provisions of 
the Constitution through interpretation. The view is that there is 
sufficient elasticity but fundamental changes are not envisaged by 
interpretation. Thus, there is a possibility of reading into the 
provisions c ertain Regulations or amplifications which are not 
directly dealt with. There is yet another angle that the libertarian's 
absolutism principle never allows for restrictions to be read into the 
liberties which are not already mentioned in the Constitution.  
12.  Similarly, Dickson, J., in Hunter v. Southam  Inc [1984] 2 
SCR 145 , rendering the judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada, 
expounded the principle pertaining to constitutional interpretation 
made the important observation that, “the task of expounding  a 
constitution is crucially different from that of construing a statute. A 
statute defines present rights and obligations. It is easily enacted and 
as easily repealed. A constitution, by contrast, is drafted with an eye 
to the future. Its function is to p rovide a continuing framework for the 
legitimate exercise of governmental power and, when joined by a Bill or 
a Charter of Rights, for the unremitting protection of individual rights 
and liberties. Once enacted, its provisions cannot easily be repealed or 
amended. It must, therefore, be capable of growth and development 
over time to meet new social, political and historical realities often 
unimagined by its framers. The judiciary is the guardian of the 
constitution and must, in interpreting its provisions, bear these 
considerations in mind. Professor Paul Freund expressed this idea 
aptly when he admonished the American courts 'not to read the 
provisions of the Constitution like a last will and testament lest it 
become one' .” 
13.  The Supreme Court of India in Kalpana Mehta and Ors. 
vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors.  (AIR 2006 SC 3127 ) held that, “ it 
may be desirable to give a broad and generous construction to the 
Constitutional provisions, but while doing so the rule of "plain mean ing" 
or "literal" interpretation, which remains "the primary rule", has also to 
be kept in mind. In fact, the rule of "literal construction" is the safe rule 
unless the language used is contradictory, ambiguous, or leads really 
to absurd results .” Also, In Manoj  Narula v. Union of India  (2014) 9 
SCC 1 , the Supreme  Court  of India , while interpreting Article 75(1) of 
the Constitution, opined that reading of implied limitation to the said 
provision would tantamount to prohibition or adding a Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             9 
   
disqualification  which is neither expressly stated nor impliedly 
discernible from the provision. Eventually, the majority expressed 
that when there is no disqualification for a person against whom 
charges have been framed in respect of heinous or serious offences or 
offences relating to corruption to contest the election, it is difficult to 
read the prohibition into Article 75(1) by interpretative process or, for 
that matter, into Article 164(1) to the powers of the Prime Minister or 
the Chief Minister in such a manner. Th at would come within the 
criterion of eligibility and would amount to prescribing an eligibility 
qualification and adding a disqualification which has not been 
stipulated in the Constitution. In the absence of any constitutional 
prohibition or statutory em bargo, such disqualification cannot be 
read into Article 75(1) or Article 164(1) of the Constitution.  In 
Padmasundara Rao (dead) and Ors. v. State of Tamil and Ors. (2002) 
255 ITR 147 (SC ), the Supreme Court of India, while interpreting a 
provision, held that, “ the Court only interprets the law and cannot 
legislate it. If a provision of law is misused and subjected to the abuse 
of the process of law, it is for the legislature to amend, modify or repeal 
it, if deemed necessary .” 
14.  This Court has had almo st similar approach regarding 
interpretation of a Constitutional provision.  As in Al-Jehad Trust v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 Supreme Court 324 ), it was held 
that, “…a written Constitution, is an organic document designed and 
intended to cater the ne ed for all times to come. It is like a living tree, it 
grows and blossoms with the passage of time in order to keep pace 
with the growth of the country and its people; Thus, the approach, 
while interpreting a Constitutional provision should be dynamic, 
progressive and oriented with the desire to meet the situation, which 
has arisen, effectively. The interpretation cannot be a narrow and 
pedantic. But the Court's efforts should be to construe the same 
broadly, so that 'it may be able to meet the requirement of ever 
changing society. The general words cannot be construed in isolation 
but the same are to be construed in the context in which, they are 
employed. In other words, their colour and contents are derived from 
their context.”  More importantly, this Court in Begum Nusrat Ali 
Gonda V. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2013 Supreme 
Court 829 ) culled out the following basic principles for the 
interpretation of Constitution:  Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             10 
   
a. That the entire Constitution has to be read as an 
integrated whole;  
b. No one particular provision should be so construed as to 
destroying the other, but each sustaining the other  
c. provision. This is the rule of harmony, rule of 
completeness and exhaustiveness;  
d. Interpretation to be consistent with the Injunctions of 
Islam;  
e. It must always be borne in mind that it is only where the 
words are not clear, or the provision in question is 
ambiguous, that is, it is fairly and equally open to diverse 
meanings, that the duty of interpretation arises;  
f. Intention to  be gathered from the language of the 
enactment, otherwise known as the 'plain meaning rule;  
g. It is elementary rule of construction that it is to be 
assumed that the words and phrases of technical 
legislation are used in their technical meaning, if they 
have acquired one, and otherwise in their ordinary 
meaning. Critical and subtle distinctions are to be 
avoided and the obvious and popular meaning of the 
language should, as a general rule, be followed;  
h. It is a cardinal rule of construction of statutes that 
no words are to be added or omitted or treated as 
surplus  age or redundant ; 
i. That the words of written Constitution prevail over all 
unwritten conventions, precedents and practices to the 
contrary; and  
j. Legislative history is relevant for interpreting 
constit utional provisions.  
Emphasis supplied.  
 
15.  The making of Article 63A as well as other provision of 
the Constitution, in my view, is impelled by the trinity of the 
preambular vision that the Constitution makers gave to this country. 
Drafting the text of a Constitution or a Statute is not just an art  but 
is a skill. It is not disputed that a good legislation is that the text of 
which is plain, simple unambiguous precise and there is no 
repetition of words or usage of superfluous language. The skill of a 
draftsman in the context of drafting a Constitut ion or a Statute lies in 
brevity and employment of appropriate phraseology wherein 
superfluous words or repetitive words are avoided. It appears that the 
aforesaid principle was kept in mind while drafting the provisions of 
Article 63A. Moreover, the autho rity to exercise judicial power is 
inherent in the Superior Courts only to interpret, construe and apply 
the law as a result of a system of division of powers. One cannot 
stretch jurisdiction and power of the Supreme Court beyond the 
known Constitutional l imits. Clause (2) of Article 175 of the 
Constitution says that no Court shall have any jurisdiction save as is 
or may be conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under any law 
as held in State v. Zia -ur-Rehman  (PLD 1973 SC 49 ). One of the Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             11 
   
principles of  Constitutional interpretation enunciated was, that the 
Courts are creatures of the Constitution, they derive their powers and 
jurisdiction from the Constitution and must confine themselves 
within the limits set by Constitution. Reference may be made to Mrs. 
Shahida  Zahir  Abbasi and 4 Others vs. President of Pakistan  (PLD 
1996 Supreme Court 632 ). 
16.  The Constitution should be read as a whole giving every 
part thereof meaning consistent with the other provision of the 
Constitution. As far as possible each provision of the Constitution 
should be construed so as to harmonize with all the others. But, in 
applying these rules we however have to remember that to harmonies  
not to destroy. In the interpretation of the Constitutional provision 
the courts always presume that the legislature inserted every part 
thereof for a purpose and the legislative intention is that every part of 
the statue should have effect. An argument founded on what is 
claimed to be the spirit of the Constitution is always attractive, for it 
has a powerful appeal to sentiment and emotion; but a court of law 
has to gather the spirit of the  Constitution from the language of the 
Constitution. What one may believe or think to be the spirit of the 
Constitution cannot prevail if the language of the Constitution does 
not support that view.  
17.  By applying the above quoted as well as discussed 
principles of interpretation of a Constitutional provision, I would now 
proceed to determine the question sas referred to us by the President 
through this Reference for opinion.  
Question No.1  
18.  From a  bare perusal of the reference, it transpire s that 
the same is founded on the preconceived notion that every member 
who abandons his party or who disagree with the desire of the party 
head particularly in matters as enumerated under clause 1(b) of 
Article 63A of the Constitution would be dishonest an d has 
committed Khyanat  for some monetary gain or material 
consideration. Any interpretation or opinion on this presumption 
would be destructive of intention of the Constitution makers. 
Moreover, the argument  on behalf of the President that a  robust, 
purpose oriented and meaningful interpretation of Article 63A which 
visualizes this provision as prophylactic enshrining the constitutional 
goal of purifying the democratic process, inter alia, by rooting out the 
mischief of defection by creating deterrence, inter alia, by neutralizing Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             12 
   
the effects of vitiated vote followed by lifelong disqualification for the 
member found involved in such constitutionally prohibited and 
morally reprehensible conduct is not tenable under the law and is 
overruled ,being misconceived.  
19.  Moreover, Article 63A  also provides penal consequences of 
defection in the terms that if the declaration of defection made by the 
Party Head against a member is confirmed by the Election 
Commission , the member so declared shall cease to be a member of the 
House and his seat shall become vacant by virtue of sub -para 4 of the 
Article 63A. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Election 
Commission may prefer an appeal to this Court under sub-para 5  of 
Article 63A supra  see Imran Khan Niazi v. Ayesha Gulalai  (2018 
SCMR 1043 ). It is a well -settled principle of interpretation that a penal 
provision should be construed strictly and its scope should not be 
extended unless it is so required by the clear language used therein or 
by necessary intendment.  Reference here may be made to the case of 
Wukala  Mahaz  Barai  Tahafaz  Dastoor v. Federation of Pakistan and 
others  (PLD 1998 Supreme Court 1263 ). For this reason, a member , 
cannot be held disqualified lifelo ng on the ground of his defection 
under Article 63A  of the Constitution merely through the process of 
interpretation as proposed or expected by the President. It would 
amount to re-write or read in “a penal” phrase in a Constitutional 
provision and would also affect  the other provisions of the Constitution. 
It would not be out of context to state that the Court s only interpret  
the law and cannot legislate it. If a provision of law is misused and 
subjected to the abuse of the process of law, it is for the l egislature to 
amend, modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary.  (See P admasundara 
Rao (dead) and Ors. v. State of Tamil and Ors. (2002) 255 ITR 147 
(SC)). It is also to be borne in mind that Constitution envisages the 
trichotomy of powers amongst three organ s of the State, namely the 
legislature, executive and the judiciary. The legislature is assigned the 
task of law making, the executive to execute such law and the judiciary 
to interpret the laws. None of the organs of the State can encroach 
upon the field of the others. Reference may be made to the cases of 
Jurists Foundation v. Federal Government  (PLD 2020 SC 1 ), Executive 
District Officer (Revenue) v. Ijaz Hussain  (2011 SCMR 1864 ), Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265 ), Sindh 
High Court Bar Association's case  (PLD 2009 SC 879 ), Nazar Abbas 
Jaffri v. Secy: Government of the Punjab  (2006 SCMR 606 ), Syed Zafar Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             13 
   
Ali Shah v. General Pervez Musharraf  (PLD 2000 SC 869 ), Liaquat 
Hussain v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1999 SC 504 ), Mahmo od Khan 
Achakzai v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1997 SC 426 ), Government of 
Balochistan v. Azizullah  Memon  (PLD 1993 SC 341 ), Federation of 
Pakistan v. Saeed Ahrnaci Khan  (PLD 1974 SC 151 ), State v. Zia  ur 
Rahman  (PLD 1973 SC 49 ), Smt. Indra Nehru Ghandi v. Raj Narain  
(AIR 1975 SC 2299 ) and Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India  (AIR 1980 
SC 1789 ). The question No.1 is, therefore, answered in negative.  
 
Question No.2  
20.  Coming to the question No.2 of the reference. It revolves 
around the consequences of defection on the vote being cast by the 
defector. The learned counsel for the President forcefully asserted 
that w here a member engages in constitutionally prohibited and 
morally reprehensible act of defection he cannot claim a vested right 
to have his vote counted and given equal weightage, and as such his 
vote should not be counted. Article 55 of the Constitution 
contemplates that all the decisions of the National Assembl y shall be 
taken by majority of the members present and voting. Voting is 
formal expression of will or opinion by the person entitled to exercise 
the right on the subject or issue in question. In Black's Law 
Dictionary  by Henry Campbell Black, M.A (Sixth E dition) at p.1576 , 
the term vote is explained as, " the expression of one's will, preference, 
or choice, formally manifested by a member of a legislative or 
deliberative body, or of a constituency or a body of qualified electors, in 
regard to the decision to be made by the body as a whole upon any 
proposed measure or proceeding or in passing laws, rules or 
regulations, or the selection of an officer or representative ". Right to 
vote means right to exercise the right in favour of or against the 
motion or res olution. Such a right implies right to remain neutral as 
well. For this, I, with respect, do not agree with the majority opinion 
that the vote of any member (including a deemed member) of a 
Parliamentary Party in a House that is cast contrary to any direct ion 
issued by the latter in terms of para (b) of clause (1) of Article 63A 
cannot be counted and must be disregarded, and this is so regardless 
of whether the Party Head, subsequent to such vote, proceeds to 
take, or refrains from taking, action that would  result in a declaration 
of defection. I am utterly unable to understand how the vote (being 
cast contrary to the direction of the Parliamentary Party in a House ), 
on the basis of which he would be proceeded against for defection , Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             14 
   
would not be counted  in the absence of an  express provision of  the 
Constitution . If, for the sake of arguments, the Article 63A is 
interpreted in the way  as suggested by the President  then any formal 
session of House for voting in the matters enumerated in para (b) of 
clause (1) of Article 63A would not be required because it is a matter 
of record that how much votes a Party Head has had in the House 
and as such the Party Heads or any one authorized by them alone 
can cast all the votes on behalf of others.  
21.  I am of the consid ered view that the Article 63A does not 
prohibit any member of a House from violating the direction issued 
by a Parliamentary Party to which he belongs. All that Article 63A 
prescribes is that when such a direction is violated by a member he 
incurs disqual ification for continuing as a member of the House. 
Undoubtedly, the object, sought to be achieved by Article 63A, is to 
ensure loyalty of the members to a political party, which sponsored 
the candidature of such a member at the election. It was a remedy, 
which the Parliament sitting as Constituent Assembly, thought fit to 
provide in order to curb the evil of widespread practice of 
unprincipled floor crossing motivated by the concerns of personal 
benefit. The Parliament could as well have declared that such an act 
of voting (which attracts the consequence of termination of the 
membership of such a member) should also be ignored for the 
purpose of deciding the issue on which the voting took place. But it 
did not. Though, it would be difficult to speculate the reasons for 
such omission, I hazard a guess that it is in recognition of the 
possibility of an honest dissent. It is, thus, a balancing act between 
the party discipline and the convictions of individual members. 
However, the fact that the Constitution does  not contemplate such a 
step of ignoring the vote given in violation of the party direction does 
not necessarily mean that Legislature in exercise of its authority 
under Article 67, is debarred from making such a provision in the 
absence of any Constitutio nal prohibition. Moreover, the 
interpretation as offered by majority would render the provisions of 
the Article 95 & 136 (vote of no -confidence against Prime Minister & 
Chief Minister) as redundant as no resolution for no -confidence 
would ever succeed. The argument that there is a vacuum which 
necessitates interference of this Court is untenable as the provisions 
of Article 63A are simple, clear and unambiguous. Strict and faithful 
adherence to the words of the Constitution, specially so where the Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             15 
   
words are  simple, clear and unambiguous is the rule. Any effort to 
supply perceived omissions in the Constitution being subjective can 
have disastrous consequences as recently held in the case of Gul Taiz 
Khan Marwat v. the Registrar, Peshawar High Court  (PLD 2021 
Supreme Court 391 ). 
22.  If blunders are found in legislation, they must be 
corrected by the Legislature, and it is not the function of the Court to 
repair them. (see Halsbury 's Laws of England, 3rd Edition, Volume 36 
page 390 ). As a general rule a Court of law is not authorized  to 
supply a cassus  omissus, or to alter the language of a statute for the 
purpose of supplying a meaning, if the language used in the statute 
is incapable of one, even though they may be of opinion that a 
mistake has been made in d rawing the Act ( see Caries on Statute 
Law, 6th Edition, page 520 ). The purpose of construction or 
interpretation of a statutory provision is no doubt to ascertain the 
true intention of the Legislature, yet that intention has, of necessity, 
to be gathered f rom the words used by the Legislature itself. If those 
word are so clear and unmistakable that they cannot be given any 
meaning other than that which they carry in their ordinary 
grammatical sense, then the Courts are not concerned with the 
consequences of  the interpretation however drastic convenient the 
result, for, the function of the Court is interpretation, not legislation. 
Reference here may be made to Muhammad Ismal v. the State  (PLD 
1969 SC 241 ). However, it is only very exceptional and challenging 
circumstances where this Court does consider to read into a 
provision of Constriction. The question No.2 is thus answered in 
negative.  
Question No.3  
23.  Through this question,  it has been stressed that a 
member who could but did not hear the voice of his conscience by 
resigning from his existing seat in the Assembly and has been finally 
declared to have committed defection after exhausting the procedure 
prescribed in Article 63A including appeal to the Supreme Court 
under Article 63A(5), he can no longer b e treated to be sagacious, 
righteous, non -profligate, honest and ameen and, therefore, stands 
disqualified for life . At the cost of repetition, it is again stated that t he 
object, sought to be achieved by Article 63A, is to ensure loyalty of 
the members to a political party. It was a remedy, which the 
Parliament sitting as Constituent Assembly, thought fit to provide in Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             16 
   
order to curb the evil of widespread practice of unp rincipled floor 
crossing motivated by the concerns of personal benefit. The 
Parliament could as well have declared that the defector no longer be 
treated to be sagacious, righteous, non -profligate, honest and Ameen 
and, therefore, stands disqualified for l ife. But it did not. I, with 
respect, do not find myself in agreement with what has been held by 
the majority in their short order that a declaration of defection in 
terms of Article 63A can be a disqualification under Article 63, in 
terms of an appropriat e law made by Parliament under para (p) of 
clause (1) thereof.  Article 63A itself provides penal consequences for 
defection and  a penal provision should be construed strictly and its 
scope should not be extended unless it is so required by the clear 
langua ge used therein or by necessary intendment.  The question No.3 
is, therefore, answered in negative.  
 
Question No.4  
24.   As regard to this question, it has been found that this 
question is too general in nature.  Answering this question would be 
in the teeth of the doctrine of separation of powers and would be 
contrary to the provisions of the Constitution. No doubt, our 
legislature is fully competent to enact laws on the subject keeping in 
view all the necessities  to curb, deter and eradicate the practice of 
defection . The question is, therefore, answered in negative.  
 
Conclusion  
25.  Article 63A after the 18th Amendment supra  is very much 
there and the legislature after that has never deemed it appropriate 
to go for further changes and amendments in it. All the questions 
referred to this Court, with the cumulative effect, are of the type that 
answer to any question in affirmat ive would lead this Court to exceed 
and overstep its domain. This in other words would mean that this 
Court is putting something new in the text of the Article which is 
even not the mandate of the Constitution. The argument that the 
defection/house trading  is a cancer and we have to eradicate the 
same by curbing it with an iron hand. I may agree to certain extent 
with this proposition but this menace could not be curbed by the 
stroke of my pen. Again, it is for the Constitution makers to remove 
this cancero us tumor through a surgical operation. To me, the entire 
provision of Article 63A as reproduced above is very plain and simple 
and I find nothing which could hardly need any interpretation other Reference No.1 of 2022 etc.                                                                                                             17 
   
than what its language provides. In my view, it’s a comp lete code in 
itself, which provides a comprehensive procedure regarding defection of 
a member of Parliament. It does not admit interpretation and as such 
the questions asked through this Presidential Reference are answered 
in negative. However, if the Parliamen t deems fit or appropriate may 
impose further bar or restriction upon the defectors.  
26.  Similarly Constitution Petitions No.2 and 9 of 2022 are 
dismissed, accordingly.  
 
        Judge  
“Approved for reporting ” 