Const.P -21/2022  
  1 
 
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - Even though we have been 
hearing this case since 19 July 2022  but after the 46th hearing of the 
case held on 16 March 2023 , the Parliament enacted the Supreme Court 
(Practice and Procedure) Act 2023  (“Act”) on 21 April 20231 which, inter 
alia, requires under S ection  3 that the Bench for hearing petitions under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution is to be constituted  by a Committee 
comprising of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and two next most senior 
Judges  of the Court . Section 4 provides that any case involving the 
interpretation of constitution al provision  is to be heard by a Benc h 
comprising a tleast of five J udges.   
2.   The next hearing  in this case after the promulgation of the 
Act was  scheduled to be held on  16 May 2023. Before the said hearing , I 
apprised the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan of my reservations to 
continue with hearing the case  by the present Bench  (as expressed in 
this note). The case was  therefore  simply adjourned  on that date . My 
understanding  was that the present case would be taken up for further 
hearing only after the constitutionality of the Act is finally decided by this 
Court. However, this case has been fixed for hearing today , and there is 
no date of hearing fixed in the other case2 that will determine the 
constitutionality of the Act.   
3.   The Act being a procedural law also applies to pending cases 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, including the present one. I am 
aware that the operation of the Act has been suspended by an eight -
member Bench of this Court. It is, however, clear that the suspension 
order of the eight -member Bench is an interim measure. If ultimately the 
Court upholds the constitutional validity of the Act, which is an equally 
possible outcome with that of the possible dec ision of its constitutional 
invalidity, the Act would take effect from the date of its enforcement, not 
from the date of decision of the Court. In case the Act is held to be valid, 
the decision of this Bench, which is not constituted as per the procedure  
prescribed and strength of Judges required under the Act, in the present 
matter, may arguably be coram non judice  and thus a nullity in the eye of 
law.  
4.  In order to  avoid such an anomaly , I was of the view that the 
cases under Article 184(3) of the Cons titution should not be heard till the 
                                                
1 which  was suspended by this Court on 13.04.2023 when it was still a Bill.  
2 Raja Amer Khan v Federation of Pakistan (C.P. 6/2023), etc.  Const.P -21/2022  
  2 
 
case dealing with the  constitutional validity of the Act  is decided , or if 
some urgency requires that a case under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution must be heard, it would be prudent  and appropriate  if it is 
heard by  a Full Court Bench. That is why I recorded  my opinion in 
Const. Petitions No.24 -26 of 2023 (Trial of Civilians in Military Courts 
case) on 22 June 2023 thus:  
I am of the opinion that until this Court decides the constitutionality of 
the Supreme Court (Pra ctice and Procedure) Act  2023, Section 3 of which 
has prescribed the procedure for invoking original jurisdiction of this 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, all such matters under 
this jurisdiction must be heard by the Full Court Bench of this  Court.  
I, therefore, made a request today to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of 
Pakistan on the Bench to constitute a Full Court Bench , for hearing the 
present case, which I hope his lordship would consider earnestly .   
5.  Despite the above, in all fairness  to the parties of this case , I 
also consider it appropriate to give an opportunity to the m to assist the 
Court on the question whether this Bench should continue hearing this 
case or should this case be adjourned till the Court first decides the 
constitut ionality of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) 
Act, 2023 or in the alternate , should a Full Court Bench hear this case 
pending decision on constitutionality of the Act . Learned Counsel  for the 
parties are to come prepared on the next date to address the Court on 
this question.  
 
Judge  
Islamabad,  
18th August, 2023.  
Sadaqat  