IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Review Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN  
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI  
MR. JUSTICE NASIR -UL-MULK  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD SAIR ALI  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S.  KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALI  
MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
MR. JUSTICE TARIQ PARVEZ  
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR  
MR. JUSTICE ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA  
MR. JUSTICE SARMAD JALAL OSMANY  
MR. JUSTICE AMIR HANI MUSLIM  
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
MR. JU STICE IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY  
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ATHER SAEED  
 
 
CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011  etc 
[Against the judgment dated 16.12.2009 passed in Constitution  
Petitions No. 76 to 80 of 2007]  
 
 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary  
M/o Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs, Islamabad  
 
vs. 
 
Dr. Mubashir Hassan, etc.  
 
 
For the applicant/petitioner:   Mr. Mahmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
[CMA 5144/11 & CRP 129/10]  Mr. Masood Ch ishti, 
Secretary, Ministry of Law &  
Justice.  
 
On Court notice:     Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
 
For the respondent No.1:   Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
[CRP 129/2010]     Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
 
 
Date of hearing:     25.11.2011  CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 2 
 
JUDGME NT 
 
 Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, J. -   The afore -referred civil 
review petition seeks review of this Court’s judgment dated 16th of 
December, 2009 whereby Constitution Petitions No. 76 to 80 of 2007 
and 59 of 1999 (challenging the vires of the National Recon ciliation 
Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the “NRO”)  were 
allowed/disposed of in terms of the short order dated 16.12.2009, the 
operative part of which reads as follows: - 
(i) that the NRO is declared to be an instrument void ab initio being ultra 
vires and violative of various constitutional provisions including 
Article Nos. 4, 8, 25, 62(f), 63(i)(p), 89, 175 and 227 of the 
Constitution;  
(ii) that as a consequence of the said declaration, all steps taken, actions 
suffered, and all orders passed by whatever aut hority, any orders 
passed by the courts of law including the orders of discharge and 
acquittals recorded in favour of the accused persons, are also 
declared never to have existed in the eyes of law and resultantly of no 
legal effect;  
(iii) that all cases in whic h the accused persons were either discharged or 
acquitted under Section 2 of the NRO or where proceedings pending 
against the holders of public office had got terminated in view of 
Section 7 thereof, a list of which cases has been furnished to this Court 
and any other such cases/proceedings which may not have been 
brought to the notice of this Court, shall stand revived and relegated 
to the status of pre -5th of October, 2007 position;  
(iv) that all the concerned courts including the trial, the appellate and the 
revisional courts are ordered to summon the persons accused in such 
cases and then to proceed in the respective matters in accordance with 
law from the stage from where such proceedings had been brought to 
an end in pursuance of the above provisions of the  NRO;  
(v) that the Federal Government, all the Provincial Governments and all 
relevant and competent authorities including the Prosecutor General 
of NAB, the Special Prosecutors in various Accountability Courts, the 
Prosecutors General in the four Provinces a nd other officers or 
officials involved in the prosecution of criminal offenders are directed 
to offer every possible assistance required by the competent courts in 
the said connection;  
(vi) that similarly all cases which were under investigation or pending 
enquiries and which had either been withdrawn or where the 
investigations or enquiries had been terminated on account of the 
NRO shall also stand revived and the relevant and competent 
authorities shall proceed in the said matters in accordance with law;  
(vii) that it may be clarified that any judgment, conviction or sentence 
recorded under section 31 -A of the NAB Ordinance shall hold the field 
subject to law and since the NRO stands declared as void ab initio , CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 3 
therefore, any benefit derived by any person in pursuan ce of Section 6 
thereof is also declared never to have legally accrued to any such 
person and consequently of no legal effect;   
(viii) that since in view of the provisions of Article 100(3) of the 
Constitution, the Attorney General for Pakistan could not have 
suffered any act not assigned to him by the Federal Government or not 
authorized by the said Government and since no order or authority 
had been shown to us under which the then learned Attorney General 
namely Malik Muhammad Qayyum had been authorized to addr ess 
communications to various authorities/courts in foreign countries 
including Switzerland, therefore, such communications addressed by 
him withdrawing the requests for Mutual Legal Assistance or 
abandoning the status of a Civil Party in such proceedings abroad or 
which had culminated in the termination of proceedings before the 
competent fora in Switzerland or other countries or in abandonment of 
the claim of the Government of Pakistan to huge amounts of allegedly 
laundered moneys, are declared to be unau thorized, unconstitutional 
and illegal acts of the said Malik Muhammad Qayyum;   
(ix) that since the NRO stands declared void ab initio , therefore, any 
actions taken or suffered under the said law are also non est in law 
and since the communications addressed by  Malik Muhammad 
Qayyum to various foreign fora/authorities/courts withdrawing the 
requests earlier made by the Government of Pakistan for Mutual Legal 
Assistance; surrendering the status of Civil Party; abandoning the 
claims to the allegedly laundered mone ys lying in foreign countries 
including Switzerland, have also been declared by us to be 
unauthorized and illegal communications and consequently of no legal 
effect, therefore, it is declared that the initial requests for Mutual 
Legal Assistance; securing the status of Civil Party and the claims 
lodged to the allegedly laundered moneys lying in foreign countries 
including Switzerland are declared never to have been withdrawn. 
Therefore the Federal Government and other concerned authorities 
are ordered to ta ke immediate steps to seek revival of the said 
requests, claims and status;  
(x) that in view of the above noticed conduct of Malik Muhammad 
Qayyum, the then learned Attorney General for Pakistan in addressing 
unauthorized communications which had resulted in u nlawful 
abandonment of claims of the Government of Pakistan, inter alia, to 
huge amounts of the allegedly laundered moneys lying in foreign 
countries including Switzerland, the Federal Government and all other 
competent authorities are directed to proceed against the said Malik 
Muhammad Qayyum in accordance with law in the said connection;  
(xi) that we place on record our displeasure about the conduct and lack of 
proper and honest assistance and cooperation on the part of the 
Chairman of the NAB, the Prosecutor General of the NAB and of the 
Additional Prosecutor General of the NAB, namely, Mr. Abdul Baseer 
Qureshi in this case. Consequently, it is not possible for us to trust 
them with proper and diligent pursuit of the cases falling within their 
respective spher es of operation. It is therefore, suggested that the 
Federal Government may make fresh appointments against the said 
posts of persons possessing high degree of competence and 
impeccable integrity in terms of Section 6 of the NAB Ordinance as 
also in terms of the observations of this Court made in the case of 
Khan Asfandyar Wali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2001 SC 607). 
However, till such fresh appointments are so made, the present 
incumbents may continue to discharge their obligations strictly in CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 4 
accorda nce with law. They shall, however, transmit periodical reports 
of the actions taken by them to the Monitoring Cell of this Court which 
is being established through the succeeding parts of this judgment;  
(xii) that a Monitoring Cell shall be established in the S upreme Court of 
Pakistan comprising of the Chief Justice of Pakistan or a Judge of the 
Supreme Court to be nominated by him to monitor the progress and 
the proceedings in the above noticed and other cases under the NAB 
Ordinance. Likewise similar Monitorin g Cells shall be set up in the 
High Courts of all the Provinces comprising of the Chief Justice of the 
respective Province or Judges of the concerned High Courts to be 
nominated by them to monitor the progress and the proceedings in 
cases in which the accu sed persons had been acquitted or discharged 
under Section 2 of the NRO;  
(xiii) that the Secretary of the Law Division, Government of Pakistan, is 
directed to take immediate steps to increase the number of 
Accountability Courts to ensure expeditious disposal of c ases;  
We place on record our deep sense of appreciation for the learned 
counsel for the parties as also for the learned amicii curiae who have 
rendered invaluable assistance to us in these matters.  
 
The petitions stand allowed and disposed of by this short  order in 
terms noted above.  
 
 
2. The detailed reasons were subsequently given which 
judgment is reported in PLD 2010 Supreme Court 265.  
3. Learned counsel for the Federation of Pakistan, Dr. 
Zaheer -ud-Din Babar , on Court query , specifically referred to 
paragrap hs No. 12, 44, 45 & 46 of the detailed judgment  which are 
sought to be reviewed by the petitioner. However during the course of 
arguments, he contended that certain observations made in paras 56, 
63 to 86, 137, 139, 151, 171, 172 & 178 also warrant review.  The 
paras to which he made specific reference are as under :- 
“12. During the course of hearing, Federation of Pakistan has 
submitted Civil Misc. Application Nos. 4875 & 4898 of 2009, of 
identical nature, wherein attention of the Court was drawn towards it s 
earlier judgment passed in Sindh High Court Bar Association's case 
(PLD 2009 SC 879) and at pages 11 & 12 of the said applications, 
apprehension of destabilization of the system was expressed in the 
following terms: -- 
"If however, this Hon'ble Court wish es to rule upon wider issues 
other than those raised in the petition and prayer the 
Federation requests that fresh petitions be filed precisely 
stipulating these issues whereupon the Federation will seek 
instructions on such new petition.  CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 5 
Pak Today is pois ed at the cross roads. One road leads to truly 
federal democratic welfare state with the balance of power 
between an - Independent judiciary, a duly elected Govt. 
representing the will of the people a determined executive 
which is fighting the war against t errorism and poverty. The 
second road leads to destabilization of the rule of law. The 
people .of Pakistan await your verdict."  
As in above 'statement apprehension of destabilization of the system 
has been expressed, therefore, Mr. Kamal Azfar, learned Sen ior ASC, 
who had filed the Applications, referred to hereinabove, was called 
upon to submit an affidavit, clarifying the stand taken by him. 
Surprisingly, he, verbally, contended that "apprehension of 
destabilization of the democratic system is from GHQ an d CIA", The 
words so uttered by him are as follows: - 
"There are extra constitutional forces in Pakistan and 
outside Pakistan which are trying to destabilize this 
country. I say more openly, the dangers to Pakistan 
come from the CIA & GHQ."  
The above statem ent on behalf of Federation was prominently noted 
by the leading newspapers. On the same day, learned Acting Attorney 
General once again made a categorical statement of accepting the 
decision, whatsoever, will be recorded by this Court. His such 
statement has also been recorded vide order dated 15th December, 
2009, which is reproduced hereinbelow for convenience: - 
"Learned Attorney General for Pakistan has concluded 
his submissions, while reiterating his stand, taken on the 
first day of hearing that the Fed eral Government is not 
defending the NRO…………."  
"STATEMENT  
In Compliance of the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan 
to apprise the Hon'ble Court as to how the Federation would interpret 
the wording "the second road leads to the destabilization o f the rule of 
law", it is submitted as follows: - 
(1) There is no mention of the wording `threat to democracy' in the 
Statement.  
(2) The Federation supports the Prosecution, in accordance with law, 
of persons alleged to have done wrong doing. The Federation  does not 
oppose the Petitions seeking a declaration that the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance 2007 (NRO) is illegal and unconstitutional.  
(3) With regard to the "wider issues" mentioned in paragraph No.9 
these refer to those matters which were raised by the Petitioner's 
counsel during oral arguments and which find no mention whatsoever 
in the Petitions. For example, submissions made in respect of Articles 
89 (in particular the alleged concept of "implied Resolution") and 
A.264 on the effect of Repeal.  
(4) The Federation's view is that those who have benefited under the 
NRO should be proceeded against under the appropriate laws before 
the courts having the competent jurisdiction. As factual matters need 
to be determined by the Trial Courts.  
(5) So far as my  comments made yesterday before this Hon'ble Court 
concerning the threat from GHQ, the CIA and the contents of CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 6 
paragraph 9 of the CMA are concerned these were my personal views 
and were not made on the instructions of the Federation of Pakistan. 
As such I withdraw the same, which should not be considered by this 
Hon'ble Court in any manner whatsoever and the same should be 
deleted and expunged from the record.  
(6) It is emphasized that the Federation of Pakistan holds this Hon'ble 
Court in the highest estee m and has the greatest respect for the 
same."  
The above statement, filed on behalf of Federation of 'Pakistan, has 
disclosed the intention of Federation of Pakistan, particularly to the 
effect that those who have acquired benefit under the NRO, 2007 
should  be proceeded against under the relevant laws, before the 
Courts of competent jurisdiction, as factually matters need to be 
determined by the Trial Court. Learned Acting Attorney General for 
Pakistan and learned counsel appearing for Federation of Pakistan  
have reiterated this stand, time and again, during the course of 
hearing.  
44. Relevant extract from the book "Reconciliation: Islam, Democracy and 
the West" by late Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto; as relied upon by M/s Abdul 
Hafeez Pirzada and A.K. Dogar, Sr. AS C are also reproduced hereinbelow for 
ready reference: -- 
"In August I called PPP leaders to New York. There we 
discussed giving General Musharraf a "nonpaper" of what we 
expected. Makhdoom Amin Fahim gave the "nonpaper" to 
General Musharraf on August 18. T he "nonpaper" said that 
unless there was movement, by the end of August both sides 
would be free to go their own ways. General Musharraf and I 
had a long conversation over the phone that night. He said he 
would send a team to see me at the end of August.  
The August team met me in London at my flat in Queens Gate. 
They discussed a whole new constitutional package. We 
increased the political price for the new package. They said 
they would come back in two days. They didn't. As the deadline 
approached for call ing off talks, I got a call that the deadline 
would be extended. It was, but there was silence from the 
Musharraf camp.  
The PPP and I met in London in September, and I announced 
that the date of my return to Pakistan would be given on 
September 14, 2007 fr om all the capitals and regions of 
Pakistan. I wanted the date announced from my homeland. The 
talks with Musharraf remained erratic. He didn't want us 
resigning from the assemblies when he sought re -election. 
There wouldn't be much difference in his winni ng whether we 
boycotted or contested, but we used this to press him to retire 
as army chief. He cited judicial difficulties. It was a harrowing 
period. After many, many late -night calls, he passed a National 
Reconciliation Order, rather than lift the ban o n a twice -elected 
prime minister seeking office a third time, which he said he 
would do later. In exchange for the NRO, we reciprocated by 
not resigning from the assemblies, although we did not vote for 
him. We knew the matter still had to be decided by th e 
Supreme Court. We thought Musharraf took the wrong decision 
to seek re -election from the existing Parliament, that it would 
only compound the crisis. But he had made his choice."  
 CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 7 
45. It appears from the above extract of the book, itself, of late Mohtarm a 
Benazir Bhutto that the NRO, 2007 was designed to benefit a certain class of 
individuals against whom cases were registered between 1st January, 1986 to 
12th October, 1999 subject to the scheme laid down therein. Thus we, prima 
facie, hold that the NRO, 2007 was not promulgated for achieving the object 
of national reconciliation as according to its substantive provision i.e. Section 
2, it was meant to extend benefit to ' the accused persons, 'against whom 
cases were registered between 1st January, 1986 to  12th October, 1999, 
subject to the scheme laid down therein. Likewise, under Section 7 of the 
NRO, 2007, the cases against `holders of public office', involved in the 
offences, inside and outside the country, deemed to have been withdrawn, 
including the p roceedings, initiated under Section 33 of the NAO, 1999 
outside the country, through request for mutual assistance and civil party to 
proceedings, by the Federal Government, before the 12th October, 1999. 
These two provisions, abundantly, make it clear tha t the NRO, 2007 has 
extended benefit only to the criminals, involved in the minor or heinous 
crimes and `holders of public office' involved in corruption and corrupt 
practices, as such it cannot be considered to be a legislation for achieving the 
object of  national reconciliation.  
46. We have yet to see a law pari materia with the NRO, 2007 according to 
which an accused, who being `holder of public office', indulged into corruption 
and corrupt practices, plundering and looting of national wealth, etc., has 
been extended the benefit of withdrawal of his cases from the Court of 
competent jurisdiction. In order to understand the word `reconciliation' 
reference may be made to `Black's Law Dictionary' wherein it has been 
defined as 'restoration of harmony between  persons or things that had been 
in conflict'. Likewise in `Corpus Juris Secundum' the word `reconciliation' has 
been defined as `the renewal of amicable relations between two persons who 
had been at enmity or variance usually implying forgiveness of injur ies on one 
or both sides; it is treated, with respect to divorce'. The word `reconciliation' 
has been defined in `Advanced Law Lexicon' 2005 Ed. as `the restoration to 
friendship and harmony; renewal of amicable relations between two persons 
having been in  conflict; literally the restoration of friendly relations after an 
estrangement'. As it has been argued by Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC 
that when the word `national' is prefixed with the word `reconciliation', its 
meaning changes absolutely from its ordinary dictionary meanings, and 
`national reconciliation' means `the reconciliation of the entire nation'.: 
Therefore, keeping in view the fact, noted hereinabove, that the NRO, 2007 
was the result of deal between two individuals for their personal objec tives, 
coupled with its dictionary meaning, it cannot be called `national 
reconciliation'. ” 
4. Petitioner had initially challenged the short order dated 
16.12.2009 but when the detailed reasons were released, he filed 
C.M.A. No. 1844 of 2010  and added additio nal grounds in support of 
the petition for review . In support of the petitions, learned counsel 
made following submissions: - 
(i) that although the Federation of Pakistan had not 
defended the National Reconciliation Ordinance 
before this Court the observations made in Paras 44 
and 45 of the detailed judgment (under review) with CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 8 
reference to Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto ’s book 
"Reconciliation: Islam, Democracy and the West" 
that any benefit was drawn by the author and that 
NRO 2007 was not promulgated for the object o f 
national reconciliation but for the benefit of certain 
individuals is incorrect; that the only benefit which 
she derived was restoration of democracy and that 
this finding is an error apparent in the face of record;  
(ii) that initially a statement was filed t o the effect that 
the Federation did not contest the Petition No. 76 of 
2007 and rather filed a conceding statement . It was 
however submitted by the Federation ’s counsel then, 
that if this Court intended to travel outside the 
parameters of the prayers made  in the pet itions 
which were allowed (vide the judgment under 
review ), it would have been proper and just to grant 
reasonable time to the Federation to reply and 
contest. In written reply the said counsel had 
specifically made a prayer as follows:  
“if howe ver this Hon’ble Court wishes to rule 
upon wider issues other than those raised in 
the petition in that case, the Federation 
requests that petitions be filed precisely 
stipulating these issues whereupon the 
Federation will seeks instructions on such 
new pe titions.”  
 
 
(iii) that this Hon’ble Court has failed to take note of the 
preamble to the NRO which makes it abundantly 
clear that the purpose of the NRO was to promote CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 9 
national reconciliation and that desired object was 
achieved. Similarly this Hon’ble Court als o did not 
take into consideration the peculiar circumstances, 
under which the NRO was promulgated i.e. the 
restoration of democracy after many years of the 
rule of a military dictator who had perpetuated his 
rule by forcing the leader of the main political  parties 
of Pakistan i.e. PPP and PML(N) in exile and his crude 
attacks on the judiciary;  
(iv) that he would press ground (t) in CMA 1844 of 2010 
only to the extent that the NRO has wrongly been 
held as a deal between two individuals, rather it was 
an initiativ e taken by the then President of Pakistan 
and duly approved by the then Cabinet  and all the 
political parties benefited from it . He further 
requested that Paras (a), (u), (v), (x), (cc), (dd), 
(hh), (gg), (ii), (k) in CMA 1844 of 2010 be deleted.  
(v) that acc ording to the law laid down by this Court, 
parties are not permitted to argue the grounds which 
are neither taken in the pleadings nor relief is 
granted behind the prayer of the parties;  
(vi) that admittedly NRO was past and closed transaction 
and it was dead p eace of legislation when it was 
taken up for discussion during the proceedings of the 
instant case;  
(vii) that the esteemed judgment of this Court delivered 
in Constitution Petitions No. 76 -80 of 2007 and 59 of CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 10 
2007 has touched upon Islamic jurisprudence and 
some complicated concepts of constitutional law 
which have developed over centuries. As the 
judgment was to have repercussions, not only in 
Pakistan but globally as well, this Court should have 
been adequately assisted by experts in Swiss Law 
and eminent Isla mic scholars for probing into Islamic 
jurisprudence;  
(viii)  that once the Federation had conceded to the 
prayers in the petition there were no legal grounds 
or justifiable reasons to pronounce a detailed 
judgment going beyond the parameters of the 
pleading and pr ayers in Petition No. 76 of 2007 and 
connected petition;  
(ix) that if such a precedent is followed in uncontested 
matters, it would severely hamper the working of the 
judiciary and the effective administration of justice. 
For instance, if a Court were to hold f ull hearing in 
uncontested criminal/compoundable, civil cases and 
constitution petitions where the parties in dispute 
had reached an amicable settlement within or 
outside the court, this would cause chaos in the 
system;  
(x) that it is not denied that political  victimization had 
been going on between the various political parties 
when the opportunity arose throughout the period of CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 11 
the NRO. This is borne out of even from the book of 
PML (N) Chief Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif;  
(xi) that the Hon’ble Court has erred in par a 169 in 
holding that the President had no power to 
promulgate the NRO under Article 89 as the NRO’s is 
subject matter fell beyond the scope of the Federal 
and the concurrent list. The Hon’ble Court in the 
same para held that Parliament had the power to 
enact the NRO as an Act of Parliament and through 
its 31st July 2009 judgment gave Parliament the 
opportunity to do so within four months. That if the 
Parliament had the  power to make the NRO an Act , 
the President also had the power to promulgate an 
Ordinanc e in respect of the NRO being part of the 
Parliament;  
(xii) that in para 178 of the detailed judgment, this Court 
has erred in ordering the Federal Government and 
other concerned authorities to seek revival of the 
said requests, claims and status contrary to the  
principles of International Law in foreign countries;  
(xiii)  that paragraphs 63 to 67 and 367 to 385 are not 
tenable as some of the convictions recorded which 
were annulled by invoking NRO were convictions in 
absentia and the prosecution was launched with 
malice . Such convictions were in derogation to the 
law down in PLD 1998 SC 1445;  CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 12 
(xiv)  that decision to write or not to write letter to Swiss 
authorities to open/revive the prosecution/cases falls 
within the domain of Executive authority and the 
direction by this Cour t to issue a letter to Swiss 
authorities in this regard is violative of the principles 
of trichotomy of powers which is one of the 
foundational values of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan. Para 4 of the short note in the 
case reported at PLD  2009 SC 879 reiterated this 
salutary rule;  
that under Article 89 of the Constitution, powers of 
the President to promulgate an Ordinance and an 
Ordinance so issued has the same effect as an Act of 
the Parliament. The declaration given by this Court in 
Para 169 of the judgment under review to the effect 
that the President “ though has an authority under 
Article 89 of the Constitution to promulgate an 
Ordinance but cannot issue temporary legislation 
which the Parliament is empowered to do”  is not 
correct inte rpretation of the said constitutional 
provision ; 
(xv)  that t he Court erred in law when in Paras 171 and 
172, it directed revival of the criminal matters/cases 
which stood terminated as a result of NRO;  
(xvi)  that the Court fell in error in not appreciating the 
functi ons of the Attorney General under Article 100 
of the Constitution i.e. it is the office of the said CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 13 
incumbent which is empowered to act or not to act in 
terms of its mandate and the letter written by the 
then Attorney General for Pakistan to Swiss 
authorit ies to withdraw the prosecution was well 
within its mandate. The adverse finding recorded in 
this regard offended the principle of audi alteram 
partem . The observations made in Paras 178 and 
456 are in derogation to Article 4 of the Constitution 
as well;  
(xvii)  that in rendering the judgment under review, this 
Court has not kept in view the well established rule 
of law that any right accrued to a citizen cannot be 
disturbed or compromised in collateral proceedings;  
(xviii)  that while exercising the power of judicial revie w, 
this Court ought to have observed the salutary 
principle of judicial restraint and the observations 
made in Paras 85, 86 and 151 are not in consonance 
with the said principle;  
(xix)  that the Court while traversing beyond the spirit and 
import of the statement  made by the learned Acting 
Attorney General Mr. Shah Khawar or counsel for the 
Federation Mr. Kamal Azfar has not kept in view the 
following principles of appreciation of pleadings: - 
(i) that a judgment cannot go beyond the 
admissions/pleadings;  CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 14 
(ii) that non -denial of an assertion is also a 
pleading and the pleadings have to be 
considered in their entirety;  
(iii) that a fact has to be pleaded and then 
argued;  
(iv) that the concession given by the counsel 
cannot be stretched far beyond the non -
validity of the Ordinance under the 
Constitution.  
(xx)  that scope of review under Rule 188  of the Supreme 
Court Rules 1980 read with Order XXVI of the Code 
of Civil Procedure is very wide and this Court can 
review the judgment under consideration if there are 
errors in the face of record or i t is against  the law 
declared by this Court.  
 
5. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan , Mr. Moulvi Anwar -
ul-Haq appeared on Court ’s call and the Court sought his assistance 
because in terms of Article 100 of the Constitution , it is mandated as 
follows: - 
“100 . (1) The President shall appoint a person, being a 
person qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court, 
to be the Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
(2) The Attorney -General shall hold office during the 
pleasure of the President and shall not engag e in private 
practice so long as he holds the office of the Attorney -General.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Attorney -General to give 
advice to the Federal Government upon such legal matters, and 
to perform such other duties of a legal character, as may be 
referred or assigned to him by the Federal Government, and in 
the performance of his duties he shall have the right of audience 
in all courts and tribunals in Pakistan.  
(4) The Attorney -General may, by writing under his hand 
addressed to the President,  resign his office.”  
 CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 15 
6. He however, did not argue the review petition  under the 
impression that since the Federation had engaged a counsel, the 
Attorney General was not required to argue the same. Nevertheless 
the Court queried from him about the distinction  between the repeal of 
a law in terms of Article 164 of the Constitution and a law  having been 
declared void by a Court, to which in all fairness, he replied that the 
effect of repeal of a law is provided in the afore -referred Article but the 
effect of dec laration by a Court that the law is void would be that no 
such law ever existed. We may also mention here that Mr. Babar Awan 
had also filed an application seeking permission to place on record 
certain record of the Law Department / letters / communication s 
authored by or on behalf of the former Attorney General for Pakistan 
but initially on 24.11.2011 we did not permit him to read those 
documents as those were neither filed in the main case nor they were 
referred to in the instant review petition. However,  we examined those 
documents ourselves during the break and called Mr. Babar Awan after 
the break to read those documents but he did not appear . The case 
was adjourned to 25.11.2011 to enable him to appear and even on the 
said date he did not appear. We as ked Mr. Masood Chi shti, Federal 
Law Secretary, present in Court to read those documents but he 
expressed his inability to read as he had no instructions to do that. 
Thereafter , we asked Mr. Attorney General to read those documents 
and came to the conclusio n that those had no bearing on the instant 
review petition. The application was accordingly disposed of.  
7. Having heard learned counsel for the review petitioner, 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan and having gone through the CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 16 
material laid before this Cou rt, the issues which crop up for 
consideration are as follows: - 
(i) Whether the judgment under consideration reflects 
“errors in the face of record ” or there is “sufficient 
cause ” warranting its review;  
(ii) Whether the Court in passing the judgment under 
review we nt beyond the conceding statement made 
by learned Acting Attorney General for Pakistan or 
the counsel for Federation Mr. Kamal Azfar;  
(iii) Whether this Court has made any declaration qua 
the NRO being Islamic or un -Islamic and thereby 
entered the exclusive juri sdictional domain of the 
Federal Shariat Court in terms of Article 203G of the 
Constitution;  
(iv) Whether the effect of repeal of an ordinance or law 
in terms of Article 164 of the Constitution and 
section 6 of the General Clauses Act is the same as 
that of an ordinance or law being declared non est  
and null and void.  
 The following two issues having nexus are being discussed 
together.  
Issue No. (i)  Whether the judgment under consideration 
reflects errors in the face of record or there is sufficient 
cause warran ting its review;  
Issue No. (iii)  Whether this Court has made any 
declaration qua the NRO being Islamic or un -Islamic and 
thereby entered the exclusive jurisdictional domain of the 
Federal Shariat Court in terms of Article 203G of the 
Constitution;  
 
 CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 17 
8. The po wer of review has been conferred upon this Court in 
terms of Article 188 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
and the Court is to exercise the said jurisdiction strictly within its 
parameters because the Constitution mandates that, no Court shall 
have any jurisdiction save as is or may be conferred on it by the 
Constitution or by or under any law.”  [Article 175(2)] A reference to 
the said Article would be in order which reads as follows: - 
“188.  Review of Judgments or Orders by the Supreme Cou rt.  
The Supreme Court shall have power, subject to the provisions of 
any Act of [169]  [Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)] and of any rules 
made by the Supreme Court, t o review any judgment pronounced 
or any order made by it.”  
 
9. In terms of the afore -referred provision, this power is 
subject to an Act of the Parliament or Rules framed by this Court. The 
Parliament has not enacted any law in this regard but this Court has 
framed Rules and Order XXVI Rule 1 relates to this Court’s power to 
review which is as follows: - 
“1. Subject to the law and the practice of the Court, the Court may 
review its judgment or order in a Civil proceeding on grounds 
similar to those mentioned in  Order XLVII, rule I of the Code and 
in a criminal proceeding on the ground of an error apparent on the 
face of the record. ” 
 
10. The afore -referred Rule provides that this Court may 
review its judgment in a civil proceeding on grounds similar to those 
mention ed in Order XLVII Rule I of CPC and in a criminal proceeding if 
there is an “error apparent on the face of record”. To comprehend the 
nature of grounds in a civil proceeding which may warrant review, Rule 
1 of Order XLVII CPC has to be kept in view which i s reproduced 
below: - 
“1. Application for review of judgment. ---(1) 
Any person considering himself aggrieved, -- CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 18 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is 
allowed, but from which no appeal has been 
preferred;  
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeals 
allowed; or  
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of 
Small Causes,  
and who, from the discovery of new and important 
matter or evidence which, after exercised of due 
diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not 
be produced by him at the time when t he decree was 
passed or order made, or on account of some 
mistake or error apparent on the face of the receipt 
or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a 
review of the decree passed or order made against 
him, may apply for a review of judgment  to the 
Court which passed the decree or made the order.”  
 
 
11. An analysis of the contentions raised in the petition and 
submissions made by petitioner’s learned counsel would indicate that 
they neither disclose discovery of a new important matter nor evidenc e 
of which the petitioner/Federation was not aware at the time of 
hearing of the main petition to bring it to the notice of this Court. We 
specifically queried learned counsel about the paragraph which 
according to him reflected some mistake or error appar ent on the face 
of record and he initially referred to paragraphs No. 12, 44, 45 and 46 
but during the course of his submissions, he also referred to 
paragraphs, 56, 63 to 86, 137, 139, 151, 171, 172  and 178.  
12. We have carefully examined the afore -referred paragraphs 
and find that these paras do not reflect any error or mistake within the 
meaning of the Constitutional and Statutory provisions or the Rules 
framed by this Court to which reference has been made in para 7 
above to warrant exercise of review juri sdiction.  
13. Para 44 of the judgment under review merely makes a 
reference to late Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto’s book “Reconciliation:  CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 19 
Islam, Democracy and the West”. The observations made in Para 45 of 
the National Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007 are qualified b y the 
expression “prima facie”  but the finding that the said Ordinance 
“extended benefit to those involved in minor or heinous crimes and 
holders of public office involved in corruption or corrupt practices, as 
such it cannot be considered to be a legislat ion for achieving the object 
of national reconciliation”  was with reference to those who 
promulgated the NRO and did not attribute any motive to the late 
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutt o. The point in issue before this Court was not 
what was in the mind of the auth or of the afore -mentioned book as 
she was a political leader of international stature and she may have 
been responding to the initiative and offers made by General Pervaiz 
Musharraf which in her estimation inter alia  led to restoration of 
democracy. The Co urt while passing the judgment under review was 
mainly concerned with the subject matter of the NRO and its 
consequences and even while declaring it to be “non est ”, it did not 
give any adverse finding on the merit of the cases which were either 
terminated  or ended in acquittal on account of the said Ordinance. The 
Court, on the contrary, while reviving those cases left it to the 
concerned courts to decide it as mandated in law  strictly on merit . No 
wonder none of the beneficiaries whose cases were reviewed  has 
sought review of the judgment. The Court during hearing of this 
petition made a particular reference to some of the important holders 
of public office who instead of getting any benefit from the NRO faced 
trial and earned acquittal from a court of law  i.e. Mr. Yousaf Raza 
Gillani, Prime Minister of Pakistan and those whose cases having been 
revived as a consequence of the judgment under review faced trial but CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 20 
acquitted i.e. Mr. Rehman Malik, the Interior Minister, Government of 
Pakistan.  
14. The Court in P ara 178 of the judgment merely held that 
the communications addressed by the then Attorney General were 
unauthorized and the Federal Government was directed to take steps 
to seek revival of the request in that context. Neither during the 
hearing of the mai n case, learned counsel for the Federal Government 
placed on record any instructions of the Federation in this context nor 
during the hearing of this review petition, any such material was laid 
before this Court which could persuade us to hold that the sai d 
communication by the then Attorney General was duly authorized to 
warrant its review.  
15. In Paragraphs 63 to 67, the Court was merely commenting 
on certain amendments in Criminal Procedure Code (section 494 of the 
Cr.P.C.) with regard to withdrawal of case s and as to how such 
amendments were not tenable in law; how the stated object of the 
preamble of the NRO 2007 of seeking “national reconciliation” could be 
realized by acquitting certain people accused  of corruption ; how the 
Indian Supreme Court in (AIR 1 980 SC 1510) commented upon the 
role of a court seized of the request for withdrawal of a criminal case 
should proceed i.e. uninfluenced by any political consideration with a 
view to ensure that the Court does not become “ anyone’s stooge”.  
16. In Paragraphs 68  to 85 of the judgment under review, the 
Court commented upon the effect of Section 6 of the NRO 2007 
whereby section 3A of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 was 
amended with regard to trials in absentia and how the said 
amendment is violative of  the principle of trichotomy of powers CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 21 
enshrined in the Constitution. The observations made in the afore -
referred paragraphs are based on precedent case law and are in 
accord with the mandate of the Constitution. This is evident from the 
observation made i n Para 81 of the judgment under consideration 
which reads as follows: - 
“81. The legislature is competent to legislate but 
without encroaching upon the jurisdiction of the 
judiciary. If, it is presumed that the insertion of 
clause (aa) in Section 31A of the  NAO, 1999, by 
means of Section 6 of the NRO, 2007, is 
constitutionally valid even then it would be 
tantamount to allow the legislature to pronounce a 
judicial verdict against an order or judgment of a 
competent Court of law, declaring the same to be 
void ab initio. Therefore, following the doctrine of 
trichotomy of powers, the action of the legislative 
authority, whereby clause (aa) has been inserted in 
Section 31A of the NAO, 1999, by means of the 
NRO, 2007, would be considered to be a step to 
substitute the judicial forum with an executive 
authority. Thus, it would not be sustainable being 
contrary to the principle of independence of 
judiciary, as mentioned in Article 2A of the 
Constitution, which provides that independence of 
judiciary shall be fully sec ured read with Article 
175 of the Constitution, which lays down a scheme 
for the establishment of the Courts, including the 
superior Courts and such other Courts as may be 
established by law. In the case in hand, except an 
appeal under Section 32 of the NA O, 1999 to the 
High Court of the Province, no other remedy is 
available to a convict against his 
conviction/sentence, to get it set aside. ” 
 
 
 Dilating upon the rationale of the guidelines issued by this 
Court from time to time in the precedent cases to wh ich reference has 
been made in these paragraphs as also in the judgment under review, 
the Court observed in Para 85 as follows: - 
“85. Essentially, the above guidelines/directions for 
expeditious disposal of cases were issued by this 
Court, in exercise of i ts powers under Article. 187 
of the Constitution, which provides that Supreme 
Court shall have power to issue such directions, CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 22 
orders or decrees, as may be necessary for doing 
complete justice in any case or matter pending 
before it, including an order for  the purpose of 
securing the attendance of any person or the 
discovery or production of any document. ” 
 
 
17. Paragraph 137 to 139 merely elucidate the mandate of 
Article 227 which stipulates that the existing laws shall be brought in 
conformity with the injunc tions of Islam and that this shall not affect 
the personal laws of non -Muslim citizens or their status as citizens ; of 
Article 228 regarding the composition of Islamic Council of Ideology 
and the reference to be made by the President or the Governor of a 
Province if two -fifths of the total membership of the Parliament or a 
Provincial Assembly requires so for seeking advice from the said 
Council as to whether a proposed law is repugnant to injunctions of 
Islam or not and on Article 230 relating to the functi ons of the Council. 
In Paras 138 and 139, the Court merely observed that Article 25 of the 
Constitution providing for equal protection of law to all citizens is in 
countenance with Quranic injunctions and that the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance had not been promulgated in terms of Article 
227(1) of the Constitution. The Court did not annul the NRO on the 
ground of its being un-Islamic as that would be violative of Article 
203(g) of the Constitution, which stipulates that:- 
“203G . Bar of Jurisdiction  
Save as provided in Article 203F, no court or 
tribunal, including the Supreme Court and a High 
Court, shall entertain any proceeding or exercise any 
power or jurisdiction in respect of any matter within 
the power or jurisdiction of the Court. ” 
 
18. In Para 139 of  the judgment under revi ew, the Court 
candidly observed: - CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 23 
“The observations relating to the application of 
Article 227 and to the morality and conscience of the 
Constitution are only further supportive observations 
that can be construed as a reconfirmation  of the 
essential and inherent invalidity in the light of the 
other express provisions contained in the 
Constitution. The Primary' touchstones remain the 
other provisions of the Constitution specified in the 
judgment. ” 
 
 
19. So far as paragraphs 171 and 172 ar e concerned, they 
merely relate to the consequences of the declarations made in the 
judgment whereby the National Reconciliation Ordinance was held to 
be “void ab initio”, “ultra vires” and was “deemed non est from the 
date of its promulgation i.e. 5th October 2007 as a consequence 
whereof all steps taken, actions suffered, and all orders passed by 
whatever authority, any orders passed by the Courts of law including 
the orders of discharge and acquittals recorded in favour of accused 
persons, are also decla red never to have existed in the eyes of law and 
resultantly of no le gal effect ” and thereafter in terms of Para 172 of 
the acquittals and discharge orders were annulled and the criminal 
cases were revived. No exception could be taken to such a declaration  
and directions issued first because this was the legal consequence of 
the declarations made with regard to the NRO and second the counsel 
for Federation himself candidly submitted that the Federation had no 
objection if the cases against those who benefit ed from the NRO are 
revived and they are proceeded as mandate in law.  
20. The submission of petitioner’s learned counsel with regard 
to Para 169 of the judgment under review reflect lack of proper 
appreciation. The Court acknowledged the power of the President  in 
terms of Article 89 of the Constitution to promulgate an ordinance but CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 24 
qualified the same holding that he cannot issue a temporary 
legislation, which the Parliament is not empowered to do.  The 
observation was made with reference to lists of subjects on  which the 
Parliament is empowered under the Constitution to legislate. The Court 
found that, “a  thorough perusal of the Federal and the Concurrent Lists 
persuades us to hold that the President was not empowered to issue 
the NRO, 2007 as the subjects cover ed by its Section 2, 6 and 7 fall 
beyond the scope of these lists.”  The learned counsel did not explain 
as to how the afore -referred provisions of the NRO fell within the list 
on which the Parliament was empowered to legislate and therefore the 
President C ould.  
 
Issue No. (ii)  Whether the Court in passing the judgment 
under review went beyond the conceding statement made 
by learned Acting Attorney General for Pakistan or the 
counsel for Federation Mr. Kamal Azfar;  
Issue No. (iv)  Whether the effect of repea l of an 
ordinance or law in terms of Article 164 of the Constitution 
and section 6 of the General Clauses Act is the same as 
that of an ordinance or law being declared non est  and null 
and void.  
 
 
 
21. To appreciate the afore -referred issues, it would be in 
order to keep in view the statements made by the then learned Acting 
Attorney General Mr. Shah Khawar as also the then learned counsel for 
Federation Mr. Kamal Azfar which have been reproduced in Para -3 of 
this judgment. Mr. Babar Awan, ASC particularly referred to that 
part/para of the written statement filed by Mr. Kamal Azfar wherein he 
had stated as follows: - 
“(3) With regard to the "wider issues" mentioned in 
paragraph No.9 these refer to those matters which 
were raised by the Petitioner's counsel during  oral CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 25 
arguments and which find no mention whatsoever in 
the Petitions. For example, submissions made in 
respect of Articles 89 (in particular the alleged 
concept of "implied Resolution") and A.264 on the 
effect of Repeal.”  
 
 
22. The Court repeatedly asked lear ned counsel as to what is 
meant by “wider issues ” to which he did not respond. However, the 
issue alluded to in the said part of the statement of learned counsel for 
the Federation pertains to the effect of repeal of an Ordinance in terms 
of Article 264 of  the Constitution which reads as follows: - 
“264. Effect or repeal of laws.  
Where a law is repealed or is deemed to have been 
repealed, by, under, or by virtue of the Constitution, 
the repeal shall not except as otherwise provided in 
the constitution,  
(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the 
time at which the repeal takes effect;  
(b) affect the previous operation of the law or 
anything duly done or suffered under the law;  
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability 
acquired, accru ed or incurred under the law;  
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment 
incurred in respect of any offence committed against 
the law; or  
(e) affect any investigation legal proceeding or 
remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, l iability, penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment;  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, 
and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may 
he imposed, as if the law had not been repealed. ” 
 
23. Section 6 o f the General Clauses Act is couched in similar 
terms as it provides that: - 
“6. Effect of repeal.  Where this Act, or any [Central 
Act] or Regulation made after the commencement of 
this Act, repeals any enactment hitherto made or 
hereafter to be made, then,  unless a different 
intention appears, the repeal shall not:  
 CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 26 
(a) revive anything not in force of existing at the 
time at which the repeal takes effect; or  
 
(b) affect the previous operation of any enactment 
so repealed or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder ; or 
 
(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability 
acquired, accrued or incurred under any 
enactment so repealed; or  
 
(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment 
incurred in respect of any offence committed 
against any enactment so repeated; or  
 
(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or 
remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or 
punishment as aforesaid;  
 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enf orced and 
any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be 
imposed as if the repealing Act or Regulation had not 
been passed.”  
 
 
24. In terms of Article 89 of the Constitution, the President 
may promulgate an Ordinance and it shall have the same effect as an 
Act of the Parliament. However, the Article inter alia  provides that it 
shall stand repealed if not extended by the National Assembly  within 
the period stipulated in the said Article . In the case in hand, the Court 
was not seized of a matter/issue with reg ard to the effect of repeal in 
terms of Article 89, rather the Court in passing the judgment under 
review itself made a declaration on reasons mentioned therein that it 
was “ultra vires of the Constitution”, “void ab initio” and “non est”. The 
effect of re peal as spelt out in clauses (a) (b) (c) (d) and (e) of Article 
264 of the Constitution referred to above, therefore cannot be 
canvassed particularly in view of the candid statement made by 
learned Acting Attorney General and in Para 4 of the statement of the CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 27 
then learned counsel for the Federation Mr. Kamal Azfar.  The 
judgment of this Court reported at Muhammad Arif v. The State  (1993 
SCMR 1589 ) and Government of Punjab v. Zia Ullah Khan (1992 SCMR 
602) relate to the effect of repeal made in terms of Artic le 89 of the 
Constitution. In Jannat -ul-Haq Vs. Abbas Khan (2001 SCMR 1073) this 
Court distinguished between the effect  of repeal of law in terms of 
Article 264 of the Constitution and the fact of law having been 
declared to be repugnant to the Fundamental  Rights by a Court. In 
holding that the effects of “repeal” of a law and its being declared as 
“void” are distinct, the Court held at page 1081 as follows: - 
“Another significant aspect in this context is that 
right of repeal being inherent in Legislature alone, 
any change of law including its annulment otherwise 
than by legislation would not constitute “repeal” as 
to protect any right, obligation acquired, accrued or 
incurred under an annulled law. Similarly operation 
of a law declared to be repugnant to t he Injunctions 
of Qur’an and Sunnah or anything done or suffered 
thereunder before a specified date or continuation of 
suits pending on the specified date also does not 
amount to the repeal of law. There is a fine 
distinction between both the aforesaid eve ntualities 
insofar as their respective implications are 
concerned. The implication of the expression “ceases 
to have effect” occurring in Article 203 -D regarding 
Islamization of laws would be that special 
methodology in its post declaration juncture to be 
repugnant to Injunctions of the Qur’an and Sunnah is 
provided therein. It is, therefore, concluded that 
Article 264 of the Constitution which governs the 
implications of repeal of law would not be attracted 
to the laws which are declared to be void on grou nd 
of their being violative of the fundamental rights 
enshrined in the Constitution as is the case in hand. 
The Court seized of such matters is to provide the 
solutions to the implications.”  
 
 
25. Similarly in Muhammad Iqbal Vs. Ghaunsullah Khan  (2002 
CLC 1533 ), one of us, who was then a Judge of the Peshawar High CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 28 
Court, speaking for the Court at page 1537 came to the conclusion as 
follows: - 
“A perusal of the abovequoted provisions of the 
Constitution and the General Clauses Act would reveal 
that the expressio n “ceased to have effect” cannot be 
held synonymous with repeal as is envisioned by Article 
264 of the Constitution and section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act. In the former eventuality even pending cases 
cannot be dealt with in accordance with the law which  has 
been so held repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam and 
ceases to have effect after the date mentioned in the 
decision while in the latter eventuality a proceeding 
pending in a Court or any such right, privilege, obligation 
or liability, acquired, accr ued or incurred under any 
enactment so repealed are fully protected unless a 
different intention appears from repealing enactment.”   
 
 
26. Before parting with this judgment, we may like to observe 
that the Court was conscious of the fact that although neither  the 
Parliament approved the NRO as an Act nor defended the law rather 
did not oppose revival of criminal cases, yet this petition for review 
was filed on behalf of the  Federation; that despite repeated queries of 
the Court, learned did not elaborate as to  how the Federation was an 
“aggrieved person” or disclose any other “sufficient cause ” to fall 
within the parameters of the law regulating the review jurisdiction. 
However, in the interest of justice, we held a detailed hearing. We 
even allowed learned cou nsel for review petitioner to argue the matter 
notwithstanding the fact that earlier on Mr. Masood Chishti filed 
application to seek permission to argue the case who was superseded 
by Mr. Kamal Azfar and even he withdrew as he was appointed Advisor 
to the Prime Minister and thereafter Mr. Babar Awan, ASC filed CMA 
No. 5144 of 2011 seeking permission to argue the case. The 
indulgence extended, however, cannot be in derogation to law. We 
permitted him to argue so that if we find that a case for review is CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 29 
made , we will allow the application seeking permission to argue, which 
could only have been argued under the Supreme Court Rules by the 
counsel who appeared for the Federation in the main case. Having 
considered all the grounds urged before this Court, we are of the view 
that no case for review is made out. The application seeking 
permission to argue by the counsel who admittedly did not appear for 
Federation in the main case is violative of Rule Order XXVI Rule 6 of 
the Supreme Court Rules and therefore not te nable  and the application 
was disposed of accordingly . While dismissing the review petition, w e 
reiterate the earlier view of this Court in Justice Khurshid Anwar 
Bhinder v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 483) wherein at Page 
526 it was held as follow s:- 
“A review is by its very nature not an appeal or a re -hearing merely on 
the ground that one party or another conceives himself to be dissatisfied 
with the decision of the court, but that it should not only be granted for 
some sufficient cause akin to t hose mentioned in Order XLVII, Rule 1 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, the provisions thereof incorporate the 
principles upon which a review was usually granted by Courts of Law in 
England. The indulgence by way of review may no doubt be granted to 
prevent remediable injustice being done by a court of last resort as 
where by some inadvertence an important statutory provision has 
escaped notice which, if it had been noticed, might materially have 
affected the judgment of the court but in no case should a rehe aring be 
allowed upon merits. ” 
 
 
 Afore -mentioned are the detailed reasons for dismissing 
this petition for review in terms of the short order passed  by this Court 
on 25.11.2011 which is as follows: - 
On 24.11.2011, Dr. Babar Awan, learned Sr. ASC 
concluded  his arguments. In the meanwhile, he had filed 
CMA no. 5234/2011 and insisted for permission to rely 
upon the same. As it is settled principle of law that 
ordinarily at the review stage, a document is not allowed 
to be produced unless it is very much relev ant to do 
complete justice. Initially request was not entertained, 
but subsequent thereto, after giving a second thought, we 
formed the opinion to allow the learned counsel to refer 
to and read the said documents. However, when we 
assembled in the second h alf, he was not present. 
Message was sent to him through the Court staff, but he CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 30 
did not turn up. In the meanwhile, learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan was asked to convey him to appear 
in Court today because otherwise except the case of Syed 
Nasir Ali S hah, all the listed matters including the instant 
CMA/Review Petition have been concluded.  
It seems that in the late hours a request was sent by him 
to the Registrar for adjournment, which was not 
entertained and the same was returned. When the 
hearing of the case opened today, Mr. Masood Chishti, 
Secretary, Ministry of Law & Justice, Government of 
Pakistan, who himself had drafted the Review Petition at 
the time when he was practicing law, was asked to read 
the documents instead of arguing the same because  we 
are of the opinion that the learned counsel to whom 
directions have been made out of sheer respect, he 
should have made himself available before the Court, but 
the Secretary, despite our clear direction as well as 
expressing displeasure, except reading  only one letter 
dated 02.09.1997 declined to read other documents. 
However, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan, in 
such a situation, was asked to read documents through 
and through. In compliance with the order, all the 
documents, which pertained t o the years 1997 to 1999 in 
respect of investigation of the cases against Mr. Asif Ali 
Zardari and Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto pending before 
the Swiss Courts were considered in his presence.  
It may be observed that this Court is seized with the 
matter relati ng to review of the judgment dated 
16.12.2009 in pursuance whereof, the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007 was declared void ab 
initio, being ultra vires and violative of certain Articles of 
the Constitution, therefore, to be deemed non est from 
the d ay of its promulgation. However, after hearing the 
learned counsel for the petitioner from 21 to 24 th 
November, 2011 at length and having gone through the 
documents as well as considering all the aspects of the 
case relating to the Review Petition filed un der Article 188 
of the Constitution to review the judgment dated 
16.12.2009, we are of the considered opinion that no 
case is made out for the review of the said judgment. 
Resultantly, the Review Petition and CMA No. 5144/2011 
are dismissed with no order a s to costs. The concerned 
authorities are hereby directed to comply with the 
judgment dated 16.12.2009 in letter and spirit without 
any further delay.  
 
 
 
Chief Justice.  
 
 
 
Judge (1)   Judge (2)   Judge (3)  
 
 CMA NO. 5144 OF 2011  
& CIVIL REVIEW PETI TION NO.129/2010  
IN CONST. P. 76/2007 & CMAs No. 1427/2011 etc  
 
 
 31 
 
Judge (4)   Judge (5)   Judge (6)  
 
 
 
Judge (7)   Judge (8)   Judge ( 9) 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge (1 0)   Judge (1 1)   Judge (1 2) 
 
 
 
Judge (1 3)   Judge (1 4)   Judge (1 5) 
 
 
 
Judge (1 6) 
 
 
 
Islamabad  
25.11.2011  
Khurram Anees  
Approved for Reporting  