IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
 
Suo Motu Case No.5 of 2012  
(Suo Motu Action regarding allegation of 
business deal between Malik Riaz Hussain and 
Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar attempting to influence 
the judicial process)  
 
 
On Court Notice:    Mr. Irfan Qadir,  
     Attorney General for Pakistan  
       
For Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar:   Sardar M. Ishaq Khan, Sr. ASC  
     With Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar  
 
For Malik Riaz Hussain:   Mr. Zahid Hussain Bokhari, ASC  
      
For Bahria Town:    Dr. Amjad Hussain Bukhari, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR wit h 
Syed Shabbar Hussain, Company Secy.  
 
On Court’s call:    Mr. Mubassar Saddozai, Dir. (L), SECP  
     Mr. Shaukat Hussain, AROC, SECP  
           
Date of Hearing  :  07.06.2012 (at 4 p.m.)  
 
    ORDER  
 
 Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  Suo Motu  Notice was issued in this case for 6.6.2012 . 
The order passed yesterday i.e. 6.6.2012 and order passed earlier in the day today is 
on file. Hon’ble the Chief Justice was heading the Bench but has recused in the light 
of the order passed this morning.  
2. Yesterday we received in Court a statement filed by Mr. Hamid Mir, 
Executive Editor of GEO TV. We have also received earlier in the day a statement 
submitted in Court by Mr. Kamran Khan who is Group Executive Director of GEO 
TV and lastly we have received f rom Mir Ibrahim Rehman, Chief Executive of GEO 
TV Network, a set of documents including an affidavit by Shaheen Sehbai, Group 
Editor, News International. Copies of these three statements have been furnished to 
learned counsel representing the parties and to the learned Attorney General.  
3. These statements are a record of meetings  and interactions between the se 
three persons and one Malik Riaz Hussain. According to these reports, Malik Riaz SMC 5 of 2012  2 
Hussain informed them  that Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar had committed serio us financial 
wrong -doing. The statements themselves are replete with references to the Chief 
Justice of this Court.  
4. At the start of this hearing, the Company Secretary of Bahria Town (Pvt.) Ltd. 
namely, Mr. Shabbar Hussain was as ked to provide some particulars as to the 
Company and its nexus with the Pak Bahria and with Malik Riaz Hussain. He stated 
that the Company was set up in 1997 on the basis of a joint venture between Bahria 
Foundation and the family of Malik Riaz Hussain. I t is a bit unfortunate that although 
we waited all day yesterday from 9:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. for the Company Secretary to 
turn up  with the record,  this did not happen. The Company Secretary has today 
apologized for this . Since we do not wish to digress fro m the focus of these 
proceedings, we do not  wish to comment further on the failure of  the Company 
Secretary to arrive in the Supreme Court from Rawalpindi during the said time. He 
has stated that he was in a meeting and later there was rush of traffic.  Let this rest for 
the time being. The Company Secretary, however, shall furnish in Court the joint 
venture agreement between Bahria Foundation and Malik Riaz Hussain. He shall also 
provide copies, if any, relating to the dissolution of the joint venture. During 
questioning he  mentioned that there was some litigation pending in the Civil Court 
relating to the said joint venture. He shall furnish copies of the record of the said 
litigation also.  
5. In addition to the above, the Company Secretary informe d the Court that 
Malik Riaz Hussain officially has nothing whatsoever to do with Bahria Town (Pvt.) 
Ltd. because  he does not own even a single share in the said Company and although 
he was the Chairman of the Company, he resigned from the said office last month. 
The Company Secretary also informed the Court that two private limited Companies 
namely, Safari Town Pvt.  Ltd. which owned 999 ,000 ordinary share s of Bahria Town 
and Hussain Global Associates Pvt. Ltd. which owned 5 ,000,000  ordinary shares of 
Bahria Town, have  transferred their share -holding in favour of the son and the wife 
of Malik Riaz Hussain namely Ahmed  Ali Riaz Malik and Bina Riaz. As a  SMC 5 of 2012  3 
consequence, the present share -holding of Bahria Town is vested 26% in Ahmed Ali 
Riaz Malik and 74% in Bina Riaz.  
6. Sardar Muhammad Ishaq Khan Sr. ASC representing Dr. Arsalan stated that 
learned counsel for Bahria Town and Malik Riaz respectively should be asked to 
provide the documents which have been mentioned in the statements of the three 
persons referred to above. The learned counsel representing Bahria Town has stated 
that he is in  possession of only one document which is a return in form 29 submitted 
on behalf of Bahria Town to the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan. We 
have already noted that the Company Secretary of Bahria Town shall provide th e 
remaining record noted in the previous paragraph s. 
7. Syed Zahid Hussain Bukhari has stated that he has had telephonic contact 
with his client Malik Riaz Hussain. He presently is not a position to state if any 
medical procedure will be advised by the med ical consultants of Malik Riaz Hussain 
in England. He, however, also stated that he will make contact with his client to find 
out the true position. He requested the Court to adjourn the case for seven days so 
that he can obtain instructions/documents etc. for the assistance of the Court.  We can 
understand the need felt by learned counsel to be in contact with his client. However, 
in this day of advanced communication  technology , seven days may not be required. 
We, however, will allow reasonable time to  enable counsel to be in touch with his 
client.  Learned Sr. ASC representing Malik Riaz also stated that a larger Bench should 
be constituted for the hearing of this Suo Moto Case. He also made a few other 
suggestions as to the constitution and number of J udges on such Bench. He is free to 
move any ap plication in this behalf to Hon’ble the Chief Justice.  
8. The learned Attorney General apparently was of the view that there was 
nothing special about this case and Dr. Arsalan and Malik Riaz are just two 
indiv iduals like any other individuals who appear in cases before this Court. He also 
contended that no allegation had been made to disparage the reputation of this 
Court. This statement was made by the learned Attorney General when he had not, 
as yet, had an  opportunity of going through the statement made by the three 
individuals mentioned above. However, his contention is noted and it is also SMC 5 of 2012  4 
observed that Suo Moto notice  in the case  was taken by Hon’ble the Chief Justice for 
valid reasons which have also been  noted in the order passed yesterday and earlier in 
the day today.  
9. The l earned Attorney General also stated that the fundamental rights of the 
persons involved have to be kept in mind as also their right to fair trial. We do not 
intend to hold a trial because that would be a matter which, if necessary will be 
undertaken by a competent trial Court in accordance with law. For the present, the 
exercise being undertaken by us is to ensure that the truth relating to matters which 
have had wide , intensive and  extensive publicity not only in Pakistan but the world 
over should be uncovered. This exercise is of the utmost significance because without 
this the legal , constitutional and moral authority of this Court can be adversely 
affected. The proceedings ar e to take place in open Court and the interest which has 
been evoked in these proceedings is manifest from the coverage received in the media 
and by heavy attendance in Court of persons from all walks of life. The learned 
Attorney General stated that he ha s the highest regard for the members of this Bench  
but would still request  that in view of the extraordinary nature of the case a larger 
Bench be constituted. This s ubmission is somewhat at odds  with his earlier stance 
that this matter should be treated as  any other ordinary case. However, the learned 
Attorney General is also free to move an application before Hon’ble the Chief Justice.  
10. The learned Attorney General, if he so chooses and the learned counsel 
representing respectively Dr. Arsalan, Malik R iaz and Bahria Town shall file concise 
statements together with all relevant documents in their possession by Saturday i.e. 
9.6.2012. The concise statement s should be exchanged between the learned counsel 
before the next date of hearing i.e. 11 .6.2012.  
11. Since in the statements of the three media persons referred to above, there is 
also mention that rupees thirty to forty crores have been paid by or on behalf of Malik 
Riaz Hussain to Dr. Arsalan , it is necessary for us to get some information  on the 
financial status of Malik Riaz.  As we have already been informed that Malik Riaz ha s 
no nexus with Bahria Town Pvt. Ltd., the Chairman, FBR is directed to provide to us SMC 5 of 2012  5 
the tax returns, wealth statements and other relevant documents which will show to 
us the net worth of Malik Riaz Hussain. Let this be done by tomorrow.  
12. Ali Ahmad Riaz, Chief Executive, Bahria Town and Malik Riaz Hussain shall 
also appear in Court on the next date of hearing unless prevented by some 
unavoidable reason.  
13. To come up on 11.6.2012.                  
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
ISLAMABAD  
07.06.2012  
M. Azhar Malik  
 