IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 PRESENT:  Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
   Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
   Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Civil Petitions No. 231 and 183 -K/2022 and 827/2023  
 
 
Ayaz, etc.         (in CP 231/2022)  
 
Province of Sindh through its Secretary Forest &  
Wildlife Department, Government of Sindh, etc.   (in CP 183 -K/2022)  
 
Abdul Aziz         (in CP 827/2023)  
 
         Petitioners  
 
Versus  
 
Mustafa Saeed, etc.  (in all)      Respondents  
 
 
In CP 231/2022  
 
For the Petitioners:   Mr. M. Aqil Awan, Sr. ASC  
     (through Video Link, Karachi)  
 
For Respondent Nos. 1 to 5:  Mr. Ghulam Sarwar Baloch, ASC  
     (through Video Link, Karachi)  
 
For Respondent No. 6:   Mr. Miran Muhammad Shah, Addl. AG  
     (through Video Link, Karachi)  
 
For Res pondent No. 16:   Syed Qamar Hussain Sabzwari, ASC  
 
In CP 83 -K/2022  
 
For the Petitioners:   Mr. Miran Muhammad Shah, Addl. AG  
     Dr. Abdul Jabbar Kazi, Addl. Secretary,  
     Forest & Wildlife  
     (through Video Link, Karachi)  
 
For Respondent No. 7:   In-person 
     (through Video Link, Karachi)  
 
For Respondent No. 13:   Syed Qamar Hussain Sabzwari, ASC  
 
In CP 827/2023  
 
For the Petitioner:    Syed Qamar Hussain Sabzwari, ASC  
 
For the Respondents:   Nemo  
 
Date of Hearing:    27.11.2023  C. P. No. 231/2022, etc.  2
 
ORDER  
 
 We are informed that the Sindh Public Service Commission (‘ the 
Commission ’) had issued advertisement No. 04/2020, dated 13 July 
2020, in respect of a number of posts, including selection of suitable 
candidates in the Forests and Wildlife Department for two Assistant 
Conse rvator of Forests in BPS -17. Only applicants between 21 years to 
30 years of age were eligible to apply. The applicants were required to 
have a degree in B.Sc in Forestry or Agriculture or Physical Sciences in 
at least 2nd class from a recognized universit y. Subsequently, a 
corrigendum was issued stating, that to maintain the urban and rural 
quota one post will be considered to be urban and the other rural. 
Thereafter, an addendum was issued on 8 September 2020, based upon 
Notification No.SO -II(SGA&CD)5 -64/2011 dated 27 July 2020 (‘ the 
Notification ’), which provided that, ‘ Government of Sindh are pleased to 
allow relaxation upto maximum of fifteen (15) years  in the upper age limit 
to all the applicants applying for the vacancies in all the Departments of 
Government of Sindh (except Police Service & the posts to be filled through 
Combined Competitive Examination by the Sindh Public Service 
Commission). ’ Moreov er, the number of posts were increased from two to 
seven by a letter dated 27 October 2020 written by ‘ Section Office -I for 
Secretary to Govt. of Sindh ’ addressed to the Commission. This letter also 
stipulated that the selection was for, ‘ STIPENDIARY CANDI DATES FOR 
M.SC (FORESTRY COURSE 2020 -2022 AND B.SC (FORESTRY) COURSE 
2020 -24 AT PAKISTAN FOREST INSTITUTE PESHAWAR FOR INITIAL 
APPOITMENT TO THE POSTS OF ASSISTANT CONSERVATOR OF 
FORESTS (BS -17) AND RANGE FOREST OFFICE (BS -16).’ The direction of 
this Court  that every government servant must mention his name and 
designation in every notification, memorandum, order, etc. has not been 
complied with, as neither the name of Section Officer nor of the said 
Secretary is mentioned.  
 
2. The impugned judgment, by a D ivision Bench of the High Court, 
had set aside the selection process and directed that the posts be 
advertised afresh by the Commission. The province of Sindh as well as 
some private parties have assailed the decision of the High Court.  
 C. P. No. 231/2022, etc.  3
3. There is no one  to represent the Province of Sindh before us at 
Islamabad. Unlike other provinces the office of the Advocate General, 
Sindh has no presence at Islamabad. The learned Advocate -General 
Sindh was sent for and he informed us (through video -link) that even 
though the province has 80 law officers yet it flies in an Additional 
Advocate General every week, which undoubtedly, must constitute a 
major expense on the public exchequer. We were informed that the 
person who was supposed to fly in today could not do so, a nd are being 
addressed by Mr. Miran Muhammad Shah, Additional Advodate -General 
(‘AAG’) through video -link. The salary of an AAG we are told is half a 
million rupees. Unfortunately, we cannot proceed to decide these 
petitions because learned AAG was not abl e to answer the questions put 
to him.  
 
4. Rule 12(1) of the Sindh Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1974 (‘ the Rules ’) stipulates that the education, 
qualification, experience and age limit for the post be provided. Rule 
12(2) of the Rules states that the stipulated age may be relaxed to the 
extent mentioned in the Table by the authorities mentioned therein, 
which provides that upto one year age can be relaxed by the Head of the 
Department in all grades, for grade 16 and above the power to relax age 
of one year vests in the Head of the Department, for a period of three 
years the Secretary of the Department can relax it, upto five years the 
Chief Secretary can do so and upto 10 years the Minister Incharge or the 
Chief Secretary (if t here is no Minister) can relax age. In the instant case, 
age has been relaxed by fifteen years, which means that candidates who 
are about forty -five years may also apply.  
 
5. The following questions arise:  
(i) If a rule provides a maximum age for a post wh y should it be 
relaxed ? 
(ii) If at all age is to be relaxed should it not be in respect of an 
individual seeking it, provided he could justify it?  
(iii) Does blanket age relaxation not defeat the intent of the law, 
and defeat rule 12(1) of the Rules?  
(iv) Whether the Notification, granting 15 years age relaxation 
conforms with the law?  C. P. No. 231/2022, etc.  4
(v) Whether the interest of the people of the province is served 
when age is relaxed, who may only then have the benefit of 
the selected candidate’s service for less than 15 years, since 
the retiring age is 60 years?  
(vi) Whether age should be relaxed when there is high 
unemployment and qualified candidates are available?  
(vii) What is a stipendiary candidate ? 
(viii) The advertisement issued by the Commission stipulated 
selection of Assistant Conservator of Forests possessing 
certain educational qualification, and did not mention 
stipendiary candidates , therefore, why are stipendiary 
candidates  to be selected?  
(ix) Why, after the publication of advertisement arbitrarily 
changes were made, and if so why fresh publication was not 
made?  
 
6. A copy of this order be sent to the Advocate -General, Sindh, Chief 
Secretary Sindh, Chairperson and Members of the Sindh Public Ser vice 
Commission and the Law Department, Government of Sindh, who should 
file concise statements with regard to the above. Concise statements to 
be filed latest by 31 December 2023.  
 
7. To come up in the month of January 2024.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
27.11.2023  
(Farrukh)  
Approved for Reporting  
 