SMC No.1/2023, etc  1 
 
Table of Contents  
Preface ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 1 
Background facts  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  3 
Suo motu proceedings and constitution petitions in this Court  ................................ ................  4 
Our reservations on the invocation of suo motu jurisdiction and constitution of the Bench  ...... 5 
Decisi on by two Hon’ble Judges and recusal by two Hon’ble Judges and further hearing 
by the remaining five Judges  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 5 
Scope of jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) during pendency of the same 
matter before the High Courts  ................................ ................................ ................................  7 
High Court judgment al ready in the field – how can original jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) be exercised against a judicial pronouncement of a High Court, directly or 
indirectly  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................... 11 
Applicability of res judicata to a decision of a High Court made under Article 199  .................. 15 
Federalism - Judicial propriety in allowing the High Courts of the respective Provinces to 
decide upon matters that relate to those Provinces only  ................................ ........................ 17 
Parliament is the best forum and political dialogue is the best way to resolve political 
issues  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...19 
Decision by 4 -3 or 3 -2 majority  ................................ ................................ ............................. 20 
Need of making rules for regulating the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) and 
the constitution of Benches  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...23 
 
JUDGMENT  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - (For himself and Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J.)  
Preface  
The jurisdiction of a court is determined by the Constitution and laws, 
not by caprice or convenience of the judges.1 And, i t is the nature of the 
controversy that determines the jurisdiction  of a court and not the 
magnitude of the interests involved .2 When caprice and convenience of 
the judges takes over , we enter  the era of an “imperial Supreme Cour t”. 
According to  Professor Mark A. Lemley ,3 the U.S. Supreme Court has by 
its decisions given in the past few years, restricted the power of the 
Congress, the administration and the lower federal courts, and has 
concentrated the power in itself. The immediate danger of the imperial 
Supreme Court,  writes Professor  Lemley,  is that it will damage the 
constitutional system by usurping the power that doesn’t belong to it; 
but the longer -term danger may be the opposite. The Court, by turning 
it in the minds of the public into just another political insti tution, may 
ultimately undermine its legitimacy and credibility of its judgments.  We 
must ensure that our Supreme Court does not assume the role of an 
imperial Supreme Court with its judicial decisions restricting the power 
of the Parliament, the Governmen t and the provincial High Courts 
                                                             
1 Attributed to John Marshall, Fourth Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court (1801 -1835 ).  
2 Oliver Wendell Holmes, Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court (1902 -1932) . 
3 Mark A. Lemley , The Imper ial Supreme Court ,136 Harv. L. Rev. F. 97 (2022).  SMC No.1/2023, etc  2 
 
assuming all the powers to  itself, and must remember that  “we have no 
more right to decline the exercise of jurisdiction which is given, than to 
usurp that which is not given.”4 
2.  The present suo motu  proceedings and the connected 
constitutional petitions invite the Court to exercise its original  
jurisdiction  under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan (“Constitituion”)  inspite of the fact that the 
matters involved are already  pending adjudication before the provincial 
High Courts  and the question of law involved in one case has been 
decided by the High Court of the Province concerned . It is, therefore,  
crucial that before embarking upon  its or iginal jurisdiction  under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitutio n, this Court carefully assess es that 
such an exercise of dis cretion ary jurisdiction  does not border on judicial 
overreach , paint ing the Court, in the words of Professor Lemley, as an 
“imperial Supreme Court ”. The original jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution is not only “discretionary”5 but also 
“special”6 and “extraordinary”7, which is to be exercised “with 
circumspection ”8 only in the “exceptional cases ”9 of public importance 
relating to the enforcement of fundamental rights  that are considered 
“fit”10 for being dealt with under this jurisdiction by the Court. This 
jurisdiction of the Court is special and extraordinary , for in the exercise 
of it the Court acts as the first and the final arbiter , which leaves a 
party aggrieved of the determination made by the Court with no remedy 
of appeal to any higher court . This jurisdiction  must not , therefore,  be 
frequent ly and incautious ly exercise d, lest it damages the public image 
of the Court as an impartial judicial institution.11 Foundations of a 
judicial institution stand on, and its real strength lies , in the public 
trust and w ithout such public trust and public acceptance, a court  
loses the legitimacy it requires to perform its functions. A court’s 
                                                             
4 Cohens v. Virginia (1821)  per John Marshall.  
5 Akhtar Hassan v. Federation of Pakistan 2012  SCMR  455; Tahir -ul-Qadri  v. Federation of Pakistan 
PLD 2013 SC 413; Ashraf Tiwana  v. Pakistan 2013 SCMR 1159.  
6 Manzoor Elahi  v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1975 SC 66 per Anwarul Haq, J.  
7 Ibid per Hamoodur Rahman, C J.   
8 Ibid. 
9 H.R.C No.5818 of 2006    2008 SCMR 531.  
10 Manzoor Elahi  v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1975 SC 66 per Anwarul Haq, J.  
11 See Yasser Kureshi , Seeking  Supremacy: The Pursuit of Judicial Power in Pakistan  (2022); Asher Asif 
Qazi, A Government of Judges: A Story of The Pakistani Supreme Court's Strategic Expansion  (2018); 
Maryam S. Khan, Genesis and Evolution of Public Interest Litigation in the Supreme Court of Pakistan: 
Toward A Dynamic Theory of Judicialization  (2015).  SMC No.1/2023, etc  3 
 
concern with legitimacy is therefore not for its own  sake but for the 
sake of the people  to which it is responsible.12   
Background facts   
3.  In the context of the dissolution of the Provincial Assembly 
of the Province of Punjab on 14.01.2023, a dispute arose  in regard to 
appointing a date for the election , which involved the question of law : 
Who has the constitutional power and duty to appoint a 
date for the holding of a general election to a Provincial 
Assembly that stands dissolved under the second part of 
clause (1) of Article 112 of the Constitution at the 
expiration of forty -eight hours af ter the Chief Minister has 
advised the Governor to dissolve the Assembly but the 
Governor has not  made any express order thereon?   
A political party, Pakistan Tehreek -i-Insaaf (“PTI”), through its Secretary 
General moved the Provincial  High Court concerned , i.e., the Lahore 
High Court, by filing a writ petition13 under Article 199 of the 
Constitution for determination of the said question . A Single Bench of 
the Lahore High Court decided the said writ petition , along  with other 
connected writ petitions,  by its judgment dated 10.02.2023, holding 
that it is the Election Commission of Pakistan  (“ECP”)  which is to 
appoint  a date for the holding of a general election when a Provincial 
Assembly stands dissolved under the second part of clause (1) of Article 
112 o f the Constitution and consequent ly directed  the ECP to 
immediately announce the date of the election, after consultation with 
the Governor of Punjab.   
4.  The ECP and the Governor of Punjab preferred intra -court 
appeals (“ICA s”) before the Division Bench of the Lahore High Court 
against the Single Bench judgment dated 10.02.2023 , which are 
pending adjudication . In the ICA, the Go vernor prayed for the 
suspension  of the impugned judgment as an interim relief, which was 
however not granted by the Division Bench , and f or the implementation 
of the judgmen t of the Single Bench, PTI filed a contempt petition , 
which is also pending adjudication .  
                                                             
12 Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1992) 505 U.S. 833.  
13 W.P. No. 5851 of 2023.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  4 
 
Suo motu proceedings and constitution petitions in this Court  
5.  Meanwhile, on 16.02.2023 a two -member B ench of this 
Court while hearing a service matter of a civil servant,14 surprisingly 
apprehended delay in the holding of the  general election to the  
Provincial Assembly  of Punjab and took suo motu  notice of the matter , 
with the following observations:  
7. We  note that the Provincial Assembly of Punjab stood dissolved on 
14.01.2023 pursuant to the Advice of the Chief Minister, Punjab dated 
12.01.2023. As such, elections to the Punjab Provincial Assembly are 
required to be held within 90 days of the said date i n terms of Article 
224(2) of the Constitution. However, no progress appears to have taken 
place in this regard and there is a real and eminent danger of violation 
of a clear and unambiguous constitutional command.    
The Hon’ble Memb ers of the said Bench expressed their view on the 
matter and referred the same to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan to 
invoke the suo motu  jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, thus:  
8……….. We are, however, of the view tha t the matter brought to our 
notice during these proceedings raises a serious question of public 
importance with reference to enforcement of Fundamental Rights 
conferred by Chapter -1 of Part -II of the Constitution. Considering the 
fact that unless timely st eps are taken to remedy the situation, there is 
an eminent danger of violation of the Constitution which we are under a 
constitutional, legal and moral duty to defend. We therefore consider it 
a fit case to refer to the Hon’ble CJP to invoke the suo motu  jurisdiction  
of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, who may if he 
considers appropriate after invoking jurisdiction under the said Article 
constitute a Bench to take up the matter. Let the office place this file 
before the Hon’ble CJP for a ppropriate orders.  
After two days, o n 18.02.2023 , Mr. Muhammad Sibtain Khan, the 
Speaker of th e Provincial Assembly of Punjab  (a member of PTI before 
his election as Speaker) and some prominent members of PTI, like Mian 
Mahmood ur Rashid etc., filed Consti tution Petition No.2 of 2023 in this 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, agitating the same 
grievance as recorded in the order of the two -member Bench. The 
Speaker of t he Provincial Assembly of Kh yber Pakhtunkhwa also joined 
in Constitution Petition No.2 of 2023 for agitating the grievance as to 
not appointing the date of the election by the Governor of the Province  
of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa . It may  also be pertinent to mention here that 
earlier to the sa id suo motu  notice taken by the two -member Bench, the 
President of the Islamabad High Court Bar Association had also filed 
Constitution Petition No.1 of 2023 in this Court under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution on the same matter, on 09.02.2023, but the same had 
not been fixed for hearing till then.  
                                                             
14 Order dated 16.02.2023 passed in C.P No.3988 of 2022 titled Ghulam Mehmood Dogar  v. Federation 
of Pakistan, citation 2023 SCP 59 at the official website of this Court.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  5 
 
6.  Upon the recommendation of the two -member Bench, the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan  invoke d the suo motu  jurisdiction of 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , by  his 
admini strative order dated 22.02.2023 ,15 and constitute d a nine -
member  Bench to consider the questions of law framed therein; his 
lordship  also fixed the connected Constitution Petitions No.1 and 2 of 
2023 for hearing before th e nine-member Bench.   
Our reservations on the invocation of suo motu jurisdiction and 
constitution of the Bench  
7.  We had serious reservations on the mode and manner how 
the original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) was invoked 
suo motu  in the present matter as well as on the constitu tion of the 
nine-member Bench, which we expressed in our orders dated 
23.02.202316 and the details thereof need not be reiterat ed here. Our 
reservations  were regarding the administrative decision  of the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice invoking the suo motu  jurisdiction in the matter , after 
having noticed the mode  and manner in which the issue arose  out of an 
unrelated  service matter of a civil servant being heard by a two -member 
Bench , nuanced by the surfacing of audio leaks involving one of the 
Hon’ble Judges  of that two -member Bench  and thereafter the 
constituti on of the nine -member  Bench that includ ed the said two 
Hon’ble Judges . It is clarified that the actual sitting of the said two 
Hon’ble Judges on the Bench or their recusal from the Bench is of little 
concern  to us , as it is a matter between the Judges and their 
conscience , only to be adjudged  by history. Our reservations, however, 
remain to the extent of the administrative powers exercised by the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice and have been  elaborated upon later in the 
judgment.     
Decision by two Hon’ble Judges and r ecusal by two Hon’ble Judges and 
further hearing by the remaining five Judges  
8.  On the first date of hearing, i.e., 23.02.2023, at the very 
outset one of us ( Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J. )  read a note in Court 
expressing his opinion that the present suo motu  proceedings were not 
justified. T wo Hon’ble Judges of the nine -member Bench ( Yahya Afridi 
and Athar Minallah, JJ. ) dismissed the suo motu  proceedings as well as 
                                                             
15 Administrative order dated 22.02.2023 of HCJP in S.M.C. No.1 of 2023, citation 2023 SCP 64 at the 
official website of this Court..  
16 Order dated 23.02.2023 passed in S.M.C. No.1/2023, citation 2023 SCP 68 at the official website of 
this Court.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  6 
 
the conn ected constitution petitions, by their orders dated 23.02.2023,1 
inter alia  holding:  
While the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution is an independent original jurisdiction that is not affected 
by the pendency of any matter on  the same subject matter before any 
other court or forum, the decision already rendered by the Lahore High 
Court in Writ Petition No.6093/2023, pending challenge in Intra -Court 
Appeal No.11096 of 2023, and the peculiarly charged and unflinching 
contested p olitical stances taken by the parties, warrant this Court to 
show judicial restraint to bolster the principle of propriety. This is to 
avoid any adverse reflection on this Court’s judicial pre -emptive 
eagerness to decide.  
On the second date of hearing, i.e ., 24.02.2023, an application was filed 
by three political parties, namely, Pakistan Muslim League (N), Pakistan 
Peoples’ Party and Jamiat Ulema -e-Islam, reques ting that the two 
Hon’ble Judges  of the nine -member Bench ( Ijaz ul Ahsan and Sayyed 
Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, JJ. ) may recuse themselves from hearing this 
case, for the reasons stated in the said application. Taking stock of the 
situation, the Hon’ble  Chief J ustice called a meeting of the Judges of 
the nine -member B ench, which took place on 27.02.2023 .  
9.   In the meeting , the two Hon’ble Judges ( Ijaz ul Ahsan and 
Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, JJ. ) after deliber ations decided to 
recus e themse lves from the Bench. I t was also considered  that the  two 
Hon’ble Judges ( Yahya Afridi and Athar Minallah, JJ. ), who had already 
made and announced their final decision of dismissing the constitution 
petitions and the suo motu  proceedings  on 23.02.2023  and had in the ir 
order left it to the  Hon’ble Chief Justice to decide if they were required 
to sit through the r emaining proceedings  in the following words – 
“However, I leave it to the Worthy Chief Justice to decide my retention 
in the present benc h hearing the said petitions.” Therefore, a Bench 
comprising t he remaining five Judge s of the nine -member Bench was 
reconstituted by the Hon’ble Chief Justice , to simply further hear the 
case and no specific order was passed to exclude the two Hon’ble 
Judges.    
10.  In the said backdrop, the rema ining  five members of the 
Bench heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties to the 
constitution petitions as well as the other major political parties 
including Pakistan Muslim League (N), Pakistan Peoples ’ Party and 
Jamiat Ulema -e-Islam, and examined  the record of the cas e. SMC No.1/2023, etc  7 
 
Scope of jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) during pendency of 
the same matter before the High Courts  
11.  As the constitutional petitions involving the same matter 
are pending adjudication  before the  respective High Courts, we think it 
appropriate to first take up the question regarding the scope of 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution during 
pendency of the same matter before the High Courts .  
12.  After the coming into  force of the Constitution in 1973, it 
did not tak e much time that the question as to  the nature and scope of 
the original jurisdiction conferred on this Court under Article 184(3) , 
came fo r consideration before this  Court in Manzoor Elahi17. The Court 
not only elaborated the mea ning and scope of the phrase  “question of 
public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights” as used in Article 184(3) but also explained the 
different contours of this jurisdiction, which so far as  are relevant for 
the present case may be stated briefly as follows.  
13.  The original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) 
is an “extraordinary” jurisdiction , which is to be exercised “with 
circumspection”. It confers the “enabling powers”, and  the Court is not 
bound to exercise them even where the case brought before it involves a 
question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any 
of the Fundamental Rights. Before exercising this extraordinary 
jurisdiction, the Court is to s ee whether the facts and circumstances of 
the case justify the exercise of it and whether the case is “fit” for being 
dealt with by the Court under this jurisdiction. As the jurisdiction of 
this Court under Article 184(3) is concurrent with that of the Hig h 
Courts under Article 199, if the jurisdiction of any of the High Courts 
has already been invoked under Article 199 and the matter is pending 
adjudication, then the two well -established principles are also to be 
considered before exercising its jurisdicti on under Article 184(3) by this 
Court: First, where two courts have concurrent jurisdiction and a 
petitioner elects to invoke the jurisdiction of one of the courts then he is 
bound by his choice of forum and must pursue his remedy in that 
court; and second , if one of the courts having such concurrent 
jurisdiction happens to be a superior court to which an appeal lies from 
the other court of concurrent jurisdiction then the superior court 
                                                             
17 Manzoor Elahi  v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1975 SC 66.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  8 
 
should not normally entertain such a petition after a similar petition  on 
the same facts has already been filed and is pending adjudication in the 
lower court, otherwise it would deprive one of the parties, of his right of 
appeal. Even where no similar petition on the same facts has already 
been filed in any of the High Cour ts, this Court can decline to exercise 
its extraordinary jurisdiction if it finds that sufficient justification has 
not been shown for bypassing, and not invoking , the concurrent 
jurisdiction of the High Court concerned.  
14.        We may  add a third principle, i.e. , the principle of forum 
non conveniens  (inconvenient forum),  which can  also be useful ly 
considered by this Court while deciding upon its discretion to exercise 
or not to exercise  its jurisdiction under Article 184(3)  in a particular 
matter . This principle of forum non conveniens  is a legal doctrine in 
common law jurisdictions that allows a court to decline jurisdiction over 
a case if it determines that another court would be more appropriate or 
convenient for the parties involved. This principle aims to promote 
fairness and effic iency in the judicial system by ensuring that cases are 
heard in the most suitable venue.  In other words, when  a court is 
satisfied that ther e is some other court  having the competent 
jurisdiction  in which the case may be heard and decided  more suitably 
for the interests of all the parties and the ends of justice, t his principle 
allows it to decline the exercise of its jurisdiction despite having the 
same .18 This principle is generally applied in matters where courts of 
two or more countries have concurrent jurisdiction, and the court 
whose jurisdiction is invoked by one of the parties, is of the view that a 
court in another jurisdiction is more suitable to adjudicate the case and 
thus waives its jurisdiction over the case . The rationale of this principle 
can, however,  be applied by the courts of concurrent jurisdiction that 
are situated in one and the same country  also. Given  this principle, this 
Court if, after considering the convenience of the parties and the nature 
of the matter involved, finds that the case may be heard and decided 
more suitably by a High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution, it 
may decline to exercise its jurisdiction  under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution.   
15.  The scope of original jurisdiction of the Court was again 
examined by an 11 -Member Full Court Bench of this Court in Benazir 
                                                             
18 Dicey, Morris & Collins, The Conflict of Laws,  (16th ed. 2022) Vol - 1, Ch -12. SMC No.1/2023, etc  9 
 
Bhutto19. The Court, in that case,  considered and further explained the 
principles enunciated in Manzoor Elahi  in regard to th e exercise of this 
jurisdiction.  No principle enunciated in  Manzoor Elahi  was dissent ed to 
or overruled.  The Court simply found it proper to exercise its original 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) in  the facts and circumstances of the 
case before it.  
16.  In Benazir Bhutto , the Court endorsed the principle 
enunciated in Manzoor Elahi , that in matters of concurrent jurisdiction , 
the lower court should normally be approached in the first instance, by 
holding that it is no doubt correct that ordinarily  the forum of the court 
in the lower hierarchy should be invoked but the principle is not 
inviolable and there may be genuine exceptions  to it, such as the case 
before it where there had been a denial of justice as a result of the 
proceedings before the Hi gh Court s being dilatory  and when the High 
Court s had not exercised its judicial power in the matter by making an 
order admitting the petitions for regular hearing and were thus not 
seized of the dispute. The Court also cautioned that the applicability of 
this prin ciple is to be judged in the light of the particular facts and 
circumstances of each case, as there can be an abuse of this principle if 
there is an indiscriminate filing of petitions by persons motivated to 
stultify the exercise of judicial power under Ar ticle 184(3) of the 
Constitution. T he Court explained  that the petitioner before it was not 
bound by the choice of the forum made by another person who had filed 
a similar petition in a High Court in his individual capacity without 
there being any authoris ation from the petitioner, the co -chairperson of 
the aggrieved political p arty, and  held that the element of "common 
interest" of the two petitioners would strike at the choice of selecting the 
forum only when there is a proof to elicit a common design bet ween 
them . The Court finally held that the facts of Manzoor Elahi  and that of 
the petition before it were distinguishable , and thus proceeded to 
exercise its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, without 
superseding in any manner the princ iples enunciated in Manzoor Elahi . 
Nor any other judgment of this Court has come or brought to our 
notice, which has overruled the principles enunciated in  Manzoor Elahi . 
Thus, the principles enunciated in  Manzoor Elahi  and explained in  
Benazir Bhutto  as to the nature and scope of the original jurisdiction of 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is the law of the land 
                                                             
19 Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakist an PLD 1988 SC 416.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  10 
 
till today, which should therefore be applied and followed by this Court 
unless a Bench of this Court larger than an 11 -member Bench 
overrules the same.  
17.  Given the above  legal position, this Court declined to 
exercise its jurisdiction under Art icle 184(3) of the Constitution in a 
later case of Farough Siddiqi,20  after considering the  case of Benazir 
Bhutto , and held that it  saw no reason whatsoever to deprive the High 
Court, of hearing the identical petition which was pending there , 
particularly when the facts and questions of law are same and when no 
dilatory tactics had been adopted in the High Court. The Court held  
that in the circumstances of the case, the direct petition before it under 
Article 184(3) was not maintainable on the ground that on the same 
subject -matter , a petition under Article 199 was pending in the Sindh 
High Court and dismissed the petition under  Article 184(3) with the 
observation that the High Court would take up the petition under 
Article 199 pending before it for hearing in the first week after vacation. 
Similarly, in Wukala Mahaz21 this Court reiterated that there is no 
doubt that the Court ca nnot, as a  matter of course, entertain a 
constitution p etition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution and allow 
a party to bypass a High Court which has jurisdiction under Article 199 
of the Constitution, inter alia , to enforce the Fundamental Rights und er 
clause (2) thereof, and that the Court should be discreet in selecting 
cases for entertaining under Article 184(3) of the Constitution.  
18.  In the light of the above principles enunciated in Manzoor 
Elahi  and explained in Benazir Bhutto , when we examine the facts and 
circumstances of the present case, we find that the writ petitions filed 
in the Lahore High Court by PTI and others cannot be said to have been 
filed to “stultify” the exercise of original jurisdiction by this Court under 
Article 184(3) nor is there any inordinate delay in the proceedings being 
conducted in that High Court, which could have justified the exercise of 
extraordinary jurisdiction by this Court under Article 184(3). The delay, 
if any, has in fact been caused by th e present  proceedings  and, as 
observed by Justice Anwarul Haq in  Manzoor Elahi   that the  “High 
Court …would have proceeded to examine the allegations …, if the matter 
had not been brou ght to this Court ”, we find that  the Division Bench of 
the Lahore High Court would have decided the ICAs pending before it  
                                                             
20 Farough Siddiqi v. Province of Sindh 1994 SCMR 2111.  
21 Wukala Mahaz v. Federation of Pakistan  PLD 1998 SC 1263 (7 -MB) SMC No.1/2023, etc  11 
 
and the Peshawar High Court would have decided the writ petition 
pending before it  if the present proceedings had not been taken up by 
this Court. Further, we find t he principle of choice of forum, as 
enunciated in  Manzoor Elahi  and explained in  Benazir Bhutto , is also  
applicable to the present case  as the writ petitions filed by PTI and 
others in the Lahore High Court and the constitution petitions, 
particularly C.P.  No.2 of 2023 filed in this Court  by the Speaker of the 
Provincial Assembly of Punjab and others, involve the element of 
"common interest" of the petitioners.  We are , therefore , of the opinion 
that in view of the prin ciples settled in Manzoor Ilahi  and Benzair 
Bhutto , the present suo motu  proceedings and the connected 
constitution  petitions  do not constitute a fit case to exercise the 
extraordinary original  jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of 
the Constituti on. 
High Court judgment already i n the field – how can original jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) be exercised against  a judicial pronouncement  of a 
High Court, directly or indirectly  
19.  As aforementioned, the question of law involved in the 
present matter, is: who has the constitutional power and duty to 
appoint a date for the holding of a general election to a Provincial 
Assembly that stands dissolved under the second part of clause (1) of 
Article 112 of the Constitution, at the expiration of forty -eight hours 
after the Chief Minister has advised the Governor to dissolve the 
Assembly but the Governor has not made any express order thereon? 
And, this question has already been decided by  a Single B ench of the 
Lahore H igh Court  in the exercise of its constitutional jurisdiction 
under Article 199 of the Constitution  by its judgment dated 10.02.2023, 
which judgment having not been set aside or suspended by any higher 
forum is in the field and is thus fully operative and binding on t he 
parties to the writ petitions wherein the same was passed.  
20.  In view of the above position, the question as to the 
maintainability of the present suo motu  proceedings  and constitution 
petitions, falls for our determination:  whether this Court in the exercise 
of its original jurisdiction under Article  184(3) of the Constitution has  
the power to make an order of the nature mentioned in Article 199 of 
the Constitution  against a judicial order of a High Court , directly or 
indirectly .  SMC No.1/2023, etc  12 
 
21.  We are aware of  certain judgments22 of this Court wherein 
this Court has exercised its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the cases, 
notwithstanding  the pendency of writ petitions under Article 199 of the 
Cons titution before the High Courts, but we could not lay our hands on 
any judgment wherein this Court has specifically taken up and decided 
the said question , and exercised its j urisdiction under Article 184(3)  of 
the Constitution despi te there being a judgment of a  High Court passed 
under Article 199 of the Constitution in the matter taken up by this 
Court . The present case, therefore, appears to be one of first 
impression. And, b efore delving into the said question, we find it 
appropriate to reproduce here the relevant p rovisions of Article 199 and 
Article 184 of the Constitution for ease of reference:  
199. Jurisdiction of High Court  
(1) Subject to the Constitution, a High Court may, if it is satisfied that 
no other adequate remedy is provided by law : 
(a)   …………………………………………………………………………..  
(b)   …………………………………………………………………………..  
(c)  on the application of any aggrieved person , make an order 
giving such directions to any person or authority, including any 
Government exercising any power or performing any func tion in, 
or in relation to, any territory within the jurisdiction of that 
Court as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II . 
(5) In this Article, unless  the context otherwise requires: - 
"person" includes any body politic or corporate, any authority of 
or under the control of the Federal Government or of a 
Provincial Government, and any Court or tribunal, other than 
the Supreme Court, a High Court  or a Court or tribunal 
established under a  law relating to the Armed Forces of 
Pakistan;  
184. Original Jurisdiction of Supreme Court.  
(1) 
………………………………………………………………………………………….  
(2) 
………………………………………………………………………………………….  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 199, the Supreme 
Court shall, if it considers that a question of public importance  with 
reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights 
conferred by Chapter I of Part II  is involved have the power to make an 
order of the nature mentioned in the said Article . 
(Emphasis added)  
From the bare reading of the above -cited provisions of Articles 199(1)(c) 
and 184(3) of the Constitution, i t is evident that the jurisdiction of a 
High Court under Article 199(1)(c) and that of this Court under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution are concu rrent, in so far as  they relate to the 
                                                             
22 Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1988 SC 416; Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan 
PLD 1993 SC 473.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  13 
 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental  Rights conferred by Chapter I of 
Part II  of the Constitution.  
22.  Article 184(3) of the Constitution empowers this Court “to 
make an order of the nature mentioned in the said Article”, i.e., Article 
199, and as per clause (5) of Article 199 a High Court and this Court 
are excluded from the definition of the term “person”  to whom any order  
or direction  can be made , or whose any act or proceeding can be 
declared to have been done or taken without lawful authority,  in the 
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 199. Thus, a petition under Article 
199 of the Constitution is no t maintainable before a High Court , nor 
can an y order , direction  or declaration under the Article  be made, 
against itself or any other  High Court or this Court , or in regard to any 
act done or proceeding taken by such Courts . The bar creat ed by clause 
(5) of Article 199, which affects the jurisdiction of the High Courts 
conferred under that Article, being a substantive provision is also 
applicable to the exercise of its jurisdiction by this Court under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution.  Therefore , neither a High Court nor this 
Court can exercise its respective jurisdiction under Article s 199 and 
184(3), against a High Court or this Court  or against any act or 
proceeding of a High Court or this Court . We are fortified in our this 
view by the following  opinio n of a five -member Bench of this Court 
delivered in Ikram Chaudhry :23 
5. We tried to impress upon them that the above facts would not 
attract  Article 184(3) of the Constitution if otherwise the aforesaid 
petitions are not sustainable in view of well -settled proposition of law; 
firstly, that a Bench of this Court cannot sit as a Court of Appeal over 
an order or a judgment of another Bench of this  Court and, secondly, 
Article 184(3) confers jurisdiction on this Court of the nature contained 
in Article 199 of the Constitution, clause (5) of which excludes inter alia 
the Supreme Court and the High Courts.  In other words, no writ can be 
issued by a Hi gh Court or the Supreme Court against itself or against 
each other  or its Judges in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 199 of 
the Constitution, subject to two exceptions, namely, (i) where a High 
Court Judge or a Supreme Court Judge acts as persona des ignata  or as 
a Tribunal or (ii) where a quo warranto  is prayed for and a case is made 
out. 
(Emphsis added)  
Because of the above legal position, a seven -member Bench of this 
Court has categorically and firmly held in Shabbar Raza24 that a 
judgment or an order of this Court “can never be challenged by virtue of 
                                                             
23 Ikram Chaudhry v. Federation of Pakistan  PLD 1998 SC 103 (5 -MB) Almost all important previous 
cases are cited in it. See also Naresh Mirajkar v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1967 SC 1 (9 -MB).  
24 Shabbar Raza  v. Federation of Pakistan  2018 SCMR 514.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  14 
 
filing independent proceedings under Arti cle 184(3) of the Constitution”; 
such course  is “absolutely impermissible”.  
23.  There is another legal aspect of the matter , which b ars the 
interference by this Court with any judgment, decree or order of a High 
Court, in its jurisdiction under Art icle 184(3) of the Constitution . The 
jurisdiction  conferred on  this Court under Article 184 is its original 
jurisdiction, as mentioned in the title of this Article, in contrast to its 
appellate jurisdiction under A rticle 185 of the Constitution, which 
denotes that this Court is to exercise it in a matter that has not  already 
been heard and decided by a High Court.25 This Court can examine the 
legality of any judgment, decree or order passed by a High Court and 
can set it a side, if the same is found to have been passed otherwise 
than in accordance with law, only in the exercise of its appellate 
jurisdiction conferred on it under Article 185 of the Constitution or by 
or under any law  and not in the exercise of its original jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . 
24.  A similar view has been pronounced by th e Indian Supreme 
Court  in Naresh Mirajkar26 and Daryao27 in the context of its original 
writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Indian Constitution, which 
jurisdiction  is similar to that of this Court under Article 184(3) of our 
Constitution. A nine -member Bench of the Indian Supreme Court held 
in Naresh Mirajkar  that the correctness of a judicial order passed by a 
High Court can be challenged only by appeal and not by writ 
proceedings before it under Article 32 of the Indian Constitution . And in 
Daryao , a five -member Bench held that an original petition for a writ 
under Article 32 of the Indian Constitution cannot take the place of an 
appeal against an order passed by a High Court under Article 226 of the 
Indian Constitution (which is sim ilar to Article 199 of our Constitution) , 
and that there can be little doubt that the jurisdiction of the Court to 
entertain applications under Article 32 , which are original , cannot be 
confused or mistaken or used for the appellate jurisdiction of this Co urt 
which alone can be invoked for correcting errors in the decisions of the 
High Courts pronounced in writ petitions under Article 226 of the 
Indian Constitution.  
                                                             
25 H.R.C. N o.18877 of 2018  PLD 2019 SC 645 (Majority view).  
26 Naresh Mirajkar v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1967 SC 1 (9 -MB).  
27 Daryao v. State of U.P. AIR 1961 SC 1457  (5-MB). SMC No.1/2023, etc  15 
 
25.  It is a well -settled principle of law that what cannot be done 
"per directum ” (directly)  is not permissible to be done “ per obliquum " 
(indirectly) .28 When anything is prohibited, everything by which it is 
reached is prohibited also ( quando aliquid prohibetur, prohibetur et omne 
per quod devinetur ad illud ). Article 175(2) of the C onstitution  
unequivocally declares that no court shall have any jurisdiction save as 
is or may be conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under any law. 
No court, including this Court, can evade this constitutional command 
by indirect or circuitous means . Thus, when a High Court or this Court 
cannot directly entertain a constitution petition under Article 199 or 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution against itself or each other  or against 
any act done or proceeding taken by them , either of them cannot do it 
indirectly or  impli edly by giving a decision contrary to the decision 
already given by  any of them on the same facts  and in the same matter , 
in the exercise of their respective jurisdiction under the said Articles. 
We can, therefore, safely conclude t hat this Court in the exercise of its 
original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution does not 
have the power to make an order of the nature mentioned in Article 199 
of the Constitution   against a judicial order of a High Court , direct ly or 
indirectly . Hence, the present suo motu  proceedings initiated, and the 
connected constitution petitions filed, under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution are not maintainable in view of the constitutional bar of 
Article 199(5) read with Article 175(2) of the Constitution , in so far as 
they relate  to the matter already decided by the Single Bench of the 
Lahore High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction  under Article 199 of the 
Constitution . 
Applicability of res judicata to a decision of a High Court made under 
Article 199  
26.  We have pondered upon this aspect also, that if this Court 
decides  upon the question of law  involved in the present matter  against  
that what has been decided by the Single Bench of the Lahore High 
Court  without setting aside that decision, which decision t he ECP would 
be bound to obey and comply with.  At first blush, it appears that it 
would be the decision of this Court , in view of Article 201 of the 
Constitution which is subject to Article 189 and the provisions of the 
latter Article that make the decisio n of this Court binding on all other 
                                                             
28 Abdul Baqi  v. Govt. of Pakistan PLD 1968 SC 313; Nawaz Sharif  v. President of Pakistan PLD  1993 
SC 473; Hanif Abbasi  v. Imran Khan PLD 2018 SC 189.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  16 
 
courts of the country . However, when such a position is examined 
profoundly, it presents a serious le gal problem in the said answer 
because  of the  difference between the doctrine  of stare decisis  
incorporated in Article s 189 and 201 of the Constitution and the 
doctrine of res judicata  codified in Section 11 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure 1908 . Fortunately, we need not dive deep and do labour for 
explaining the diffe rence between the two doctrines  as this Court, while 
dealing with and rejecting the contention that the bar of  res judicata  is 
not attracted  to a decision on a question of law,  has already elaborated 
these doctrines  and explained the difference between them  in Pir 
Bakhsh,29 which we can advantageously state here in brief .   
27.  “Stare decisis”  and “res judicata”  both are Latin terms; 
stare decisis  literally means to stand by a decision and res judicata, a 
matter adjudged.  The core distinction between the two doctrines lies in 
what a case decides generally and what it decides between the parties to 
that case.  What a  case decides generally is the  ratio decidendi  (rationale 
for the decision) or the  rule of law on which the  decision is based, for 
which it stands as a precedent and is to be applied and followed in the 
later cases by virtue of the doctrine of stare decisis ; and what it deci des 
between the parties is  far more than this , which includes the decision 
on both issues of law and issues of facts arisen in the case as well as 
the adjudication on the contested claims of the parties , and the parties 
and their privies are bound by that decision and adjudication  because 
of the doctrine of res judic ata. Stare de cisis is based upon the legal 
principle or rule involved in a prior case and not upon the adjudication 
which resulted therefrom, whereas  res judicata  is mainly based  upon  
the adjudication . Res judicata  applies only when the same parties, or 
their privies, are involved in the subsequent case as were involved in 
the prior case, the applicability  of stare  decisis  is not affected by the fact 
that the parties to the subsequent case were not involved in the prior 
case wherein the question of law was decided.  The basis of the doctrine 
of stare decisis  is the need to promote certainty, stability and 
predictability of the law while that of the doctrine of res judicata is the 
need to have an end of the litigation over a dispute between the parties. 
Stare decisis is, thus, applicable only to questions of law ; res judicata  
applies to decisions on both questions of law and  fact. Res judicata is 
strictly applicable even where the decision on the questions of law or 
                                                             
29 Pir Bakhsh v. Chairman, Allotment Committee  PLD 1987 SC 145.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  17 
 
fact and the consequent adjudication on the respective claims of the 
parties were erroneous, whereas stare decisis has a certain flexibility 
and does not prevent a court from overrul ing its prior decision if, upon 
re-examination thereof, it is convinced that the decision was erroneous.  
28.  In view of the above exposition of the difference in the scope 
and applicability of the doctrines of stare decisis  and res judicata , we 
are of the  considered opinion that the judgment of the Single B ench of 
the Lahore High Court , if it is not set aside in the ICAs pending before 
the Division Bench of that High Court or in an appeal filed by any of the 
parties  to the case or any other aggrieved person before this Court 
under Article 185 of the Constitution, would remain binding on the ECP 
and the Governor of Punjab by virtue of the doctrine of res judicata , 
notwithstanding any decision of this Court contrary to that of  the Single 
Bench of the Lahore High Court. And such a situation, instead of 
resolving the question of law, would create more constitutional and 
legal anomalies.  Therefore, on this ground also, we find it not a fit case 
to exercise the jurisdiction of this  Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution.  That is why a five -member Bench of the Indian Supreme 
Court has held in Daryao30 that the general rule of res judicata  applies 
to writ proceedings  before it under Article 32 of the Indian Constitution  
(which is similar to Article 184(3) of our Constitution) , and  if a writ 
petition filed by a party under Article 226 of the Indian Constitution 
(which is similar to Article 199 of our Constitution) has been dismissed 
on the merits by a High Court, the judg ment thus pronounced is 
binding between the parties, which cannot be “circumvented or by -
passed ” by taking recourse to Article 32 of the Indian Constitution . We 
agree with and adopt this view, in holding that a judgment pronounced 
by a High Court in the ex ercise of its jurisdiction under Article 199 of 
the Constitution cannot be “circumvented or by -passed” by taking 
recourse to Article 184(3) of the Constitution , on the constitution 
petitions filed by the litigants or suo motu  by the Court.  
Federalism - Judicial propriety in allowing the High Courts of the 
respective Provinces to decide upon matter s that relate to those Provinces 
only  
29.  Pakistan is a federal republic and its Constitution is a 
federal constitution.  The preamble of the  Constitution states that the 
                                                             
30 Daryao v. State of U.P. AIR 1961 SC 1457.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  18 
 
territories included in or in accession with Pakistan shall form a 
Federation wherein the units will be autonomous with such boundaries 
and limitations on their powers and authority as may be prescribed, 
and Article 1 of the C onstitution declares that Pakistan shall be Federal 
Republic  to be known as the Islamic Republic of Pakistan . ‘The 
commonly accepted features of a federal constitution are: (i) existence of  
two levels of government;  a general [fed eral] government for the w hole 
country and two or more regional  [provincial]  governments for different 
regions within that country; (ii) dist ribution of competence or power - 
legislature, exec utive, judicial, and financial - between the general  
[federal]  and the regional  [provincial]  governments; (iii) supremacy of the 
constitution - that is, the foregoing arrangements are not only 
incorporated in the constitution but they are also beyond the reach of 
either government to the extent that neither of them can unilaterally 
change nor breach them; (iv) dispute resolution mechanism for 
determining the competence of the two governments for exercising any 
power or for performing any function. ’31 Federalism is, thus, based 
upon the division of powers  between the federation and its federating 
units , where both of them are independent and autonomous in their 
own domains . 
30.        Federalism under our  Constitution , therefore, also  
envisages independent federating units with the autonomous 
legislature, executive and judiciary. Chapter 1 of Part V of the 
Constitution provides for the distribution of legislative power between 
the Federation and the Provinces. Chapter 2 of the same Part deals with 
the distribution of executive power between the Federation and the 
Provinces. Chapters 1 to 3 of P art VII of the Constitution deal with the 
Judicature; they provide  a separate High Court for each Province  with 
its jurisdiction limited to the territory of that Province  and a Supreme 
Court for the whole country  with an overarching jurisdiction . The 
jurisdictional limits  between the co-ordinate High Courts on the basis of 
territory and the overarching jurisdiction of the Supreme Court , form 
the construct of  judicial federalism. It also fosters diversity in legal 
interpretations and allows for experimentation in legal and policy 
solutions first at the provincial  level.  
                                                             
31 The Oxford Handbook of Indian Constitution  (Sujit Choudhry et al., ed., 2016) Chapter 25 on Federal 
Scheme.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  19 
 
31.  The core principle of federalism is provincial autonomy , 
which means the autonomy and autonomous functioning  of the 
provincial legislative, executive and judicial institutions. The federal 
institutions must abide by  this principle in federalism . Under our 
Constitution, a  High Court of a Province is the highest constitutional 
court of that Province and is conferr ed with the jurisdiction under 
Article 199 of the Constitution to judicially review the acts and 
proceedings of all persons performing , within its territorial jurisdiction,  
functions in connection with the affairs of the Federation, a Province or 
a local authority. The principle  of provincial  autonomy requires that 
when a matter which relates only to a Province, and not to the 
Federation or to more than one Provinces, the Hig h Court of that 
Province should ordinarily be allowed to exercise its constitutional 
jurisdiction to decide upon that matter, and this Court should not 
normally interfere with and exercise its jurisdiction in such a matter 
under Article 184(3) of the Const itution, which jurisdiction is primarily 
federal in character. The federal structure of our Constitution 
necessitates  that the autonomy and independence of the apex provincial 
constitutional court of a Province, should not be readily interfered  with 
by thi s Court but rather be supported to strengthen the provincial 
autonomy and avoid  undermining the autonomy of the provincial 
constitutional courts.   
Parliament is the best forum  and political dialogue is the best way to 
resolve political issu es 
32.  By the present suo motu  proceedings and the connected  
constitution petitions, this Court has been ushered into a “political  
thicket ”, which commenced  last year with the dissolution of the 
National Assembly of Pakistan32 and reached the dissolution of the 
Provincial  Assemblies of two Provinces  this year  after passing through 
the disputes over the matters of counting of votes of defected members 
of political parties33 and election to the office of the Chief Minister of a 
Province,34 and that too,  in the exerci se of its original jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution .   
33.   Where the  political parties and the people subscribing to 
their views are sharply divided, and their difference of opinion has 
                                                             
32 S.M.C. No.1 of 2022   PLD 2022 SC 574.  
33 Supreme Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2023 SC 42.  
34 Parvez Elahi v. Deputy Speaker, Provincial Assembly of Punjab PLD 2022  SC 678.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  20 
 
created a charged political atmosphere  in the country , the involvement 
and interference of this Court in its discretionary and extraordinary 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  into a “ political 
thicket ”, would be  inappropriate and would inevitably invite untoward  
criticism  of a large section of the peopl e. ‘We must not forget  that 
democracy is never bereft of divide. The very essence of the political 
system is to rectify such disagreements, but to take this key 
characteristic outside the realm of our political system and transfer it to 
the judiciary, threatens the very core of democratic choice – raison 
d’etre’  of democracy. We must also remain cognisant that there will 
always be crucial events in the life of a nation, where the political 
system may disappoint, but this cannot lead to the conclusion that the 
judiciary will provi de a better recourse. ’35 A democratic political process , 
however that may be, is best suited to resolve such matters . 
34.  Democracy, it must be understood, does not mean 
majoritarian rule.  The essence of democracy is the participation of all 
concerned in the decision -making process and arriving at collective 
decision s by accommodating  differences of interest and opinion  to a 
possible extent . Taking all decisions only by majority rule is no less 
dictatorship , and the absolu tist approach to controversial issues is the 
hallmark of extremists . Opacity and inconsistency , which are  taken as 
intellectual impurity in judicial decision s, are often inseparable from the 
kind of comprom ises the politicians have to make in the democrati c 
process. Unbending attachment to a standpoint is often proved 
politically sterile.  Litigation is not a consultative or participatory process 
and can therefore rarely mediate differences on issues where there is 
room for reasonable people to disagree; only a political process can 
resolve such issues and adjust disagreements.  Thus, a  nation cannot 
reduce divisions among its people unless their representatives – the 
politicians – adopt and participate in the democratic process of political 
dialogue , in finding solutions to the people’s social, economic and 
political problems.36 
Decision by 4 -3 or 3 -2 majority  
35.  We also find it necessary to narrate the reasons for non -
issuance of the Order of the Court in the present case, to make them 
                                                             
35 Presidential Reference No.1 of 2020 PLD 2021 SC 825 per Yahya Afridi, J.  
36 Jonathan Sumption, Trials of the State: Law and the Decline of Politics  (2019).  SMC No.1/2023, etc  21 
 
part of the record.  We believed that our decision concurring with the 
decision of our learned brothers ( Yahya Afridi and Athar Minallah, JJ.)  
in dismissing the present suo motu  proceedings and the connected 
constitution petitions, had become the Order of the Court by a major ity 
of 4-3 while our other three learned brothers held the view that their 
order was the Order of the Court by a majority of 3 -2. Because of this 
difference of opinion , the Order of the Court, which is ordinarily 
formulated  by the head of the Bench could n ot be issued. We are of the 
considered view that our decision concurring with the decision of our 
learned brothers ( Yahya Afridi and Athar Minallah, JJ.)  in dismissing 
the present suo motu  proceedings and the conn ected constitution 
petitions  is the  Order o f the Court with a  majority of 4 to 3 , binding 
upon all the concerned . The answer lies in understanding the 
administrative powers enjoyed by  the Hon’ble Chief Justice  in 
reconstituting  a Bench , when the Bench once constituted and assigned 
a case has commenced hearing of a case. This court has held in H.R.C. 
No.14959 -K of 2018,37 that “once the bench is constituted, cause list is 
issued and the bench starts hearing the cases, the matter regarding 
constitution of the bench goes outside the pale of administrative 
powers of the Chief Justice and rest on the judicial side, with the 
bench. Any member of the bench may, however, recuse to hear a case 
for personal reasons or may not be available to sit on the bench due 
to prior commitments or due to illness. The bench may also be 
reconstituted if it is against the Rules and requires a three -member 
bench instead of two. In such eventualities the bench passes an order 
to place the matter before the Chief Just ice to nominate a new bench. 
Therefore, once a bench has been constituted, cause list issued and 
the bench is assembled for hearing cases, the Chief Justice cannot 
reconstitute the bench, except in the manner discussed above. ” The 
Court fu rther held that “in the absence of a recusal by a member of 
the Bench, any amount of disagreement amongst the members of the 
Bench, on an issue  before them, cannot form a valid ground for 
reconstitution of the Bench ….reconstitution of a bench while hearing 
a case, in the absence of any recusal from any member on the bench 
or due to any other reason described above, would amount to stifling 
the independent view of the judge. Any effort to muffle disagreement 
or to silence dissent or to dampen an alternative viewpoint of a 
                                                             
37 H.R.C. No.14959 -K of 2018  PLD 2019 SC 183 per Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  22 
 
member on the bench, would shake the foundations of a free and 
impartial justice system … a bench, once it is constituted and is 
seized of a matter on the judicial side, cannot be reconstituted by the 
Chief Justice in exercise of his administrative powers, u nless a 
member(s) of the bench recuses or for reasons discussed above. ”         
36.  We endorse  the above view and hold that a Judge forming 
part of a Bench once constituted and seized of the  case assigned to it 
cannot be excluded from that Bench unless he recuses himself from 
hearing that case or becomes  unavailable to sit on the Bench  for some 
unforeseen reason . After having made a final decision on the matter at 
an early stage of the proceedings of a case, the non -sittin g of a Judge in 
the later proceedings does not amount to his recusal from hearing the 
case nor does it constitute his exclusion from the Bench. I n this case, 
the two Hon ’ble Judges having decided the matter , left the option of 
their sitting  or not sitting  on the Bench  with the Hon’ble Chief Justice , 
for further hearing of the case . The exercise of this option by the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice has no effect on the judicial decision  of those  two 
Hon’ble Judges  passed in the case. The reconstitution  of the Bench was 
simply an administrative act to   facilitate  the further hearing of the case 
by the remaining five members of the  Bench  and could not  nullify or 
brush aside the judicial decisions given by the two Hon’ble Judges  in 
this case , which have to be counted when the matter is finally 
concluded. It is important to underline that the two Hon’ble Judges  (Ijaz 
ul Ahsan and Sayyed Mazah ar Ali Akbar Naqvi , JJ.) were not removed 
from the Bench but had voluntarily recused themselves. Thus,  their 
short orders are very much part of the case, therefore, the 
administrative order of reconstitution of the Bench by the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice cannot brush aside the judicial decisions of the two Hon’ble 
Judges who had decided the matter  when the case was heard by a nine -
member Bench . Failure to  count the decision of our learned brothers 
(Yahya Afridi and Athar Minallah, JJ.)  would amount to excluding them 
from the Bench without their consent, which is not permissible  under 
the law and not within the po wers of the Hon’ble Chief Justice.  
Therefore, we are  of the opinion that the dismissal of the present suo 
motu proceedings and the con nected constitution petitions i s the Order 
of the Court by a majority of 4 to 3 of the  seven -member Bench . We are 
also fortified in our opinion by the precedent of the well -known Panama 
case. In the said case, the first order of the Court was passed by  a 3-2 SMC No.1/2023, etc  23 
 
majority,38 and in the subsequent hearings conducted in pursuance of 
the majority judgment the two Hon’ble Judges, who had made and 
announced their final decision, did not si t on the Bench39 but they were 
not considered to have been excluded from the B ench and were ma de a 
party to the final judgment passed by the re mainin g three Hon’ble 
Judges40, and they also sat o n the B ench that  heard the review 
petitions41.     
Need of making rules for regulating the exercise of jurisdiction  under 
Article 184(3) and the constitution of Benches  
37.  Lastly , we find it essential  to underline that in order to 
strengthen our institution and to ensure public trust and public 
confidence in our Court, it is high time that we revisit  the power of 
“one-man show ” enjoyed by the office of the Chief Justice of Pakistan . 
This Court  cannot be dependent on the solitary decision of one man, 
the Chief Justice, but must be regulated through a rule -based system 
approved by all Judges of the Court under Article 191 of the 
Constitution, in regulating the  exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) including the exercise of suo motu jurisdiction; the constitution 
of Benches to hear such cases; the constitution of Regular Benches to 
hear all the other cases instituted in this Court; and the constituti on of 
Special Benches .   
38.  The power of doing a “one-man show” is not only 
anachr onistic, outdated and obsolete but also is antithetical to good  
governance and incompatib le to modern democra tic norms. One-man 
show lead s to the concentration of power in the hands of one individual, 
making the system more susceptible to the abuse of power. In contrast, 
a collegial system with checks and balances  helps prevent the abuse 
and mistakes  in the exercise of power  and promote the transpar ency 
and accountability.  When one person has too much power, there is a 
risk that the institution may become autocratic  and insulated , resulting 
in one -man policies being pursued, which may have a tendency of going 
against the rights and interests of the peopl e. We must not forget that 
our institution draws its strength from public perception.  The entire 
edifice of this Court and of the justice system stands  on publ ic trust 
and confidence reposed in  it. Therefore , one-man show needs a revis it 
                                                             
38 Imran Khan v. N awaz Sharif PLD 2017 SC 265.  
39 Imran Khan v. Nawaz Sharif PLD 2017 SC 692.  
40 Ibid. 
41 Nawaz Sharif v. Imran Khan PLD 2018 SC 1.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  24 
 
as it limits diverse  perspectives, concentrate s power, and increase s the 
risk of an autocratic rule. On the other hand, the collegial model 
ensures g ood governance as it rests on collab oration, shared decision -
making  and balance of power to ensure the best outcome .   
39.  The Chief Justice of this Court is conferred with wide 
discretion in the matter of constituting Benches and assigning cases to 
them under the present Supreme Court Rules 1980 . Ironically , this 
Court has  time and again held how public fu nctionaries  ought to 
structure their discretion42 but has miserably failed to set the same 
standard f or itself leaving the Chief Justice with unfettered  powers  in 
the matter of regulating the jurisdiction  under Article 184(3) (including 
suo moto) and in matters of con stituting benches and assigning cases.  
It is this unbridled power enjoyed by the Chief Justice in taking up any 
matter as a suo motu case  and in  constituting Special B enches after the  
institution  of the cases and assigning cases to them that has brought 
severe criticism and lowered the honour and prestige of this Court . Our 
acts and decisions as members of a constitutional institution are 
recorded in history and commented upon.  Political scientist and l egal 
scholar , Yasser Kureshi , in his recent book “ Seeki ng Supremacy - The 
Pursuit of Judic ial Power in Pakistan ”43 criticizes this unfette red power 
of the Chief Justice , thus : 
During the tenure of Chief Justice Saqib  Nisar (2016 -
2019), the Supreme  Court used its suo moto powers to 
intervene in governance to an extent that had never been 
seen before. It is hard to do justice to Justice Nisar's 
whirlwind of on -bench and off -bench interventions, as he 
sought to fix all of Pakistan's socio -economic pro blems: 
water purity and distribution, milk production, public 
sector corruption, hospital management, educational 
disparities and population control, through the striking of 
the gavel. Within the first three months of 2018 alone, 
Nisar launched thirty suo moto cases, often prompted by 
news articles he read, headlines he watched on the evening 
news or even posts he saw on social media. In one case, 
Nisar took suo moto notice of a photograph circulating on 
social media that showed a funeral proces sion passin g over 
sewage in a narrow street.  
Upon taking suo moto notice, Nisar would then order 
public officials to present themselves before the Court. 
During these proceedings, he would typically reprimand 
public officers and comment on state mis management, and 
in interim orders, he would direct public officers to remedy 
                                                             
42 Aman Ullah v. Federal Government PLD 1990 SC 1092 (5 -MB); Chairman, R.T.A. v. Pakistan Mutual 
Insurance Company PLD 1991 SC 14; Govt. of N.W.F.P. v. Mejee Flour Mills 1997 SCMR 1804.  
43  Cambridge University Press (2022)  pp. 223 -225. SMC No.1/2023, etc  25 
 
the issue and report back to the Court, dismiss officers who 
did not adequately address his concerns and sometimes 
even issue con tempt of court charges against public 
officials who did not satisf actorily comply with his orders. 
Perhaps the most controversial example of Justice Nisar's 
suo moto jurisprudence was his order to construct new 
dams to resolve Pakistan's water shortages, 'for the 
collective benefit of the nation'. Nisar launched a 
fundra ising scheme for donations to pay for the multi -
billion dollar dam -building project, authorizing televised 
ads and newspaper articles to openly solicit funding, and 
even ordering convicted parties in cases to do with assault, 
land acquisitions and environm ental damage to deposit 
funds into the fund for the dam for the Court's new project. 
Off the bench, Nisar also transformed the role of the chief 
justice, donning the hat of government inspector and 
international fundraiser, showing up at hospitals, schools  
and water plants to assess their condit ions, followed by 
news cameras.  
In order to build a strong,  open and transparent institution, we have to 
move towards a rule-based institution . The discretion of the Chief 
Justice needs to be structured through rules. This Court has held that 
structuring discretion  means  regularizing  it, organizing it and  
producing order in it, which helps achieve transparency, consistency 
and equal treatment in decision -making  - the hallmarks of the rule of 
law. The seven instru ments that are usually  described as useful in the 
structuring of discretionary power are open plans, open policy 
statements, open rules, open findings, open reasons, open precedents, 
and fair procedure. Our jurisprudence must first be applied at home.  
40.  Apprehending the misuse of the extraordinary original 
jurisdiction of this Court under Art icle 184(3) of the Constitution,  Ajmal 
Mian, CJ., speaking for the majority of a seven -member Bench of this 
Court in Wukala Mahaz ,44 emphasized  in 1998 that “a balanced, 
consistent and indiscriminate policy ” is to be evolved by this Court  for 
invoking and exercis ing this extraordinary original jurisdiction of the 
Court . The later years proved his apprehe nsion true. The experience of 
last two decades  has shown a r ather more need to frame “a balanced, 
consistent and indiscriminate policy”  for invoking and exercising this 
jurisdiction.  Leaving it to the unstructured discretion of one person - 
the Chief Justice  - has utterly failed .  With the change in the office of 
the Chief Justice , there is a change in the “policy ” of invoking and 
exercising the jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . 
What then is the solution? In our opinion , it is the making of rules on 
                                                             
44 Wukala Mahaz  v. Federation of Pakistan  PLD 1998 SC 1263 (7 -MB).  SMC No.1/2023, etc  26 
 
the matter  by this  Court in the exercise of i ts rule -making power 
conferred on it by  Article 191 of the Constitution , which can serve the 
purpose . Such rules may provide  that the extraordinary jurisdiction of 
the Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, either on the petition 
of a person or suo motu  by the Court, shall be invoked only if a majority 
of all the Judges or the first five or seven Judges of the Court, including 
the Chief Justice,  as may be prescribed in the rules,  agrees to it while 
considering the matter on the administrative sid e. The criterio n for 
selecting cases  for being dealt with under this jurisdiction should also 
be clearly laid down in the rules, to make the practice of the Court in 
this regard, uniform  and transparent.  
41.  So far as the matter of constituting a Bench for hearing a 
case under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is concerned, there must 
also be uniformity and transparency, which can be best assured by 
constituting a regular five  or seven -member Bench once at th e 
commencement of every judicial year , or twice a year for each term of 
six months , by including in that Bench the senior most Judge s or the 
senior most Judges  of each Province on  the strength of this Court with 
the Chief Justice or the Senior Puisne Judge as head of that Bench. 
Constituting  special Benches on  case to case ba sis, afte r the institution 
of the cases, is complete negation of fairness, transparency and 
impartiality requir ed of a judicial institution to  maintain  its legitimacy 
and credibility of its judgments.  
42.  The right to have his case heard by a Bench or a Judge to 
whom the cases are assigned on the basis of a notified objective 
criteri on is referred to as a “right to a natural judge ” in some 
jurisdictions.45 An objective criterion prevents a Judge from choosing 
his cases and the parties from choosing their Judge. The said right is 
rooted and enshrined in our jurisdiction in the fundamental rights of  
access to justice through an indepen dent and impartial court, fair trial 
and equality  before law guaranteed by Articles 9, 10A and 25 of the 
Constitution.  The right to be treated in accordance with law conferred 
by Article 4 of the Constitution also embodies this  right, as the  rule of 
law ma ndated by Article 4 assumes the existence of laws that are 
known to those who or whose matters are to be treated in accordance 
therewith.  This Court, being the guardian of the fundamental rights of 
                                                             
45 Emmanuel Jeuland , The right to a natural judge and the judicial organization , French Journal of Public 
Administration  (2008).  SMC No.1/2023, etc  27 
 
the people of Pakistan against encroachments made by other  public 
authorities and institutions, is to enforce the fundamental right of the 
public relating to its own functioning with more fervor and commitment 
than others. We are enl ightened in this respect by the invaluable 
remarks of Fletcher Moulton, L.J., and  quoted by Earl Loreburn in Scott 
v. Scott,46 that “courts of justice, who are the guardian of public 
liberties, ought to be doubly vigilant against encroachments by  
themselves.” That is why this Court needs to be rule b ased and those 
rules should be unifor m, open and available to the public.    
43.  These are the reasons for our short order dated 01.03.2023, 
dismissing the present constitution petitions and dropping the suo motu  
proceeding s, with the observation that the respective High Courts shall 
decide the matters pending before them within three working days, 
which is reproduced hereu nder for complet ion of record:  
For the reasons to be recorded later, we hold that:  
i. The suo motu proceedings (SMC No. 1 of 2023), in  the facts and 
circumstances of the case, are wholly unjustified in the mode 
and manner they were taken up under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Constitution”), 
besides being initiated with undue haste.  
  
ii. The Suo Motu Case No.1 of 2023 and the two Const. Petitions 
No. 1 & 2 of 2023 under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, in 
the light of the principles settled in Manzoor Ilahi47 and Benzair 
Bhutto48, do not constitute a fit case to exercise the 
extraordinary  original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution and are thus not maintainable as the 
same constitutional and legal issues seeking the same relief are 
pending and being deliberated upon by the respective Provincial 
High Courts in Lahore and Peshawar, without there being any 
inordinate delay in the conduct of the proceedings before them.  
 
iii. There is no justification to invoke our extraordinary jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) to initiate suo motu proceedings or 
entertain petitions  under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, as a 
single Bench of the Lahore High Court has already decided the 
matter in favour of the petitioner before the said High Court vide 
judgment dated 10.02.2023 and the said judgment is still in the 
field. The intr a court appeals (ICAs) filed against the said 
judgment are pending before the Division Bench of the Lahore 
High Court (and none of the said petitioners has approached 
this Court under Article 185(3) of the Constitution).  
 
iv. Once a constitutional issue is pen ding before a Provincial High 
Court, keeping in view the Federal structure of our Constitution 
the autonomy and independence of the apex provincial 
constitutional court, should not be readily interfered with rather 
be supported to strengthen the provincial  autonomy and avoid 
undermining the autonomy of the provincial constitutional 
courts.  
 
                                                             
46 Scott v. Scott 1913 AC 417.  
47 PLD 1975 SC 66.  
48 PLD 1988 SC 416.  SMC No.1/2023, etc  28 
 
v. There is no inordinate delay in the proceedings pending before 
the High Courts, infact the instant proceedings have 
unnecessarily delayed the matter before the High Cour ts. 
However, considering the importance of the matter we expect 
that the respective High Courts shall decide the matters pending 
before them within three working days from today.  
 
vi. Even otherwise without prejudice to the above, such like 
matters should bes t be resolved by the Parliament.  
2. We, therefore, agree with the orders dated 23.02.2023 passed by our learned 
brothers, Yahy a Afridi and Athar Minallah, JJ .49, and dismiss the present 
constitution petitions and drop the suo motu proceedings.  
  
 
 
Islamaba d, 
1st March, 2023.  
Approved for reporting  
Sadaqat   
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
 
                                                             
49 Initially a nine member bench heard this matter. The aforementioned two Hon’ble Judges decided the 
matter by dismissing the said petitions. Later on two other Hon’ble Judges disassociated themselves from 
the Bench for personal reasons and as the two afore mentioned judges had dismissed the matter, the Bench 
was reconstituted into a five member bench vide order dated 27.02.2023. The decisions of the 
aforementioned two Hon’ble Judges dated 23.2.2023 form part of the record of this case.  