IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021  
In Re order dated 20.08.2021 in SMC No.4/2021  
 
And 
 
Suo Mot u Case No.5/2021  
Suo M otu action regarding highhandedness by FIA action pursuant to FIR 
No.127/2021 and FIR No. 128/2021 lodged at FIA Cyber Crime Wing, Lahore  
 
And  
 
Constitution Petitions No.27/2022, 4/2024 and 22/2024  
 
Syed Ibn -e-Hussain and others  
 (in Const. P.  27/2022)  
Press Association of the Supreme Court through its 
President Mian Aqeel Afzal, Islamabad and 
another  
 (in Const. P. 4/2024)  
 
Farieha Aziz  (in Const. P. 22/2024)  
…Petitioners  
 
 
Federation of Pakistan through its Ministry of 
Information, Islamabad and ot hers                              (in all cases)  
…Respondents  
  
For the Petitioner:  
 Mr.  Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC  
(through video link, Karachi)  
Mr. Absar Alam  
Mr. Matiullah Jan  
Mr. Asad Toor  
 (in Const. P s.  4 & 5/202 1 and  4 of 2024 ) 
 
For PFUJ:  Mr. Sh ah Khawar, ASC  
  
For the Petitioner:  
 Mr. Haider Waheed, ASC  
(via video link, Karachi)  
Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR  
 Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
Raja Sher Bilal, In person  
Mr. Ibrar Ahmed, In person  
Mr. M. Asif, In person   
(in Const. P.  27/2022)  
  
 Ms. Farieha Aziz, In person  
(in Const. P.  22/2022)  
  
For Federation:   Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
  
For ICI Islamabad:  Mr. Ayyaz Shoukat, AG, ISI a/w  
Syed Ali Nasir Rizvi, IGP, Islamabad  Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 2
Mr. Masood Bangash, SSP, Investigation  
Mr. Raza Muhammad, SI/IO  
Mr. Ghulam Murtaza, SI/IO   
  
For FIA:  Mr. Waqar -ud-Din, Addl. DG (Ops.) FIA 
Cyber Crime  
  
For M/o Information  & 
Broad casting :  Mr. Abid Mehmood, Ch., S.O (Legal)  
  
Date of Hearing:  13.05.2024  
 
ORDER  
 
Investigation reports with regard to the case s of three journalists, 
who were attacked/abducted, namely, Mr. Absar Alam, Mr. Matiullah 
Jan and Mr. Asad Ali Toor have been submitted by the learned Additional 
Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AAG’) through CMAs. No. 2490, 4042 and 
3051  of 2024.  
 
2. Re. Mr. Matiullah Jan : Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed 
represents Mr. Matiullah Jan , who is also in attendance. They state that 
a proper investigation did not tak e place and the Police has moved to 
close the investigation without justification and without having explor ed 
all avenues of investigation.  
 
(1) It is pointed out by Mr. Matiullah Jan that when he was abducted 
on 21 July 2020 at about 11  am from in front of the Islamabad Model 
School for Girls ( Junior S ection), situated on Street No.40 , G 6-1/3, 
Islamaba d he had thrown his mobile phone , 0345 -8555919 of which the 
service provide r is Telenor , inside the compound of the said school . The 
investigation officer states that the phone was not retrieved by the Police 
but by the abductors . We are surprised that the location of the said 
phone, on the said date and time , was not sought which may also have 
helped in tracing the said abductors.   
 
 (2) Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed further states that the video 
recording which was sent for forensic determination apparent ly did not Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 3
reveal  actionable information, such as the vehicle registration number s 
of the vehicles in which the abductors  came and their f eatures . It is 
further stated that only a portion of the said video recording was sent for 
forensic determination. We direct that the entire video recording be sent 
to the Punjab Forensic Science Agency for their analysis and report.  
 
(3) Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed states that no effort was made to 
obtain recordings from a number of sensitive buildings situated in the 
area and from the cameras of the Safe City Project. Mr. Matiullah Jan 
states that Street No. 40 , from where he was abduct ed is situated 
opposite the NAB office , and the said street had been cordoned off by the 
Police and there was also a Police picket , but requisite enquiries were not 
even made from the policem en who were deputed on duty there.   
 
(4) Mr. Matiullah Jan states that he was dropped off by the abductors 
after crossing  the Fateh Jang Toll Plaza , where the National Highway 
Authority (‘NHA’) has th eir cameras installed, but this aspect , that is his 
drop off on 21 July 2020 at around 9 pm , was not investigated  by 
checking the recordings from the NHA installed cameras, and this should 
be done now.  
 
3. Re. Mr. Absar Alam : Learned AAG states that those  who may be 
involved in the case are abroad and the  Government/Police  has 
completed the requisite procedure and sent notices to Interpol for their 
arrest . He further states that the Government will be pursuing  the 
matter.    
 
4. Re. Asad Ali Toor :  The lea rned AAG states that sketches of the 
persons who had intruded into his residence and manhandled him have 
been prepared.  
 Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 4
 (1)  Mr. Toor is present and says that the sketch of the person on page 
88 is a fair resemblance but the sketch prepared on page 87 is not. 
Therefore, a fresh sketch of the perpetrator whose sketch is on page 87 
be prepared afresh with the help of Mr. Toor . Mr. Toor also points out 
that there were three perpetrators but the sketch of the third was not 
prepared . The Police with Mr. Toor’ s help should sketch the features of 
the third intruder immediately.  
 
(2) Mr. Toor states that during the incident one of the perpetrators 
received a phone call , probably between 10.50 to 11  pm. If proper Geo -
fencing was done the particulars of the phone of the perpetrator who had 
received the call and that of the phone used to call him could have been 
ascertain ed. We expect that the needful will be done now.  
 
 (3)  Mr. Toor states that his two cell phones , 0333 -5119547 , service 
provide r Ufone , and 0300 -9772445 , service provide r Mobilink , were 
taken away by the  perpetrators . These could have been traced through 
IMEI tracking , but, u nfortunately , this too the investigators failed to do , 
and should be done  now 
 
(4) Mr. Toor states that the perpetrators had i dentified themselves as 
members  of the Inter Service Intelligence (‘ ISI’), therefore, we enquired 
whether ISI was contacted and were told that a letter was written to the 
Ministry of Defence, and that a response is awaited. This depicts  
incompetence in pu rsuing the investig ation . It is inexplicable why the 
investigator s did not contact the ISI , in respect of the crime which took 
place on 25 May 2021 and continue to await for a response to their 
letter.    
 
5.  We are dismayed with the manner in which the Police has been 
investigati ng these crimes against  journalist s, the crimes were well 
orchestrated and presumably carried out on instructions , but this aspect Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 5
appears not to have even been considered. The investigators by their 
apparent incompetence have und ermined their own credibility.   The 
Inspector General of Police is in attendance and states that he too is not 
satisfied and will be substituting the investigation team with competent 
officers.  We also expect that once discernible photograph(s) of the 
abdu ctors of Mr. Matiullah Jan and sketches of all the three intruders 
into the residence of Mr. Toor have been prepared they will be published 
in one Urdu and one English newspapers published from Islamabad 
having wide circulation and a reward offered for inf ormation and for 
identifying th e culprits.           
 
6. Constitution Petition No.27/2022 : Notices were issued on 2 April 
2024 to the six petitioners because discrepancies were noted and they 
were directed to be in attendance.  Three of the petitioners are present , 
namely, Raja Sher Bilal, Professor Ibrar Ahmad and Mr. M. Asif, 
Advocate  and state that their names have been misused as they did not 
instruct  the filing of the petition, nor had filed it. Therefore, t hey were 
shown their purported signatures on th e power of attorney of the 
Advocate -on-Record  (‘AOR’), namely, the late Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. , and 
they state that the y did not sign it nor are the same their signatures. 
After the passing of late Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch., the petitioner s statedly 
engaged the ser vices of Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah as their AOR but the 
said petitioners also den y engag ing him. We have seen their original 
CNICs to compare their signatures thereon with the said power s and the 
same do not match.   
 
7. Learned Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah states that the office of Mr. 
Haider Waheed had engaged him on behalf  of the said petitioners. 
However , learned Mr. Haider Waheed denies this, and states that he was 
engaged by the late Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. He further states that he 
never  met any of the petit ioners and had only communicated with one of Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 6
them  namely, Mr. Qausain Faisal, Advocate.  The filing  of CP No.27  of 
2022 has become a very serious mat ter, three of the six petitioners 
therein have completely dissociated themselves from it . And, the learned 
AOR and the learned ASC have contradict ed each other. We accordingly 
direct the learned AOR and the learned ASC to file their respective 
affidavits, which should also attend to the following:  
(1) Who had instructed them to file the petition;  
(2) Who had engaged th em; 
(3) Who drafted the petition, and where;  
(4) Who printed it for filing;  
(5) Who issued the requisite notices;  
(6) Who paid their fees, and how;  
(7) Proof of dispatch of drafts, that is, through email, WhatsApp, 
Courier , or by other means;  
(8) Proof of communication with any o f the petitioners, including 
with Mr. Qausain Faisal , and 
(9) Costs, including travel and board, incurred and who paid the 
same .     
 
 8. The Process Server ’s reports states that when he went to serve Mr. 
Qausain Faisal, Advocate a lady came out of the residen ce and took the 
notice but refuse d to sign the receipt  thereof . Therefore, we repeat  notice 
to Mr. Qausain Faisal which should also be sent to him through the 
District Bar Association , Rawalpindi , and since he is an ASC the office of 
this Court shall also inform him. He is directed to be in attendance on 
the next date of hearing.  The address of Mr. Hassan Mahmood , another 
petitioner , was noted by the Process Server to be incorrect . Since Mr. 
Hassan Mahmood is shown to be a former Joint Secretary of the Cabinet 
Division he be served through the Government of Pakistan. Syed Ibn -e-
Hussain , the petitioner No.1 , is shown to be a former Inspector General 
of Police , and had received the notice , but  he is not in attendance. Let 
notice be issued to him to show cause why despite service he is not in 
attendance and to state whether he ha d instructed the filing of Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 7
Constitution Petition No.27 of 2022, and if  he did  so, who  did he 
instruct . He is directed to be in attendance personally  at Islamabad or 
through video -link fr om the Lahore  Registry of this Court. Copy of the 
order passed today to accompany the notices .  
 
9. Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed points out that the Government has set  up 
a National Cyber Crime Investigation Agency. We enquired from the 
learned AAG whether this is  so and the learned AAG confirms this and 
states that it has been done pursuant to S.R.O 626(I)/2024 which has 
enact ed the National  Cyber Crime Investigation Agency (Establishment, 
Powers and Functions) Rules, 2024 pursuant to section 51 read with 
section 29 of the Prevention of Electronic Crime Act, 2016. Learned Mr. 
Salahuddin Ahmed seeks time to exam ine the same and consider 
whether it will require amending his petition. Needful be done before the 
next date of hearing.  
. 
 
10.  To come up after thirty da ys.           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISLAMABAD  
13.05.2024   
Naseer                          
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 Suo Mot u Case No.4/2021, etc  
 8
 
 