IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original /Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
 Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar    
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.2 OF 2022  
(Re: restraining Political Parties from holding Public Meetings in  
Islamabad bef ore Voting on No -confidence Motion)  
 
REFERENCE  NO.1 OF 2022  
(Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
under Article 186 of the Constitution, seeking interpretation 
of Article 63 -A of the Constitution)  
 
Supreme Court Bar Association of Pak istan 
through its President   
…Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan through  
M/o Interior Islamabad and others    
…Respondent(s)  
      
For the Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.2/2022)  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, ASC.  
with Mr. Anees M.Shahzad, AOR  
a/w Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, ASC , Sardar 
Akbar Ali Dogar, ASC , Mr. Qamar 
Sabzwari, ASC , Mr. Azam Nazeer Tarrar, 
ASC, Syed Qalb -e-Hassan, ASC  and  
Raja Shafqat Abbasi, ASC  
   
For Federation of Pak  : Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan.  
Mr. Sohail  Mehmoo d, Addl. A.G.   
Mr. Muhammad Ayub,  Addl. Sec y 
Interior  
Ahsan Younas, IGP Islamabad  
   
For Govt. of Sindh  : Mr. Salman Talib -ud-Din, A.G. Sindh  
(Thr. Video -link, Karachi ) 
Mr. Fauzi Zafar, Addl. A.G. Sindh  
   
For PTI  : Mr. Ali Zafar, ASC  
   
For PMLN  and 
opposition  leader  : Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC  
a/w Mr. Saad M.Hashmi, Adv.,  
Mr. Sarmad Hani, Adv ocate  and  
Mian Shehbaz Sharif  
   
For PPPP  : Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC  a/w  
Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari  Const.P.2 & Ref. 1/2022  2
For JUI (F) : Mr. Kamran Murtaza, S r. ASC a/w 
Maulana Fazal ur Rehman  
   
For BNP (M) : Mr. Mustafa Ramday, ASC  a/w  
Mr. Akhtar Mengal  
   
For ANP  : Ameer Haider Hoti  
   
For National Assembly  : Mr. Abdul Latif Yousafzai, ASC  a/w 
Mr. Tahir Hussain, Secretary ,  
Mr. Muhammad Mushtaq, Addl. S ecy. 
   
For I.C.T.  : Mr. Niazullah Khan Niazi, A. G. 
Islamabad  
   
Date of Hearing  : 21.03.2022  
 
O R D E R  
 
 We have h eard learned counsel for the Petitioner SCBA  in CP 
2/2022, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan, the learned 
Advocates General for  Sindh and Islamabad and learned counsel 
appearing for the various political parties . 
2.  As earlier directed the IG Police, Islamabad has filed a report 
in relation to the incident at the Sindh House . We have been  
apprised of the strict measures being taken to avoid any repetition 
of such an incident anyw here in the Red Zone in relation to the 
moving and voting upon of the no confidence motion . The IG states  
that the FIR already registered will be vigorously pursued in 
accordance with law. The learned Advo cate General Sindh has 
expressed strong  reservation s as to the FIR and desires for the 
Province ’s version  to be  put on the  record . The learned Advocate 
General Islamabad assures us that any representation made by 
the P rovince through the learned Advocate G eneral will be dealt 
with in accordance with law . It is directed that the concerns 
expressed by the learned Advocate General Sindh must be 
addressed and action taken in accordance with law.  Const.P.2 & Ref. 1/2022  3
3.  Learned counsel for SCBA  as also learned counsel appearing 
for the political parties as have filed the no confide nce resolution 
have expressed strong reservations and concerns that the Speaker 
has summoned the session of the National Assembly requisitioned 
by said parties for 25.03.2022, which is beyond the stipulate d 14 
days period . Our attention has been drawn to or der issued by the 
Speaker in this regard. We are not inclined to take up this matter 
as it is collateral to the questions of constitutional interpretation 
raised before the Court not  only in terms of CP 2/20 22 but also 
the Reference filed by the President today in terms of Article 186 
(Reference 1/2022).  In any event, for such matters  the 
Constitution envisages a remedy before Parliament itself.  
4.  We have also gone through the various reliefs sought in CP 
2/2022. With reference to the first four reliefs the learned Attorney  
General has made a categorical statement before th e Court that 
the Federal Government shall not in any manner hinder  or 
obstruct , or interfere with , any member s of the National Assembly  
(including those of PTI)  who wish to attend the session summoned 
as above, and to participate in , and  cast their votes, on the no 
confidence resolution . It is so noted. With regard to the fifth relief , 
that in our view is linked to the questions referred t o this Court by 
the President. The two matters will  therefore  be hear d together . For 
this purpose notice is issued to t he petitioner S CBA in CP 2/2022 . 
Notices are also issued in relation to the Reference to the political 
parties who are before us in terms  of our previous order . (All 
notices are issued  through learned couns el appearing on their 
behalf. ) While no notices are  being issued formally to those political 
parties as are allied to PTI (and with it constitute the Federal 
Government), if the said part ies are desirous of being heard they Const.P.2 & Ref. 1/2022  4
will be allowed to do so but onl y through learned counsel 
appearing on their behalf . 
5.  Grave c oncern has also been expressed as to 
announcements made by various political parties, including PTI, 
PML(N), JUI(F) and BNP  (Mengal) regarding rallies to be held by 
them in the coming days  at Islamabad  and the influx into the 
Capital and espec ially in the Red Zone of their supporters  from all 
over the country  in the tens (if not hundreds) of thousands. The 
learned Attorney Gen eral has made a suggestion that if 
representatives of the various pol itical parties sit with the Capital 
administration a via media and mechanism can be worked out as 
to holding of the rallies and the days and venues thereof (especially 
keeping in mind the  requirements of the Red Zone and the clear 
commitments made on behal f of the Federal Government by the 
learned Attorney  General as noted above) and all related matters. 
We regard this as a reasonable and practicable suggestion. 
Learned counsel for the var ious political parties have acceded to 
this proposal though, let it b e noted, learned counsel for PPP, 
PML(N) and JUI(F)  have, on instructions, expressed some 
reservations as to whether any fruitful outcome will be achieved. 
Learned counsel, nonetheless , do state that good faith efforts will 
be made by all concerned. We the refore direct the learned Attorney 
General to coord inate with learned counsel for the political parties 
and/or the parties’ representatives to arrange the meeting(s) with 
the administrati on on an urgent priority basis in terms as 
suggested by him. 
6.  We a re cognizant that the re is great urgency as the mat ter is 
obviously time constrained . Therefore , it is directed that all learned 
counsel appearing in these matters must  file concise state ments of Const.P.2 & Ref. 1/2022  5
their submissions by or before 24.03.2022 so that the oral h earing 
can be completed within an acceptable timefra me. 
7.  Let these matters come up on 24.03.2022 at  1:00 pm. 
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
      Judge  
 
 
Islamabad, the  
21st March, 2022  