  Page 1 of 33 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice  Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
Const itution Petition No. 1 of 2012  
[Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution ] 
AND 
Crl. Org. Petition s No.8  & 12 of 2012  
[Proceedings U/A 204 of the Constitution  for non -compliance  
of the orders of this Court dated 30.01.2012 and  13.02.2012 ] 
IN 
Const itution Petition No.1 of 2012  
    
 
 
 
Mst. Rohaifa  (dec.) through her 
sons (in Const.P.No.1 & 
Crl.O.P.No.8 ) 
  
M. Tariq Asad , ASC  
 (in Crl.O.P.No.12)  
……Petitioner (s)  
   VERSUS  
 
Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary, Ministry of Defence, 
etc (in Const.P.No.1)  
  
DG, ISI , Islamabad & another  (in Crl.O.P.No.8)  
  
Athar Abbas, DG, ISPR , 
Islamabad  (in Crl.O.P.No.12)  
……Respondent (s)  
 
---***--- 
 
For the Petitioner (s)   
(in Const.P.No.1/12 & 
Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012)  : Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC. 
   
For Respondent  No.1    
(in Const.P.No.1/12)  : Nemo.  
   
For Respondents No.2 -4   
(in Const.P.No.1/12 & 
Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12/12)  : Raja Muhammad Irshad, Sr.  ASC. Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 2 of 33 2
   
On Court’s Notice  : Mr. Muneer A. Malik,  
Attorney General for Pakistan . 
   
For Govt. of KPK  : Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi, Addl.A.G.  
Mr. Shafirullah, Acting Secretary 
Law & Order, FATA . 
Mr. Moh ammad Aslam,  
Political Agen t, Orakzai Agency . 
Mr. Nawaz Khan, Assistant P.A.,  
Orakzai Agency . 
Mr. Iqbal Durrani, Legal Advisor.  
Mr. Abdul Qayyum, S.O., 
(Litigation) , FATA Secretariat . 
Mr. Khanzad Gul, S.O.(Courts) , 
Home Department, KPK . 
   
Date of Heari ng : 03.12 .2013  
 
 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
Constitution Petition No.1 of 2012  
 
 
GULZAR AHMED, J. —  Under Article 9 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, it is a Fundamental Right 
of every  citizen of Pakistan that he shall not be deprived of li fe 
and liberty save in  accordance with law. State of Pakistan being 
guardian of its citizen is bound to implement the Constitution 
provisions in letter and spirit particularly the Fundamental 
Rights , which are guaranteed by the Constitution . It is also 
inalienable right of all the citizens that they should be dealt with 
in accordance with law following the mandate of due process of 
law as enshrined in Article 10 (A) of the Constitution. It may 
further be elucidated that Article 4 provides “to enjoy the 
prote ction of law and to be treated in accordance with law is the 
inalienable right of every citizen , wherever he may be, and of 
every other person for the time being within Pakistan and in 
particular no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 3 of 33 3
reputation  or property of any person shall be taken except in 
accordanc e with law. No person shall be prevented from or be 
hindered in doing that which is not prohibited by law; and no 
person shall be compelled to do that which the law does not 
require him to do ”. In respect of the safeguard as to arrest and 
detention Article 10 of the Constitution makes the provision that 
“no person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without 
being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such 
arrest nor shall he be denied the right to consult and be 
defended by a legal practitioner of his choice and every person, 
who is arrested and detained in custody shall be produced before 
a Magistrate within a period of twenty -four hours of such arrest, 
excluding the time necess ary for the journey from the place of 
arrest to the Court of the nearest magistrate, and no such 
person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period with 
out the authority of a magistrate ”. Further  in the case of 
preventive detention th is Article provide d complete guideline as 
to the manner and how a detainee is to be dealt with by the 
authority detaining him.  While Article 13 provides that no 
person shall be prosecuted or punished for the same offence 
more than once.  
2.  In the light of the above  constitution al guarantee s 
and mandate of the law, we proceed to examine the case in 
hand.   
3.  Mst. Rohaifa a widow of Syed Zain ul Abideen, a 
resident of Lahore has filed this Constitution Petition under 
Article 184 (3) of the Constitution of the Islamic R epublic of 
Pakistan, 1973 with the following prayers: -  Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 4 of 33 4
 “It is, therefore, humbly prayed that in the 
circumstances given herein above this Hon. Court may very 
graciously be pleased to call for the whole record of the 
proceedings conducted so far and:  
 
a) direct the respondents to file a complete report before 
this Hon. Court about the deaths of the three detenues, 
namely Muhammad Aamir, Tehsin Ullah and Said Arab 
and the proceedings of trial so far conducted against 
them and the other surviving detainee s; 
 
b) call for the whole record of proceedings and determine, 
in view of the laws of the land whether the detenues , 
namely Syed Abdus Saboor, Syed Abdul Basit, Syed 
Abdul Majid and all the deceased and the surviving 
detenues  were/are subject to Army Act;  
 
c) if the detenues  are subject to Army Act, declare that the 
arrest and detention and the proceedings of trial are not 
in a lawful manner and direct the Respondents to set the 
detenues  at liberty in the interest of justice and fair 
play, in case, after probe, it is found that the arrest and 
proceedings have not been conducted in accordance 
with law;  
 
d) declare that the detenues were in illegal confinement 
and subjected to torture;  
 
e) Any other relief this Hon. Court deems proper may also 
be granted.”  
 
4.  During the pend ency of this petition Mst. Rohaifa 
expired and in her place the detainee s were impleaded as 
petitioners and the petitioner s also so ught to be added another 
prayer, which is as follows:  
“e) declare ‘Section 2(1)(d)’ of Army Act, 1952’ and ‘Action 
in Aid of  Civil Power Regulation, 2011’ ultra vires of the 
Constitution;  
 
5.  The petitioner has alleged that her three sons, 
namely Syed Abdu s Saboor, Syed Abdul Basit and Syed Abdul 
Majid were picked up on 25.11.2007 by Hasnain Haider , SHO, 
Police Station Shafiqa bad, whereafter they became missing and 
on filing of habeas corpus petition , it was informed that the 
petitioner ’s said sons are implicated in the FIR bearing 
Nos.670/07, 786/07  and 384/0 8 and they are being proceeded 
under the Anti Terrorist Act . Vide judgments dated 26.11.2009  
and 08.04.2010 , the petitioner’s sons were acquitted by the Anti Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 5 of 33 5
Terrorist Court with direction that they be released forthwith if 
not required in any other case. It however; transpired that the 
petitioner’s sons before their releas e were detained under the 
West Pakistan Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance, (MPO) 
1960 for a period of 30 days vide order dated 08.0 4.2010 and 
again on 06.05.2010 by the order of the Secretary, Home 
Department, Govt. of Punjab, they were detained for an other 
period of 90 days under Section 11 -EEE of the Anti Terrorist Act, 
1997. The petitioner assailed both the orders of the detention by 
way of Writ Petition in the Rawalpindi Bench of the Lahore High 
Court, who vide order dated 28.05.2010 set aside both the 
detention orders and directed the detainee s to be released 
forthwith from jail , if not requir ed to be detained in any other 
offence. At this stage, the petitioner has alleged that on 
29.05.2010, the Superintendent Jail, Rawalpindi handed over the 
custo dy of the petitioner’s said sons along with 8 other persons 
to respondents No.2 and 3, who took them to an unknown place. 
However one Ateequr Reh man, brother of another detainee s filed 
Writ Petitions No.2355, 2366, 2367, 2368 and 2376 of 2010 in 
the Lahore  High Court, Rawalpindi Bench. All these Writ Petitions 
were disposed of with observation that the petitioners may 
approach the  proper  forum constituted by this Court for recovery 
of missing persons. Ateequr Reh man filed C.P.No. 1973 of 2010 
in this Court against the order of the Lahore High Court , 
Rawalpindi Bench, which came up for hearing on 06.01.2011 
when this Court passed the following order: - 
  “This petition has been filed against the order dated 
09.08.2010 passed by Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Be nch, 
Rawalpindi in Writ Petition No.2355 of 2010.  Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 6 of 33 6
 2. Raja Muhammad Irshad, learned counsel for respondent 
Nos.2 & 4 states that in response to the order dated 
05.01.2011 concerned authorities have instructed him to make 
statement that arrangements shall b e made for arranging 
meeting between father, mother, daugh ters and sons of the 
detainee s namely Dr. Niaz Ahmad, Muhammad Aamir, Mazharul 
Haq, Shafiqur Rehman, Abdu s Saboor, Abdul Majid, Abdul 
Basit, Muhammad Shafiq, Said Arab, Gulroze Khan and 
Tehseenullah  as and when it is so required by them. Learned 
counsel for petitioner supplied a list of the relatives of the 
detainee s which has been handed over to Raja Muhammad 
Irshad. However, at the request of Mr. Tariq Asad, learned ASC 
who pleaded that in some of the cases, brothers and sisters 
may also be allowed to meet them. Raja Muhammad Irshad, 
learned counsel states that they would be accommodated 
accordingly. As per the background of this case, detailed order 
in respect whereof was passed on 09. 12.2010 which  is 
reproduced herein below for the sake of convenience. The 
persons named hereinbefore have been traced by the 
concerned authorities and they are in their custody for the 
purpose of holding their trials under the Army Act, 1952.  
 “Mr. Raja Muhammad Irshad , learned Senior ASC, has 
appeared on behalf of Federation of Pakistan and 
respondents No.2 & 4. He makes a loud and clear 
statement that impression given to this Court that the 
Pakistan Army or any one of its functionaries including 
I.S.I. etc. are not am enable to the jurisdiction of this 
Court, is absolutely wrong impression. According to him 
some elements who have vested interest, in order to 
create misunderstanding, have given the impression 
that Pakistan Army or I.S.I. and any other agency are 
above th e law and have no respect for the courts. He 
explains that the Pakistan Army, I.S.I. and any other 
agency are subject to the Constitution and in pursuance 
whereof hold this Court in highest esteem and that the 
attempt to create wrong impression may not be adhered 
to at all as these functionaries always consider 
themselves bound to follow the orders and the 
judgments of this Court.  
2. Learned counsel states that eleven persons 
detained in Adyala Jail, after release, were taken into 
custody by the persons who d isguised themselves as 
officials of the agency and led them to the operational 
areas of terrorists to make use of their expertise/skill in 
order to further cause damage by involving them in the Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 7 of 33 7
terrorist activities. Learned counsel further states that 
no sooner the notice was issued by this Court, all the 
responsible machinery of law was moved and a massive 
operation was carried out and ultimately more than 
twenty persons including these eleven persons were 
recovered and taken into custody from the operatio nal 
areas. Now they are in the custody of Law Enforcing 
Agencies and are being interrogated as they have got 
close/deep links with the terrorists operating in different 
areas of the country. He avers that they are involved in 
serious terrorists activities like attack on ISI Hamza 
Camp, GHQ, Defence Installations, explosions and 
various sites, killing of 3 Star General, causing day in 
and day out, damage to state properties and that of 
common man beside killing  many of common citizens as 
well as Army personn el. According to learned counsel 
they are no longer missing persons and are in custody of 
Administration/Law Enforcing Agencies and they shall be 
subjected to law and dealt with in accordance with Army 
Act. 
3. Learned counsel is required to put up his 
statement in writing in this behalf, for which he requests 
for adjournment till tomorrow i.e., 10th December, 
2010. Order accordingly. To be taken up Sr.No.1.  
 
 3. There had been a controversy in respect of non -
availability of persons, as such, the petition wa s filed before the 
High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution which was 
dismissed. Since the detainee s named above were traced out 
and  a statement to that effect was made by Raja Muhammad 
Irshad on 09.12.2010 as reproduced hereinabove, that the 
Pakistan Army or anyone of its functionaries including I.S.I., 
are amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court and the 
impression so created earlier to it was dispelled which 
according to him was made for certain vested interests, 
therefore, we are of the opini on that the actions of the Pakistan 
Army or any of their functionaries including I.S.I., are subject 
to Constitution and law. There was no need of creating such 
expression because these authorities had also been offering 
explanation before the various foru ms in respect of different 
cases. Be that as it may, as now the expression has been 
dispelled and all these authorities are subject to Constitution 
and law, the detainee s have also been traced and according to 
the learned counsel they are subject to law, w e are of the 
opinion that they are no longer in the illegal custody inasmuch 
as now their relatives shall also be having meeting with them Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 8 of 33 8
which shows that law has taken its course, no further action is 
called for, for the time being. Therefore, petition s tands 
disposed off. Before parting, however, we appreciate the efforts 
made by Raja Muhammad Irshad for providing assistance to 
this Court as being a lawyer it is the part of his professional 
commitment.”    
 
6.  Further writ petitions were filed and also proceedings 
in this Court but ultimately in CPLA No.99 of 2010 , on 
02.06.2011 the following order was passed: - 
  “Pursuant to order dated 18.05.2011 learned Attorney 
General along with Brig. Naubahar, Judge Advocate General are 
present and pointed out tha t the detainee s were formally 
arrested in the 1st weed of April, 2011 and a case has been 
registered under Section 2(1)(d) of the Pakistan Army Act, 
1952 and presently summary evidence is being recorded. It has 
been assured that no action in deviation of l aw would be taken 
and they are fully aware about the provisions as enumerated in 
Articles 10 -A and 13 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan. It is further submitted that if sufficient evidence is 
lacking they have a good chance of acquittal a s well. In view of 
the categoric statement as made hereinabove at least one thing 
becomes clear that their detention is under Pakistan Military 
Act, 1952 as a case has been registered and all the proceedings 
made so far are in accordance with the provision s as 
enumerated in above mentioned statute.  
  
2. At this juncture Mr. Tariq Asad, learned ASC for 
petitioner has submitted that he intends to file a Constitution 
Petition for seeking appropriate remedy as the ground of 
Habeas Corpus is no more available b ecause at the moment it 
cannot be declared that it is an unlawful detention. Be as it 
may, Mr. Tariq Asad, learned ASC may file Constitution Petition 
in accordance with law for the redressal of his grievance before 
appropriate forum which would be decided in accordance with 
law and on its own merits expeditiously. In the light of what 
has been discussed hereinabove, this petition is disposed of in 
above terms.”  
   
7.  A further Writ Petition No.2432/2011 , filed by Mufti 
Abdul B aais another son of petitione r in the Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad, wherein the Director General, Military 
Intelligence Detachment, Islamabad filed a short para -wise 
comments, which as follows: - 
 “It is intimated that all the three detainees with 
reference to captioned w rit petition are held at FATA and 
are being interned under “Acton in Aid of Civil Power 
Regulations, 2011 for FATA”  
 
 Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 9 of 33 9
 Pursuant to this statement, the Writ Petition was dismissed 
so also the CPLA No.1795 /2011 by this Court . 
8.  As no access was being provided to the  petitioner’s 
counsel and to the relatives to meet the petitioner’s said sons on 
the order of the learned Islamabad High  Court , a meeting was 
arranged, where the petitioner found that her sons were brutally 
tortured. It was further learnt that three of the  alleged detainee s 
i.e. Muhammad Aamir, Tehseenullah and Said Arab have died 
and such death have taken place on account of brutal torture 
and symptoms of acute renal failure. The petitioner again 
desired to meet her sons along with her counsel but it was n ot 
responded whereupon this constitution petition was filed with the 
prayer as already noted above.  
9.  The Respondent No.1 that is Federation  of Pakistan  
has not submitted any reply or concise statement. Respondents 
No.2 to 4 have filed their repl y vide CMA No.487/12, while 
pursuant to the Court orders, the Chief Secretary, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) has also submitted his replies/reports 
regarding the health condition of the detainee s and the medical 
facility, which are being extended to them and the recor d 
pertaining to their detention in the Internment Centre under 
Actions (in Aid of Civil Powers) Regulation, 2011.  
10.  It may be noted that pursuant to the various orders 
passed by this Court the petitioner , her counsel and the relatives 
were allowed  regular meeting s with the detainee s and the 
detainee s were also admitted in the Lady Reading Hospital, 
where they were provided medical treatment, food and clothing 
on account of which as reported by the Chief Secretary, KPK and Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 10 of 33 10
also admitted by the counsel fo r the petitioner their health and 
general conditions of their life ha s improved. Before we deal with 
the case as per submission s of the learned counsel for the 
parties, it is considered appropriate  to reproduce in extenso the  
reply of  Respondent No s.2-4 (CMA No.487 /12), which is as 
follows: - 
 “ 1. That on 06.01.2011, a statement submitted in writing before 
this Honourable Court in Civil Petition No.1973 of 2010 is reproduced 
here under: - 
 
a. I have the instructions to make this statement on behalf 
of above r espondents that they totally submit to the 
constitutional authority of the apex Court of the country. 
They have highest regard and respect for the 
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan. They highly 
appreciate the efforts being made by the Court to 
ensure co nstitutional governance in the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan. Let this impression being created by the 
vested interests that the Army and the ISI have no 
respect for the orders of the Supreme Court, be 
dispelled once for all through this categorical stateme nt 
that the Agencies are accountable and answerable to the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan.  
 
b. That these eleven persons after their release from 
Adyala, Jail, handed themselves over to the disguised 
persons as men from agencies, who took them to the 
terrorists, h ideouts in the tribal area, where Army is 
conducting operations against internal and external 
militants and terrorists.  
 
c. That entire governmental machinery was in full swing 
after the orders passed by this Honourable Court in 
respect of these eleven perso ns. The Agencies 
penetrated the entire operational area and carried out 
the arrests of more than twenty persons including these 
eleven missing persons from different places of the 
terrorists’ hideouts. All of them are involved in high 
profile acts of terro rism and militancy. Arrests have been 
made with the help of local administration. These 
terrorists are subject to Army Act, 1952, who will be 
tried by FGCM after proper investigation. They are no 
longer missing persons and their custody is with the 
agencie s in order to complete the investigation.   
 
  The above noted statement stands reflected in the order dated 
06.01.2011, passed by this Honourable Court in Civil Petition No.1973 
of 2010.  
 
2. That the said 11 terrorists joined the militants/terrorists 
in the operational area of FATA. On 25.11.2010, a group 
of  militants ambushed the convoy of law enforcement 
agencies and inflicted heavy loss in terms of human 
lives. The intelligence agencies with the support of law 
enforcement agencies carried out the arrests of more 
than 20 militants. The said 11 persons were found to be 
the same who had joined the militants in their hideouts 
after they were whisked away from Adyala  Jail.  
 Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 11 of 33 11
3. That the factum of the arrest of the said terrorists was 
brought to the notice of this Honourable Court, which led 
to the passing of the order, dated 06.01.2011. The 
respondent No.4 in order to hold the trial under Army 
Act, 1952, ordered the investigation but the summary of 
evidence remained inconclusive due to militants’ 
ferocious and dead ly attacks on the Army and other law 
enforcement agencies in the operational area. These 
attacks resulted into the loss of thousands of lives that 
include innocent civilians as well as personnel from the 
law enforcement agencies. The record of casualties a nd 
destruction of properties maintained by the concerned 
law enforcement agencies for the year 2011 is attached 
herewith.  
 
4. That after the promulgation of Actions (In Aid of Civil 
Power) Regulations, 2011, orders for the internment of 
many militants includi ng the said 11 terrorists were 
passed by the Competent Authority under the relevant 
provisions of the said Regulation. Since the FATA 
administration had no infrastructure available in the 
form of Internment Centers, therefore, the custody of all 
the said i nternees remained with the law enforcement 
agencies. The entire operational area presents the 
picture of a war like situation. The living conditions 
afford no proper shelter or subsistence in such 
inhospitable and hostile atmosphere. Some of the said 
internees in view of their earlier poor health conditions 
fell sick and were shifted to the Lady Reading hospital, 
Peshawar for their treatment. Despite best medical 
treatment and regular care by the doctors, four persons 
died in the hospital on different dates . The medical 
documents including death certificates issued by the 
hospital authorities show the treatment rendered to the 
sick cause of death of the deceased are being placed on 
the record of this Honourable Court. The relatives of the 
deceased were duly informed and choice was given to 
them to have the postmortem reports to determine the 
cause of death, but the offer was declined by the 
relatives. In two of the four death cases, the relatives, 
have given in writing, declining to have postmortem 
done. Othe r two blatantly refused to have any 
postmortem done or sign any documents. The allegation 
of poison and torture, contained in the petition is 
without any shred of evidence. These are wild, diabolic 
and vicious allegations against a superior Agency of this 
country whose members are on oath that they will 
uphold the constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. 
The oath contained in 3rd schedule of the Constitution is 
reproduced here under: - 
 
MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES  
(Article 244)  
 
 
(In the name of Allah,  the most Beneficent, the most 
Merciful)  
 
  I, _________________________________, do solemnly swear 
that I will bear the true faith and allegiance to Pakistan and uphold the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan which embodies the 
will of the pe ople, that I will not engage myself in any political 
activities whatsoever and that I will honestly and faithfully serve 
Pakistan in the Pakistan Army (or Navy or Air Force) as required by 
and under the law.  
 
[(May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A’meen) ].” 
 Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 12 of 33 12
  The sacrifices made by the Superior Agency of our 
country in defending the geographical and ideological frontiers 
of this country are worth writing in golden words.  
 
5. That regarding the production of the internees before 
this Honourable Court, the le tter sent by the 
Superintendent Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, 
containing the reasons for non -production of admitted 
internees is attached herewith. The three internees who 
are interned at Parachinar in FATA will be produced after 
the contents of the let ter forwarded by the interning 
authority have been gone through by this Honourable 
Court. The said letter being highly confidential will be 
produced before the Court at the time of hearing.  
 
6. That terrorism, militancy and suicide attacks on defence 
installa tions have bled the country and the dead and the 
injured run into thousands. The widows and the orphans 
having been deprived of their husbands and fathers by 
acts of terrorism and suicide attacks, are leading their 
lives in heartrending conditions. There i s no one to 
translate into words their mental agonies and bleeding 
hearts. The snow -clad mountains of Northern Areas and 
FATA and the sizzling deserts of Sindh can only find the 
valiant soldiers of our Army.  
 
7. It will not be out of place to mention that a s egment of 
the people in the media as well as in the “Civil Society” 
spit venom to damage the reputation and prestige of 
one of the best armies in the world. They are doing so to 
promote the agenda of the enemies of our country.  
 
  In view of the above, th is Honourable Court may be pleased to 
dispose of the petition with direction to the petitioner to approach the 
Competent Authority for appropriate legal remedies as provided under 
the provisions of said Regulation.  
 
11.  On 15.04.2013, Brig. Naubahar, Judg e Advocate 
General filed a statement, which reads as follows: - 
 
  “The eleven high profile terrorists/militants amongst 
others were involved in an armed attack on Army convoy at 
Lawara Mela in Orakzai Agency, on 25th Nov 2010. In the said 
attack a soldier  had embraced Shahadat and five others were 
seriously injured. After their apprehension they were subjected 
to serious investigation for the purpose of establishing their 
linkages with other militant groups, fighting with the Army in 
the operational area a s well as across the country. The discrete 
and in -depth investigation led to the startling revelations made 
by the said militants. On the basis of their statements, arrests 
of high profile terrorists were carried out.  
 
  Their trial under the provision of  PAA, 1952 could not 
take place due to lack of jurisdiction as relevant provisions 
relating to trial of civilians are contained in PAA Section 2(1)(d), 
i.e. seducing and espionage. Further, after the passage of 18th 
Constitutional Amendment, the jurisdicti on to try civilians, 
allegedly involved in attacking Armed Forces installations and 
assets as was enacted through an Ordinance to amend PAA Sec 
2(1)(d)(iia) stood elapsed.  
 
  Therefore, the militants were interned as per the law. 
The prosecuting agency ha d collected sufficient reliable 
evidence for their trial under FCR.     
    Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 13 of 33 13
 
12.  From the perusal of the record, it is apparent that 
the initial arrests of the detainee s was in respect of the thr ee 
FIRs registered against them, in which they were also trie d and 
were ultimately acquitted by the judgments of the Anti Terrorist 
Court. The detainee s were put under preventive detention under 
MPO for 30 days and then under Section 11 -EEE of the Anti 
Terrorist Act for another 90 days and both these orders were 
quashed by the learned Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi Bench 
with direction that they be released forthwith from the jail. It is 
the case of the petitioner that the Superintendent Jail, 
Rawalpindi on 29.05.2010  gave custody of the detainee s to 
Respondents No.2 to 3, while the case of the Respondents No.2 
to 4 is that after their release from Adyala Jail, the detainee s 
handed themselves to the disguised persons as men of agency, 
who took them to the terrorist hideouts in tribal area.   
13.  During the course of t hese proceedings, it was 
brought to the notice of this Court that on 19.03.2013 , 
Internment Orders in respect of the detainee s were withdrawn 
and the custody of the detainee s was handed over to the Political 
Administration of Orakzai Agency for dealing wit h their cases 
under the FCR and that the detainee s were arrested and tried 
under Sections 365 , 400, 401 PPC, 11/40 FCR and under 
Section s 121, 122 (B) PPC/3 ,4,5,6 Exclusive Substance Act/11 
FCR and ultimately vide order dated 02.05.2013 of the Assistant 
Political Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency, the detainee s were 
convicted and sentence s against them were passed. Detainee s 
Syed Abdul Majid, Syed Abdul Basit were sentenced to 5 years 
while other detainee s were sentenced to 14 years imprisonment Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 14 of 33 14
and through warra nts of commitment issued by the Assistant 
Political Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency, the custody of the 
detainee s was handed over to the Superintendent, Central 
Prison, Kohat for undergoing sentences.  
14.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties 
and have also perused the record.  
15.  Learned Attorney General has taken an objection to 
the maintainability of this petition on the ground that this Court 
has no jurisdiction in terms of Article 247(7) of the Constitution  
in respect of the detainee s, who  have committed crime in tribal 
area and were arrested from Tribal Area and after due trial were 
convicted and sentenced by Competent Authority in the tribal 
area. Article 247 (7) reads as follows:  
  “Neither the Supreme Court nor a High Court shall 
exercis e any jurisdiction under the Constitution in relation to a 
Tribal Area, unless [Majlis -e-Shoora ( Parliament)] by law 
otherwise provides:  
 
  Provided that nothing in this clause shall affect the 
jurisdiction which the Supreme Court or a High Court exercise d 
in relation to a Tribal Area immediately before the commencing 
day.” 
  
16.  It may be noted that this very jurisdictional question 
has come up before this Court success ively and this Court has 
been giving its judgments and it will be useful to examine su ch 
judgments at this stage. In the case of Qaum Bangash and 
others  vs. Qaum Turi and others  (1991 SCMR 2400),  a learned 
four Member Bench has observed as follows:  
  “The constitutional question considered in the said Civil 
Appeal No.144 of 1980 was whethe r in the facts and 
circumstances of that case the jurisdiction of the Balochistan 
High Court extended to the tribal areas where the disputed land 
was situated, namely, District Zhob of the Province of 
Balochistan, which is incidentally included in the Prov incially 
Administered Tribal Areas. In the said appeal which was 
decided on 8th August, 1991 Shafiur Rehman, J., who wrote the 
judgment for the Court, has traced the history of Constitutional 
provisions with regard to the extension of the jurisdiction of t he 
Superior Courts in respect of the tribal areas from 1955 untill Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 15 of 33 15
10th April, 1964. In this behalf, reference was made to section 7 
of the Establishment of West Pakistan Act, 1955, whereby the 
newly constituted High Court was conferred jurisdiction in 
respect of the entire province of West Pakistan; including the 
tribal areas of the former Provinces of Balochistan, the Punjab 
and the N.W.F.P. and certain States which were merged into 
the new Province of West Pakistan; the Establishment of West 
Pakistan (Am endment) Act, 1955 effecting amendment in 
subsection (1) of section 7 of the main Act, with the result that 
the jurisdiction of the High Court was excluded from the tri bal 
areas, Presidential Order No.11 of 1961 the effect of which was 
to restore the juris diction of the High Court in the special areas 
and the 1962 Constitution which again took away the 
jurisdiction of the High Court in respect of the tribal areas. 
Reference was then made to the Constitution (First 
Amendment) Act, 1963 whereby clause (5) was  added to Article 
223 of the 1962 Constitution, which is in pari material with the 
main enacting part of clause (7) of Article 247 of the Permanent 
Constitution of 1973. The effect of this amendment was that 
neither the Supreme Court nor a High Court could  exercise any 
jurisdiction under the Constitution relating to tribal areas, 
unless the Central Legislature by law otherwise provides. With 
reference to Act II of 1964 called the Tribal Areas (Restoration 
of Jurisdiction) Act, 1964, which was enforced on 10th April, 
1964 it was pointed out that the jurisdiction of the superior 
Courts was restored in relation to tribal areas of the Quetta 
Division.   
 
  It was in this background that this Court held in the said 
appeal that in 1960 when the jurisdiction of the Balochistan 
High Court was invoked there was no constitutional jurisdiction 
available to the said High Court in respect of the territories 
where the land in dispute in that case was situate. From the 
aforesaid constitutional instruments to which reference has 
been made, it would appear that the Peshawar High Court with 
which we are presently concerned was denuded of jurisdiction 
under clause (5) of Article 223 of the 1962 Constitution as from 
27th January, 1964. Act II of 1964 only restored the jurisdiction  
of the Supreme Court and the High Court of West Pakistan in 
regard to the tribal areas of Quetta Division, so that the said 
Court did not possess jur isdiction under the Constitution in 
relation to the tribal areas of Province of N.W.F.P. and the 
former St ates of Am b, Chitral, Dir and Swat. It appears that the 
next Constitutional instrument, in this behalf, to be noted is 
President’s Order 29 of 1970 called the Supreme Court and the 
High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction to Tribal Areas) Order, 
1970, Article  2 whereof provided that the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan shall have, in relation to tribal areas of Chitral, Dir, 
Kalam, Swat and Malakand Protected area (all forming part of 
Provincially Administered Tribal Area), the same jurisdiction to 
hear and determine  appeals from orders or sentences of the 
Peshawar High Court in criminal cases as it has in relation to 
the other areas of North -West Frontier Province. Article 3 of the 
Order extended that jurisdiction of the Peshawar High in 
relation to the same tribal a reas so as to confer appellate 
jurisdiction and the power to confirm death sentences passed 
by Court of Session as it has in relation to other areas of 
N.W.F.P. under the Criminal Procedure Code. The said P.O. 
No.29 of 1970 was repealed and reenacted on 9th February, 
1973 as Act No.XXVII of 1973 with the title Supreme Court and 
High Court (Extension of Jurisdiction to certain Tribal Areas) 
Act, 1973. Clause (7) of Article 261 of Interim Constitution of 
1972 provided as under: - 
 
  “(7) Neither the Supreme C ourt nor a High Court shall 
exercise any jurisdiction under this Constitution in relation to a 
Tribal Area, unless the Federal Legislature by law otherwise 
provides;  Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 16 of 33 16
 
  Provided that nothing in this clause shall affect the 
jurisdiction which the Supreme Co urt or a High Court exercised 
in relation to a Tribal Area immediately before the commencing 
day.” 
  
 It would therefore, be seen that the Peshawar High Court did 
not possess jurisdiction over any of the Federally Administered 
Tribal Areas even after the p romulgation of P.O. No.28 of 1970 
or Act No.XXVII of 1973. Kurram Agency comes within the 
“Federally Administered Tribal Areas” according to the definition 
of the term in Article 260 of Interim Constitution and Article 
246 of 1973 Constitution jurisdiction  with regard to which 
continued to be excluded by virtue of clause (7) of Article 261 
and Article 247 of the two Constitutions respectively which are 
identical provisions.   
 
17.  In the case of Shaukat  Khan vs. Assistant Political 
Agent, Landi Kotal, Khyb er Agency and others  (PLD 2002 
Supreme Court 526), referring to the case of Qaum Bangash 
(supra), a learned two Member Bench of this Court observed as 
follows: - 
  “As a larger Bench of this Court in the above judgment 
has observed that jurisdiction of Pes hawar High Court has not 
been extended in the Tribal Areas, therefore, Constitution 
petition filed by the petitioner was rightly dismissed by the High 
Court vide impugned judgment.”   
   
18.  In the case of Abdul Rahim and others vs. Home 
Secretary, Govern ment of West Pakistan and another  (PLD 1974 
Supreme Court 109), a learned t hree Member Bench of this 
Court has observed as follows: - 
  “The facts of the instant case on the other hand are 
closely similar to those of Umar Gul v. The State (1). In that 
case the dispute related to the share of produce of land 
situated in Dir State between two tribes. It came up for 
decision before the Political Agency whose decision was 
challenged by a writ petition in the High Court under Article 98 
of the 1962 Constitution.  The petition was dismissed in limine 
by the High Court on the short ground that the Court had no 
jurisdiction to entertain it in view of the prohibitory provision of 
clause (5) of Article 223 of the 1962 Constitution. This view 
was upheld by this Court. A  similar view was taken in Jamil 
Ahmad vs. State (2) in which the principle  laid down in Piao 
Gul’s case was also explained and it was observed that if a 
cause of action has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of 
the High Cour t, as for instance any person  is arrested or 
detained within those territories without lawful authority, the 
High Court will certainly have the jurisdiction to interfere in writ 
jurisdiction to examine the legality and l awful authority of that 
action. That broad distinction betw een two sets of cases, is the 
situs or the location of corpus of the dispute.  
 Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 17 of 33 17
  It would be useful to refer to the provisions of clause (5) of 
Article 223 of the 1962 Constitution it read:  
 
  “(5) Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, neither t he Supreme Court nor a High 
Court shall, unless the Central Legislature by law 
otherwise provides, exercise any jurisdiction under this 
Constitution in relation to a Tribal Area.  
 
  This clause was inserted by First Amendment, 1963 (Act 
I of 1964). The fir st thing to be noticed is the non -obstante 
clause in the beginning of the above Constitutional provisions, 
which gives it an overriding effect over other provisions of the 
Constitution including that relating to the writ jurisdiction of the 
High Court. The  prohibition is against the exercise of 
jurisdiction “in relation to a Tribal Area”. This  is not an 
expression of art like the expression “cause of action”, which 
has a well defined meaning and therefore, has a limited import. 
The words “in relation to” on  the other hand are of wide import 
and postulate of a connection of one thing with another: a 
nexus. The question therefore, is whether there is such a 
connection of nexus between the subject -matter of the dispute 
and the former State of Chitral . In this c ontext the situs of the 
land and the residence of the two sets of claimants become 
decisive. The location of the land in dispute and the residence 
of the parties plainly establishes this nexus or relationship for 
the relevant purpose.  
 
  Besides, in the in stant case, all material actions were 
taken in the tribal territory on the basis of the local custom 
having the force of law where the land in dispute is also situate. 
The mere fact that the final order sought to be challenged in 
this case was that of the Home Secretary, West Pakistan dated 
the 23rd July, 1964 would not snap the relationship of the 
dispute with the former State of Chitral, and bring the matter 
within writ jurisdiction of the High Court. On this aspect of the 
question, the law was laid down by the Privy Council as far back 
as 1943 in Ryots of Garabandino and others v. Zamindar of 
Parlakimedi and another (1) wherein it was held that the 
Madras High Court which exercised its local jurisdiction within 
the Presidency town of Madras, had no power to issue writ of 
certiorari in respect of proceedings for  settling fair  and 
equitable rent under a local law, by the special officer of District 
of Ganjam, although the final order sought to be challenged 
was made in revision b y the Collective Board of Rev enue, 
sitting in Madras. This case is an authority for the view that the 
seat of the authority at the apex cannot be a decisive for the 
relevant purpose. The matter has to be looked into from the 
point of view of its substance and not its mere form. Any ot her 
view will be a circumvention of an express prohibition in the 
Constitution.  
 
19.  In the case of Malik Taj Muhammad and another vs. 
Bibi Jano and 25 others  (1992 SCMR 1431), a four Member 
Bench of this Court has observed as follows: - 
“7. By Section 2 (1)(iv) of the Establishment of West 
Pakistan Act, 1955, the territories of West Pakistan were to 
comprise amongst others ‘the Tribal Areas of Balochistan, the 
Punjab and the North -West Frontier and the States of Amb, 
Chitral, Dir and Swat” (referred to as  the ‘specified territories’ ). 
Section 7 of the same Act, while constituting the High Courts 
provided that the High Court shall exercise jurisdiction in 
relation  to the whole of the Province of West Pakistan, and the Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 18 of 33 18
power and authority excerisable by the High Court in the 
Lahore and the Judges therefore, immediately befo re the date 
on which the order under this subsection comes into force shall 
be exersisable by the High Court of West Pakistan and the 
judges thereof in the whole of West Pakistan, and secti on 223 
of the Government of India Act, 1935, shall be construed 
accordingly . 
 
8. Then followed the Establishme nt of West Pakistan 
(Amendment)  Act, 1955 which was deemed to have come into 
force on and from the fourteenth day of October, 1955, i.e. 
from the very day that the Province of West Pakistan came into 
existence, and subsection (1) of section 7 of the Establishment 
of West Pakistan Act, 1955, was amended so as to exclude 
from the jurisdiction of the High Court the special areas.  
 The Presidential Orde r No.11 of 1961 was termed as 
Special Areas (Restoration of Jurisdiction) Order, 1961.  Clause 
2 of Article 2 provided in the following manner: -- 
 
 “The High Court of West Pakistan shall exercise in 
relation to the territories comprised in the Special Area s 
or any part thereof the same jurisdiction  as would have 
been exercisable by the High Court of West Pakistan on 
the 14th day of October, 1955, if sub -clause (i) of clause 
(a) of section 2 of the Establishment of West Pakistan 
(Amendment) Act, 1955, and Ar ticle 178 of the 
Constitution of 23rd March, 1956, had not been 
enacted.”  
 
9. This provision indeed restored the jurisdiction of the 
High Court in the special area.  Nevertheless, its 
jurisdiction  was again taken away by the Constitution of 
1962.  The cont ention of the learned counsel for the 
appellants that as existing law under Article 225 of the 
1962 Constitution the Presidential Order No.11 of 1961  
continued to be operative and holds good only to the 
extent as approved in Manzoor Ilahi’s case PLD 1975 S C 
66.  When the Fundamental Rights were introduced in 
the Constitution by Act I of 1964 Constitution (First 
Amendment) Act, 1963 clause (5) was added in Article 
223 of the Constitution of 1962 on 27th January, 1964, 
as hereunder: -- 
 
 “Notwithstanding anyth ing in this Constitution, neither 
the Supreme Court nor a High Court shall, unless the 
Centr al Legislature by law otherwise  provides, exercise 
any jurisdiction under this Constitution in relation to a 
Tribal Area.”  
 
 The Act II of 1964 Tribal Area s (Restor ation of 
Jurisdiction) Act, 1964 enforced on 10th of April, 1964, made 
the following provision with regard to restoration of 
jurisdiction: -- 
 
2. Restoration of jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the 
High Court. ---The Supreme Court and the High Court of 
West Pakistan shall exercise in relation to the Tribal 
Areas of the Quetta Division the same jurisdiction as 
was exercisable by them in relation to those areas 
before the commencement of the Constitution (First 
Amendment) Act, 1963 (I of 1964).  
 
3. Extension of Limitation. ---Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, if 
a period of limitation had begun to run from before the 
commencement of the Constitution (First Amendment) 
Act, 1963 (I of 1964) , in respect of any matter 
concerning which the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 19 of 33 19
and the High Court of West Pakistan is created or 
restored by this Act then in computing such period of 
limitation the period between the tenth day of January, 
1964, and the date of the coming into force of this Act 
shall be excluded:  
 
Provided that no period of such limitation shall expire on 
a day earlier than the thirtieth day from such date.” 
 
10. In this background of the constitutional instruments, it 
cannot be said that at the relevant time in 1960,  when the 
jurisdiction was invoked and the impugned order passed by the 
Additional Commissioner, there was at all constitutional 
jurisdiction available to the Balochistan High Court in respect of 
the territories where the land was situate.  
 
11. As regards the contention that the Additional 
Commissioner while passing the order was located in settled 
area where the jurisdiction of the High Court extended, the 
matter stands concluded by one of the later decision of the 
Supreme Court Muhammad Sadiq and others v . Government of 
Pakistan and others 1981 SCMR 1022 which provides that the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the High Court stands 
excluded in only those matter which are exclusive ly concerned 
with the Tribal Areas, and that the ouster clause cannot be  
interpreted so as to exclude the jurisdiction of a superior Court 
in matters in which any part of the cause of action accrues, or 
any effective action or step is ta ken or performed in, or at, a 
place out side the tribal area, affecting  the life, liberty or  
property and the jurisdiction of the High Court remains.  In this 
case, the subject -matter of the dispute was immovable 
property and rights therein.  These were located in the tribal 
area. The authorities which dealt with the matter were 
empowered to deal  with such ma tters as pertaining to tribal 
areas.  In the circumstances, the substantial cause of action 
and the subject -matter of dispute would be located in the tribal 
area and not in the settled area merely b ecause such an order 
was passed” . 
 
20.  In th e case of Muhammad Siddiq and others vs. 
Government of Pakistan and others (1981 SCMR 1022), a 
learned four Member Bench of this Court has observed as 
follows: - 
  “We have now heard Mr. Shaukat Ali, learned 
counsel appearing for the appellants, and Maulvi  Sirajul 
Haq for the Government of Pakistan and we find that 
this Court has consistently taken the view, as summed 
up in the most recent case on the subject, namely, 
Manzoor Elahi v. Federation of Pakistan (5), that the 
ouster of jurisdiction of the superi or Courts is not to be 
lightly assumed, and the plain meaning and intention of 
the ouster clause appears to be to exclude the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and High Courts only 
in those matters, which are exclusively concerned with 
Tribal Areas, and th at the ouster in clause cannot be 
interpreted so as to exclude the jurisdiction of a superior 
Courts in matters in which any part of the cause of 
action accrues, or any effective action or step is taken or 
performed in, or at, a place outside the Tribal ar ea, 
affecting the life, liberty or property of a citizen of 
Pakistan, or any other person for the time being in 
Pakistan, and having the right to be governed by the Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 20 of 33 20
ordinary law of the land and in accordance with the 
procedures obtaining there under.  
  Viewed in the light of these principles, it is clear 
that if the warrants and summons against the appellants 
were issued by an officer dealing with the Tribal areas, 
and presumably at a place in the Tribal area, the 
Peshawar High Court would have no jurisdict ion to deal 
with the matter, as the execution of the warrants and 
summons was to be carried out in the district of 
Faisalabad, which place is within the jurisdiction of the 
Lahore High Court. No material has been brought to our 
notice to show that the warr ants or summons were 
issued at Peshawar, even though the officer issuing the 
same also has another functions as Magistrate of the 
First Class at Peshawar. It is, however, clear that in the 
present proceedings he was acting as an Assistant 
Political Agent o f Khyber Agency and not as a Magistrate 
of the First Class within the territorial district of 
Peshawar.  
   On this view of the matter, we consider that the 
learned Judges in the High Court were right in thinking 
that their jurisdiction stood excluded at th e time the 
matter was brought to them. It transpired that 
subsequently the writ jurisdiction of the High Court was 
extended to certain Tribal areas, but that extension took 
place after the events with which we are dealing in the 
present case.  
   As a resul t of the legal position explained above, 
we consider that it was only the Lahore High Court, 
which could have jurisdiction in the matter as the 
execution of the process was to be carried out at 
Faisalabad.  
21.  In the case of Ch. Manzoor Elahi vs. Federati on of 
Pakistan etc. (PLD 1975 Supreme Court 66), which was heard by 
learned four Member Bench of this Court, three of whom passed 
a majority judgment . Reference is made to the judgment of his 
lordship Yaqub Ali, J. a Member of majority, which is as follows :- 
  “Lastly it remains to deal with the plea raised on behalf 
of the State that clause (7) of Article 247 bars this Court from 
exercising any jurisdiction in relation to the prisoner who was 
detained in a Tribal Area when this applica tion was made. 
Havin g given careful consideration to the arguments raised by 
the learned Attorney -General and the Advocates -General, 
Baluchistan and Punjab, I am unable to accept the plea that the 
bar contained in clause (7) of Article 247 of the Constitution is 
attracted. As  seen the prisoner was arrested in Lahore on 
November 12, 1973, any person could thereupon approach this 
Court with an application under Article 184 (3) for a writ in 
accordance with the provisions of Article 199 so as to satisfy 
the Court that the custody  of the prisoner was in accordance 
with law or otherwise. The place of arrest being outside a Tribal 
Area there was jurisdiction in this Court to entertain the 
application. Under Article 187 this Court has power to issue 
such direc tions, orders or decrees  as may be necessary for 
doing complete justice in any case or matter and any such Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 21 of 33 21
direction, order or decree shall be enforceable throughout 
Pakistan. Under Article 190 all exe cutive and judicial authorities  
throughout Pakistan shall act in aid of the Sup reme Court. 
Assuming that this Court finds that the arrest and custody of 
the prisoner at Kohlu are not in accordance with law and directs 
his release, it cannot be postulated that the Additional District 
Magistrate, Kohlu, or the officer incharge of the J ail in which the 
prisoner was under detention (he has since been released 
under the order of this Court) will fail to obey the direction 
given by this Court. Indeed, it is their constitutional duty to 
implement the directions given or orders pass ed by thi s Court.  
   What then is the effect of conveying the prisoner to a 
Tribal Area. Does, he thereby forfeit the Fundamental Rights so 
firmly vested by the Constitu tion in every citizen? As observed 
during the hearing of these matters, the Fundamental Rights 
are not so unreal or fragile that the ingenuity of a police officer 
and a fast moving conveyance can defeat them and render this 
Court helpless to give redress though it may be satisfied that 
the arrest and the cus tody of the prisoner are not in accordanc e 
with law. The essence of the issue in my opinion is that if a 
person is arrested in violation of any provision of law at a place 
where he has a right to move a High Court or this Court for his 
release under Article 199 or this Court under Article 184 as the 
case may be that right will not be defeated by his removal to a 
Tribal Area. My reason for reaching this conclusion is that the 
inquiry, which the Court will undertake, will, in point of time, be 
in relation to arrest and custody at a place which is no t a Tribal 
Area. His detention in a Tribal Area when an application under 
Article 184 or Article 199 is made would be relevant only if it 
could be shown that a writ issued by a High Court or this Court 
will not be obeyed by the authority who is holding the  prisoner 
in custody. As brought out above, such a situation is not 
visualized by the Constitution. The removal of the prisoner from 
Lahore to Kohlu and his detention there have, therefore, no 
effect whatever on the exercise of jurisdiction by this Court i n 
relation to the prisoner. The case of The King v. Secretary of 
State for Home Affairs -Ex Parte O'Brien cited earlier fully 
supports this view.  
   It was contended on behalf of the State that if a person 
commits an offence in a Tribal Area he renders him self liable to 
be treated in accordance with the law, which prevails in that 
part of the country. There is force in the conten tion, but there 
are more than one answers to it. Firstly, that the Criminal 
Procedure Code is as much applicable to Tribal Areas as to the 
other parts of the country. It will, therefore, be apt that such a 
person be tried in a Court constituted under the Code and not 
by a Council of Elders under the Frontier Crimes Regulation. 
Secondly, that if a person voluntarily goes to a Tribal Area and 
commits an offence there he is, on a general principle of law, 
liable to be tried and punished according to the law, custom or 
usage which prevails there. I would not, however, express any 
final opinion on this point as the prisoner in this case i s said to 
have committed the offences with which he is charged outside 
the Tribal Area and was taken there involuntarily by the agents 
of the State ”. 
22.  From the above law, as laid down by this Court, 
inter-alia, the following are the circumstances under  which the 
jurisdiction of this Court and that of the High Court  will not be 
barred under Article 247(7) of the Constitution rather the same Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 22 of 33 22
will be available to be exercised under Article 184 and Article 
199 of the Constitution: - 
i) Where location of the cor pus in dispute is situated in the 
territory outside the Tribal Area;  
 
ii) Where parties to the dispute have their residence 
outside the Tribal Area;  
 
iii) Where cause of action has arisen outside the Tribal 
Area;  
 
iv) Where the offence has taken place outside the Triba l 
Area;  
 
v) Where the arrest is made or sought to be made which is 
outside the Tribal Area;  
 
vi) Where effective action or step is taken or performed 
outside the Tribal Area;  
 
23.  The fact that the detainee s being arrested from 
Adyala Jail, Rawalpindi, is a ques tion which on perusal of record 
seems to be controversial in that the petitioner has alleged that 
they were taken away by respondents No.2 and 3 while 
respondents No.2 to 4, in their reply have submitted that they 
were taken away by disguise d persons as me n of agencies who 
brought them to the tribal territory for terrorist activities from 
where they were arrested by the Army Personnel.  Such 
controversial question cannot be determined in the absence of 
positive evidence on the record and nor we can pass/dec ide on 
the basis of mere word against word.  In the order of this Court 
dated 06.11.2011, in C.P.No.1973 of 2010 in which also Mr. 
Tariq Asad, ASC appeared a s a counsel for Atee q-ur-Rehman, 
one of the brother of the detainee s, in which the fact of the 
arrest of the detainee s from Adyala Jail was taken into 
consideration and their subsequent arrest by the Army Personnel 
from the Tribal Areas and on the statement of Raja Muhammad 
Irshad, ASC, made on 09.12.2010 that the detainee s will be Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 23 of 33 23
subjected to law and dealt with in accordance with the Army Act, 
the Court has given its opinion that they are no longer in illegal 
custody and the petition was dispos ed of accordingly.  
24.  Mufti Abdul Baais had filed Civil Petition No.99 of 
2011, in this Court in which the s tatement of Brig. Naubahar, 
Judge Advocate General, was recorded and ultimately counsel 
for the petitioners submitted that he intends to file a Constitution 
Petition for seeking appropriate remedy as the ground of habeas 
corpus is no more available because  at the moment it cannot be 
declared that it is an unlawful detention and accordingly the said 
Civil Petition was disposed of.  Another Civil Petition No.1793 of 
2011 was also dismissed by this Court.  Thus, so far as the 
question of illegal detention of t he detainee s is concerned, the 
same stood already determined and decided by this Court, as 
per the above orders.  
25.  As noted above, the Army did not try the detainee s 
in terms of Section 2(1)(d) of the Army Act, 1952, for the reason 
given by Brig. Naubah ar, Judge Advocate General, in his 
statement dated 15.04.2013 that “their trial under the provision 
of PAA, 1952 could not take place due to lack of jurisdiction as 
relevant provisions relating to trial of civilians are contained in 
PAA Sec 2 (1)(d), i.e. seducing and espionage. Further, after the 
passage of 18th Constitutional Amendment, the jurisdiction to try 
civilians, allegedly involved in attacking Armed Forces 
installations and assets as was enacted through an Ordinance to 
amend PAA Sec 2 (1)(d)(iia)  stood elapsed.  Therefore, the 
militants were interned as per the law. The prosecuting agency 
had collected sufficient reliable evidence for their trial under Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 24 of 33 24
FCR”.  The detainee s were interned in the Internment Centre 
under Actions (in Aid of Civil Power ) Regulation, 2011, 
promulgated by the President of Pakistan under Article 247(5) of 
the Constitution.  Hence in the petition prayer for challenging the 
vires of the Actions (in Aid of Civil Power) Regulation, 2011, was 
sought to be challenged but in the c ourse of his arguments, the 
learned counsel for the petitioners did not make submission in 
this respect and even in para 7 of his CMA No.2635 of 2013, he 
has made the following statement: - 
 “7. That the Applicants’ petitioner counsel may not have 
much impo rtance, but since its arguments had been concluded 
and the Counsel had submitted that he was not going to argue 
the vires of Action in Aid of civil Power Regulation, 2011, hence 
the petition be heard independently.”  
 
This Constitution Petition was delinked  from other 
Constitution Petitions and the Judgments in this case was 
reserved.  
26.  Although the petitioner has sought to challenge the 
vires of Section 2(1)(d) of the Army Act, 1952 but in face of 
development which has taken place that the Army has not t ried 
the detainee s under the Army Act, the counsel for the petitioners 
apparently did not choose to argue this point also and in our 
view such was done rightly as the question of trial of the 
detainee s under the Army Act has become mainly of an 
academic na ture rather redundant.   
27.  Regarding the death of the 4 detainee s, the 
respondents No.2 to 4 with their reply (CMA No.487 of 2012) 
have attached their death certificates which show that Syed 
Abdus Saboor expired on 20.01.2011 in LRH due to cardio 
pulmon ary arrest, respiratory distress.  Tehseenullah expired on 
17.12.2011 in LRH due to cardio pulmonary arrest.  Said Arab Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 25 of 33 25
expired on 18.12.2011 in LRH due to cardio pulmonary arrest, 
secondary to anemia and pancyctopaeshia.  Muhammad Aamir 
alias Khalid expir ed on 13.08.2011 due to acute renal failure and 
acute gastroenteritis.  The respondents No.2 and 3 in their reply 
have submitted that the internees in view of their earlier poor 
health conditions fell sick and were shifted to the Lady Reading 
Hospital, Pes hawar, for their treatment and despite best medical 
treatment and regular care by the Doctors, 4 persons died in the 
hospital on different dates.  The relatives of the deceased were 
duly informed and choice was give to them to have the post-
mortem report s to determine the cause of death , but offer was 
declined by the relatives and in 2 of the 4 death cases the 
relatives have given in writing declining to have post -mortem 
done and the other 2 blatantly refused to have any post -mortem 
done or sign any documen t and that the allegation of poison and 
torture contained in the petition is without any shred of 
evidence.  In view of this reply of respondents No.2 to 4 
supported by medical record of the 4 deceased detainee s there 
is nothing on the record which can jus tifiably substantiate the 
plea of the petitioner that those detainee s were tortured or 
poisoned more particularly when the post -mortem report s of 
these deceased detainee s is not available on the record.  The 
post-mortem report s of the deceased detainee s would have been 
very relevant to determine their real cause of death without 
which this Court is unable to come to a conclusion as alleged by 
the petitioner.  Although several medical reports in respect of 
the surviving detainee s have been submitted by the C hief 
Secretary, KPK, where the medical conditions of each of the Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 26 of 33 26
surviving detainee s have been elaborately and comprehensively 
been described and the medical treatment being administered to 
them but no where the petitioner has disputed any of the 
medical r eports submitted by the Chief Secretary, KPK and it is 
not even asserted that the medical treatment which is being 
administered to the surviving detainee s is not satisfactory.  The 
Treatment shown in the medical report s being provided  to the 
surviving detainees have not been reported to be th at of torture 
or administering of poison and therefore in the absence of any 
report to that effect, this Court cannot come to a justifiable 
conclusion that any of the detainee s was tortured or poisoned.  
28.  As regards the grievance in terms of Article 13 of the 
Constitution, it may be noted that in case FIR No. 670/2007 , 
seven accused were tried u/s 302, 324, 436, 427, 440, 120 -B 
PPC, 4/5 ESA  and 7 ATA, Police Station New Town, Rawalpindi,  
and the prosecu tion case was th at on 24.11.2007 at about 7:40 
am when the official Bus carrying officials of ISI reached at the 
security check barrier Hamza Camp , a Carry Van driven by a 
young man  of 24/25 years also came there.  One Ashfaq, who 
was on duty stopped the Carry Van but the  driver of the Van 
exploded himself inside the Van and due to such explosion the 
said Bus caught fire as a result of which 15 officials died whereas 
35 officials received injuries.  The accused were alleged to be 
involved in the said offence.   In case FIR No.786/2007 u/s 302, 
324, 120 -B, 337 -F(v), 440, 427 PPC, 4/5 ESA  and 7 ATA, Police 
Station R.A. Bazar, Rawalpindi, the prosecution case was that on 
24.11.2007  at 7:45 am one Soldier namely Arif Nawaz along 
with Soldier Khalil Ahmed and Khalid Mahmood Naik  was on Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 27 of 33 27
security duty near Defence Export Promotion  Organization, 
Iftikhar Janjua Road and at that time a silver coloured car driven 
by a young driver came there and when the security staff 
stopped that car for checking, it blew up with blast which 
resulted  into complete destruction of the car and the death of its 
driver.  Due to the blast, the said security staff beside other 
persons passing near for going to their duty in GHQ received 
injuries including destruction of bullet proof jacket and rifle of 
the said Khalid Mahmood Naik and the accused were alleged to 
be connected with the said crime.  In case FIR No. 384/2008 u/s 
120-B PPC, 4/5 ESA and 7 ATA, Police Station New Town, 
Rawalpindi .  The prosecution case was that on 01.07.2008 
Asghar Ali Goraya, SHO/In spector (complainant)  receive d a spy 
information that some terrorists  groups were present behind the 
Arts Council Building on Murree Road and were planning to 
target some important installations and building with heavy 
explosive and if immediately raided t hey could be apprehended.  
On this information, the complainant constituted a police party 
and also i nformed the Bomb Disposal Squad.  The complainant 
with his raiding party on official vehicle reached the above 
mentioned place and made raid upon which 6 p ersons behind the 
Arts Council were apprehended and on their search 5 bunches of 
detonators and prima cord wires , suicidal jackets  and 4 batteries 
were recovered.  However, nothing incriminating was recovered 
from Syed Abdul Majid, Syed Abdus Saboor and Sy ed Abdul 
Basit.  As stated above, all the accused were acquitted of 
charges against them in the above referred 3 FIR cases by the 
Anti-Terrorism Court .  In the case before the Assistant Political Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 28 of 33 28
Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency, the facts of the matter are tha t 7 
accused were handed over by the Incharge Internment  Centre, 
Kurram Agency on 22.03.2013 to the Political Agent , Orakzai 
Agency for proceeding against the accused for targeting a 
convoy of 2 Wing Dir Scouts at Sarmalo Kandow Orakzai Agency 
on 25.11.2010 .  Explosive device which was planted to destroy 
the security force s convoy  blasted and as a result a Jawan of 
security forces was killed and 7 of the same convoy were as a 
result injured.  They were arrested on the same day from the 
Lawara Mela, Orakzai A gency while trying to escape .  At the time 
of arrest weapons, ammunition and suicide jackets were also 
recovered from the accused.  On perusal of this record , it is 
apparent that there were against the detainee s in the Anti -
Terrorism Court, Rawalpindi, fro m which they were acquitted 
cases in which the offence alleged against them is said to have 
taken place in various area s of Rawalpindi  they were also 
arrested from there.  While case under which the detainee s have 
been tried, convicted and sentenced by the  Assistant Political 
Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency, the offence is said to have taken 
place at Sarmalo Kandow Orakzai Agency and they were 
arrested from Lawara Mela Orakzai Agency  which are Tribal 
Areas .  These facts amply show that the detainee s were tried in 
respect of different offences which have taken place at different 
places and they were also arrested from the respective places of 
crime s and thus theses offences cannot justifiably be considered 
to be the same offence to attract the provision of Articl e 13 of 
the Constitution.  Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 29 of 33 29
29.  As the facts further emerged from the record that 
the Internment Orders of the detainee s were withdrawn on 
19.03.2013, and their custody was handed over to the Political 
Administration of Orakzai Agency to be tried under the Frontier 
Crime Regulation (FCR).  Admittedly, the Orakzai Agency is a 
Tribal Area and it is so mentioned in Article 246 of the 
Constitution.  The detainee s were tried by the Assistant Political 
Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency u/s 121 -A, 122 PPC/3,4,5 ,6 of 
Explosive Substance Act, 1908/11 -FCR read with Section 365, 
400, 401 PPC/11 FCR and through an Order dated 02.05.2013 
detainee s Dr. Niaz Ahmed, Muhammad Mazharul Haq, 
Muhammad Shafiq, Shafiq -ur-Rehman and Gulroz were 
convicted u/s 121A, 122 PPC/11 FCR and sent enced to undergo 
14 years RI each and a fine of Rs.1  lac and in default whereof to 
undergo 3 years SI.  They were further convicted u/s 3 -5 of the 
Explosive Substance Act, 1908/11 FCR and sentenced to 14 
years RI each and fine of Rs.1  lac and in default to  undergo 3 
years RI and both the sentences were ordered to run 
concurrently.  While Abdul Basit and Abdul Majid were convicted 
u/s 121A, 122 PPC, 11 FCR and sentenced to undergo 5 years RI 
and a fine of Rs.1  lac and in default to undergo 1 year SI  each.  
They were further convicted u/s 3 -5 of the Explosive Substance 
Act, 1908/11 FCR and sentenced to undergo 5 years RI each and 
fine of Rs.1 lac and in default to undergo 1 year SI each.  Their 
sentences were also ordered to run concurrently.  All the 
detainee s were, however, acquitted from the charge u/s 365, 
400, 401 PPC/11 FCR and Sections 4 and 6 of the Explosive 
Substance Act, 1908.  They were given benefit of Section 382 -B Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 30 of 33 30
Cr.P.C with order that their sentences shall commence from the 
date of arrest by th e Political Administration, Orakzai Agency i.e. 
22.03.2013.  
30.  On conclusion of the trial and passing of the order of 
conviction and sentence, by a Warrant of Commitment issued by 
the Assistant Political Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency , the custody 
of the detainee s for undergoing their sentences was handed over 
to the Superintendent Central Prison, Kohat .  We are informed 
that 2 of the detainee s have filed Revision Application in FATA 
Tribunal u/s 55 -A of the FCR but the remaining 5 detainee s have 
still not f iled any Revision.  
31.  So far as the application of the jurisdiction of this 
Court in terms of Article 247(7) of the Constitution is concerned, 
it may be noted that as per the consensus of the Judgments of 
this Court, the bar of jurisdiction of this Court  in terms of Article 
247(7) of the Constitution will be applicable where cause of 
action and subject matter of dispute is in the Tribal Area and the 
parties to the dispute are also resident of Tribal Area and in 
terms of the Judgment in the case of Ch. Man zoor Elahi , supra , 
that if a person voluntary goes to a Tribal Area and commits 
offence there he on general principle of law is liable to be tried 
and punished according to law, custom a nd usage which prevails 
there.  
32.  In this case the detainee s have be en tried by the 
Assistant Political Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency and they have 
been convicted and awarded sentences for the crime they are 
said to have committed in the Tribal Area  and were arrested too 
from the Tribal Area .  To the extent of the decision m ade by the Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 31 of 33 31
Assistant Political Agent, as per the consensus of law , this Court 
cannot take cognizance of the same and sit in appeal to decide 
as to whether the jurisdiction assumed by the Assistant Political 
Agent, Lower Orakzai Agency was rightly and compe tently 
assumed and as to whether the conviction order was justified.  
This exercise by this Court apparently is not permissible in view 
of the bar contained in Article 247(7) of the Constitution.  
However, as the convicts are detained in the Central Prison , 
Kohat, which admittedly is a settled area , this Court can surely 
pass order and give direction to the Jail Administration of Kohat 
to deal with the said convicts as per the applicable law to the 
Prisoners and to provide them safe and proper lodging in th e jail 
and in case the said Prisoners require medical treatment which is 
not possible in the Jail Hospital or in the Jail premises, they shall 
be brought to proper Hospitals preferably the Lady Reading 
Hospital, Peshawar, where they were already under trea tment 
and the administration of Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, will 
ensure that these Prisoners are given proper care and treatment 
of ailment s suffered by them and all efforts are made to secure 
their health and life which is their guaranteed right unde r the 
Constitution of this country.  Proper food and clothing will also 
be provided to them.  The relatives and the counsel of the said 
Prisoners shall also be allowed to meet the said Prisoners 
without any let or hindrance but subject to law.  The 
Superin tendent Central Prison, Kohat, will submit fortnightly 
report to the Registrar of this Court for our perusal in Chambers, 
regarding the implementation of the above directions.  Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 32 of 33 32
33.  The instant Constitution Petition, in the above terms, 
stands disposed of.  
Criminal Original Petition No.8 Of 2012  
34.  So far as the Criminal Original Petition No.8 of 2012 
is concerned, the respondents No.2 to 4 have filed CMA No.798 
of 2012, in which they have given reasons for delay in compl ying 
with the order  of this Court d ated 13.01.2012, which is 
contained in Para 2 of the said CMA and is as follows : - 
 “That adverse weather conditions i.e. snow and poor visibility, 
in and around Parachinar prevented timely operation by 
helicopters, hence the production of three detainees detained in 
the Internment Center by interning authority under the 
provisions of Actions (in Aid of Civil Power) Regulation, 2011 
got delayed.  This Court’s order was, however, complied with 
and the seven internees including the four admitted in the 
Govern ment Lady Reading Hospital, Peshawar, were brought to 
Islamabad at about 6:00 pm on 10.02.2012, while the Order 
had already been passed at 5:30 pm by this Hon’able Court for 
their production on the next date of hearing i.e. 13.02.2012.  
There was no disobe dience of the Order dated 30.01.2012 and 
the internees from Parachinar were brought despite taking 
great risk to human lives including those of pilots of the 
helicopter who undertook the extremely dangerous mission and 
operated in the hazardous and adverse  weather and security 
environments.  The Army leadership including the heads of the 
agencies have always honoured and implemented the orders 
passed by this Apex Court of the country.  Leaving the orders 
aside, even the observations made by this Hon’able Co urt 
relating to matters falling in the domain of the Army and ISI 
never go unheeded.”  
 
35.  As the detainees were produced in the Court on 
13.02.2012 and they also had opportunity of meeting with their 
relatives and counsel and in view of the explanation g iven in the 
CMA and further that the Court very sparingly and in extreme 
cases invokes its powers to proceed in the Contempt of Court, 
we find that apparently no case for the Contempt of Court is 
made out and th is Criminal Original Petition is accordingly 
dismissed.  
Criminal Original Petition No.12 Of 2012  
36.  So far as the Criminal Original Petition No.12 of 2012 
is concerned, issuing of a purported press release by the alleged Const.P.No.1 of 2012 and Crl.O.Ps.No.8 & 12 of 2012.doc  
  Page 33 of 33 33
Contemn er apparently did not cause any obstruction or 
interference to these pr oceedings and it cannot justifiably be 
held that there was an attempt by the alleged Contemner to 
impede the cause of administration of justice.  If at all the press 
release expresses anything the same is the personal view of the 
person issuing the press release.  The press release  which is the 
subject matter of this petition does not show that it has been 
issued by the alleged Contemner rather it is attributed to a 
security official who is not named.  In this view of the matter 
and also for the reason that  the Court sparingly invokes its 
power to proceed in Contempt of Court, we find that apparently 
no case for Contempt of Court is made out and this Criminal 
Original Petition is also dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad   Judge  
03.12.2013  
NOT APPRO VED FOR REPORTING  
*Rabbani *  Judge  
 
 
 
 Announced in open C ourt on    . 
 
 
 
 
    Judge  