IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
                                                    PRESENT:
 
  
                                                  Mr. Justice Nazim Hussain Siddiqui, C.J. 
                                                  Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal 
                                                  Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar 
  
  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 55/2003            
  
Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif              …                PETITIONER 
                                                     VERSUS 
  
Federation of Pakistan through Secr etary, Ministry of Interior,  
Government of Pakistan, Islamabad & 5 others. 
                                                                …                  RESPONDENTS   
CPLA NO.791/2004 & CMA NO. 3469/2003  
                     [On appeal against the order dated 17.10.2003 of the Lahore 
                       High Court, Lahore passed in W. P. No. Nil /2003] 
 Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif              …                PETITIONER 
                                                         VERSUS 
The State & 2 others                                 …                 RESPONDENTS 
 For the petitioner:                                        Malik Muhammad Qayyum, ASC. 
(in both petitions)                                          A ssisted by:           
                                                                    Mr. Nazeer Ahmed Bhutta, ASC.  
                                                                    Mr. Shoukat Ali Mehr, ASC.                                                                    Mr. Manzoor Ahmed Malik, ASC.
                                                                    Mr. Abdul Sattar Chughtai, ASC. 
                                                                    Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR 
  
For respondents No. 1 & 6:                         Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan 
in Const.P.55/2003                                      A ttorney General for Pakistan 
(On notice) 
  For respondent No. 2                                   Syed  Shabbar Raza Rizvi,  
in Const. P.55/03                                         Advocate General Punjab. 
& respondents                                              Ms Afshan Ghazanfar,  
in CP 791/2004                                            Assistant Advocate General. 
  
Date of hearing:                                            7.4.2004 
  
JUDGMENT  
  
                NAZIM HUSSAIN SIDDIQUI, C.J.  -        This judgment will dispose of Const. 
Petition No.55/2003 and Civil Pe tition No.791 of 2004. Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif is the
petitioner in both these matters.  
2.                According to Const. Petition No.55 of 2003 the petitioner is curr ently the President o f
Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz Group), whic h won the 1997 General Elections with an
unprecedented majority. The petiti oner’s brother Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif was elected as
Prime Minister of Pakistan and the pe titioner as Chief Mi nister of Punjab.  
3.                On 12. 10.1999, the Pakistan Ar my took over the admini stration of th e country an d
the petitioner was taken into cu stody and remained as such t ill December 2000. The petitione r
was involved in airplane hija cking case, but was acquitted.  
4.                It is alleged that in D ecember 2000, while the petiti oner was in custody, he was
forced to board an airplane along with hi s other family members a nd was deported to SaudiArabia.  It is averred that the petitioner travelled to the United  States of America for treatment
and now a days he is in United Ki ngdom and is available at the ad dress given in the title of the
petition. It is alleged that Govern ment of Pakistan to date continue s to insist that some sort of a
deal exists under which the petit ioner and his family me mbers opted to live in exile, but the same
is denied by him with asserti on that no such docum ent supporting such deal has ever been
produced by th e government.  
5.                The petitioner claims  that as President of  Pakistan Muslim Lea gue (Nawaz Group) he
has a constitutional right to participate in the political act ivities and perfor m his functions as
envisaged in Article 17 of the Co nstitution of Islamic Re public of Pakistan, 1 973.  He asserts that
the authorities feel threatened by his presence in Pakistan. He  states that the respondents are
acting in flagrant disregard of the Constitution  of Pakistan, which guarantees fundamental rights,
principles of natural and po litical justice, etc.  He has alleged that just to keep him out of politics
various laws relating to political  process were amended and he wa s not allowed to contest the last
general elections.  
6.                The petitioner claims that he has all along been trying his be st to return to the country 
but was not allowed to do so. He stated that various high official s of the responde nts have issued 
clear statements to the press that  he shall not be allo wed to come back to the country. According 
to him, though there are many such statements but the following three ar e most significant:-  
(1)     Faisal Saleh Hayat, Federal Minister for Interior (The Daily Dawn 
dated 17.01.2002):        
  
                   “Sharifs won’t be allo wed to return…….”  
  
(2)     General Pervez Musharraf (The Daily Jang dated 21.8.2002):  
  
          “If they come back, Shahbaz wi ll have to go back to Saudi 
Arabia and Benazir B hutto to jail…….”       
  (3)     Nisar A. Memon, Informat ion Minister (The Daily Jang dated 
9.8.2002):  
  
“We will not let Shahbaz Sharif come back. ” 
  
7.                On th e strength of above statements, the petit ioner claims that he has sound reasons
to believe that he would not be allowed to enter Pakistan. He has emphatica lly stated that, being a
citizen of Pakistan, he has every right to return to the country a nd the respondents have no lawful
authority to refuse or interfere wi th his return to Pakistan. Furthe r, he claims that he apprehends
that he would not be allowed to board a plane for Pakistan and in case he manages to do so, the
plane would not be allowed to land  in Pakistan. According to him, clear instructions to this effect
have already been widely  publicized in the print media includ ing Daily "Insaf" dated 23.8.2003: -
“No member of the Sharif fa mily be allowed to land at  any airport: Interior 
Ministry issues written instructions. ” 
It is also averred that the a pprehension of the petiti oner is strengthened by the fact that a few 
months back his wife an d daughters came to Lahore but were not allowed to stay and sent back to 
Saudi Arabia against their wishes.  
8.                Acco rding to Civil Petition No .791 of 2004, on 29.3.2001, a crimina l case bearing
FIR No.114/2001 was registered at police station Sabzazar, La hore under Sectio ns 302,365-A, 
452, 148, 149, 109 PPC and Section 6/7 of Anti Terrorism Act, 1997  on the written complaint o f
one Syed Uddin son of Razi Uddin, showing th e petitioner and 12 others , namely, Babar Ashraf,
Zulfiqar Ahmed, Noorul Hass an, Abid Hussain, Shamshad Ah med, Munir Ahmed, Muhamma d
Riaz, Manzoor Ah med, Lala Roshan, Hakim Ali, Col. (R etd) Muhammad Asghar and son of Col.
Muhammad Asghar, as accused of th is case. Charge sheet in this case was submitted before Anti
Terrorism Court No.III, Lahore  and the petitioner was su mmoned for 10.6.2003. The summon,
however, was returned by the proces s server with an endorsement that the petitioner was in SaudiArabia and not in Pakistan. Ther eafter, on aforesaid date non- bailable warrant was issued against 
him and the same was also return ed by repeating the above endorsement.  Learned trial Court on
17.6.2003 issued a proclamation under Section 87 Cr.P.C. agai nst him. After completion o f
formalities, perpetua l warrant was issued against him by tr ial Court. The peti tioner claimed that
he was totally unaware of abov e criminal proceeding and only came  to know about it through
newspapers. He sent a fax messag e to learned trial Court from United States and requested fo r
recalling the order of proclamati on. He maintained that his ab sence was not voluntary and the
Court was informed that he wa s ready to surrender before it an d that an appropriate order be
passed to enable him to appear, etc. Instead, his request was tu rned down by learned trial Court
vide order dated 2.8.2003. Therea fter a petition was filed befo re High Court for recalling the
order, whereby he was declared  proclaimed offender and perpet ual warrant of his arrest was
issued, which was dismissed on 21.8.2003.  
9.                Giving fu rther details about the afor esaid case, petitioner st ated that the order passe d
by Anti Terrorism Court No.III, Lahore, was ch allenged before Lahore High Court and the office
raised an objection that the pe titioner was an absconder, ther efore, the writ petition was not
competent, unless he surrendered himself. It is stated  that learned counsel for the petitioner in
reply to said objection wrote at the reverse of objection proforma  that the office objection was not
sustainable in law as it amounted  to disposal of the writ petition and that the petition be fixe d
before the Court. It is mentioned that the offi ce repeated the objecti on that the petitioner is
booked in a murder case in which he has been declared proclaime d offender and proceedings fo r
procuring his attendance are pend ing, as such, under the law he  could not seek relief without
surrendering himself before the Court. After great insistence of  the learned c ounsel for the
petitioner, the matter was put up before le arned Single Judge as an ‘objection case’, but the 
learned Judge upheld and sustaine d the office objection, vide order dated 17.10.2003.  Hence
these petitions.  10.              Federati on of Pakistan in its reply/comments states that no cas e is made out fo r
invoking the original jurisdiction under clause (3) of Ar ticle 184 of the Cons titution of Pakistan
and no question of public  importance with reference to th e enforcement of fundamental rights
conferred by Chapter 1 of Part-II of the Constitution has been raised. It is as serted that the case o f
the petitioner is based on mere apprehension, which does not warr ant invoking the extra-ordinary 
jurisdiction of this Court.  Further, it is stated that, at best , the case of the pet itioner is in the
nature of grievances of persona l nature, which do not warrant exercise of jurisdiction of this
Court under aforesaid Article of the Constitution. A plea has al so been taken that nomination
papers of the petiti oner were rejected accord ing to law and that th ese issues could not be
reopened in these proceedings.  It  is urged that legality of said  FIR could not be assailed before
this Court under above referred  Article of th e Constitution.  
11.              Malik M uhammad Qayyum, ASC for the petitioner in both the petitions raised the 
following contentions: -  
(1)               The petitioner, being a citizen of Pa kistan, has a natu ral and inherent 
right to enter and retu rn to the count ry, which is guaranteed under 
Article 15 of the Constitution.   Un der Article 4 of the Constitution, 
he has a right to be d ealt with in accordance with law and is entitled 
to enjoy the equal protection of law.   The above funda mental rights of 
the petitioner are being vi olated by the respondents;  
(2)               The respondents, through the press st atements cited in  the petition, 
have made it clear that as soon as the petitioner lands at any airport in 
Pakistan, he will be immediately de ported.  In the recent past, the 
family of the petitioner was not allowed to stay  in Pakistan and was 
deported. The petitioner  understands that inst ructions have been 
issued to all the airports that if  any member of th e Sharif family 
comes to Pakistan, he/she should be  sent back immediately.  When 
the petitioner comes to Pakistan, he  would be immedia tely sent back 
and he will have no occasion to inv oke the jurisdiction of any Court in Pakistan; and  
(3)               The order passed by the Anti-Terr orism Court in Lahore declaring 
the petitioner a proclaimed offender is a nullity in the eye of law as 
held in N.M.V. Vellayappa Chetti ar v. Alagappa Chettiar  (AIR 1942 
Madras 289) wherein it is laid down that where the Court is informed 
that the accused is out of countr y, the Court cannot declare him a 
proclaimed offender.  Here, the pe titioner is willing and ready to 
surrender before the Court and face the cases against him, but he is 
not being allowed to do so.  
  
12.              Mr. Ma khdoom Ali Khan, learned Attorney Ge neral for Pakistan, appeared in 
response to the Court’s notice.  In Const. Pe tition No. 55/2003, learne d Attorney General for 
Pakistan raised the fo llowing contentions: -  
(1)               The petition is not maintainable as it is not based on any grievance or 
injury suffered. It is based on speculation and apprehension. There is not a single case where the Court has exercised jurisdiction on mere apprehension;   
(2)               The petition does not raise a question of public importance with reference 
to the enforcement of fundamental rights.  Hence, jurisdiction of this 
Hon’ble Court under Article 184(3) cannot be invoked.  If the scope of jurisdiction were enlarged, every habeas  corpus petition would be filed in 
the Supreme Court; and  
(3)               No evidentiary value is  attached to a press report where a person 
claims a legal right on its basis.  The petiti oner cannot rely on the 
press statements for the enforcemen t of his fundamen tal rights.  The 
cases where this Hon’ble Court ha s taken into consideration press 
reports are distinguishable.  
  
13.              Syed Sh abbar Raza Rizvi, learne d Advocate General Punjab  adopted the arguments 
advanced by the learned Attorney General for Paki stan.  He submitted that  the jurisdiction under Article 184(3) and Ar ticle 199 is concurrent, co-e xtensive and co-e xistent.  He further submitted 
that in the present case, tho ugh the petition was dismissed by the High Court on technical 
grounds, it has not been decided on  merits.  If the petitioner feel s that his fundame ntal right of 
access to justice has been denied , he should avail the remedy provi ded under Article 199 of the 
Constitution.    
14.              In rebuttal, Malik Muhammad Qayyum, learned counsel  for the petitioner submitted 
as under: -  
(1)               Pursuant to the direction of the C ourt comments have  been filed by 
the respondents.  They have not a dverted to the allegations in the 
petition.  Certain legal objections ha ve been raised.  Maintainability is 
to be decided by the Court with the petition.  On mer its, in paragraph 
4, all allegations in the petition are denied. It ha s been stated that “all 
actions taken by the respondents are in accordance with law." This is 
a petition for enforcement of fund amental rights on the basis of 
assertions made in the petition.  In Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s 
case (PLD 1993 SC 473), the question of mainta inability was decided 
along with the petition;   
(2)               In the connected matter , the petitioner had approached the High 
Court.  The High Court held that it  would not entert ain the petition 
unless the petitioner firs t surrendered himself;  
(3)               Press reports, unless contradicted, are referred to in  support of the 
respective cases.  In the pres ent case, besides other State 
functionaries, Genera l Pervez Musharraf himself made press 
statements, which remain uncontrad icted to date.  The petitioner 
wants to defend the cases against him.   The right to enter, and remain 
in Pakistan, is a fundamental right.   The respondents may arrest him, 
if he is required in any case; and  
(4)               The earliest case on the evidentiary value of the press statements is 
Islamic Republic of Paki stan v. Abdul Wali Khan  (PLD 1976 SC 57).  
The contents of the press statemen ts in the presen t case were never denied by the respondents.  
  
15.              It is significant to note that neither in the comments nor du ring the course of 
arguments the Federal Government/ Government of Punjab has disput ed the right of the 
petitioner being a citizen of Paki stan to come back to the c ountry nor referr ed nor brought on 
record any agreement/document pe rmitting the government to force the petitioner to live in exile. 
16.              Clause (3 ) of Article 184 and sub-clause (c) of  clause (1) of Article 199 of the
Constitution are for the enforcemen t of any of the funda mental rights conferred by Chapter 1 o f
Part II. For their prope r appreciation, they are reproduced below: -  
“Article 184(3): Without prejudice to the provisi ons of Arti cle 199, the 
Supreme Court shall, if it  considers that a question of public importance with 
reference to the enforcem ent of any of the Fundame ntal Rights conferred by 
Chapter 1 of Part II is i nvolved, have the power to ma ke an order of the nature 
mentioned in the said Article.”  
  
“Article 199(1): Subject to the Constitution, a High Court may, if it is satisfied 
that no other adequate remedy is provided by law, - - - -  
(c)      on the applica tion of any aggrieved person , make an order giving 
such directions to any person or authority, including any 
Government exercising any power or performing a ny function in, 
or in relation to, any territory with in the jurisdiction of that Court 
as may be appropriate for th e enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II.”  
  
17.              Articles 199 and 184(3)  regulate the jurisdiction of the Superior Courts and do not 
oust it.  Perusal of clau se (3) of Article 184 un equivocally postulates that two conditions are 
precedent for invoking said clause. Firstly, th e petition must clearly  demonstrate that the 
grievance relates to violation of fundamental rights. Seco ndly, the violation is of nature of public importance, which has been interpreted to m ean any invasion of indi vidual freedom, liberty, 
fundamental rights, incl uding effectiveness and safeguard for their implementatio n. Therefore, 
having regard to the c onnotation of the words “public importance” , the facts and circumstances 
of each case would have to be  scrutinized on its own merits.  
18.              Wi th the assistance of learned counsel for the parties, we have surveyed the relevant 
case law.  In Manzoor Elahi ’s case , (PLD 1975 SC 66), Benazir Bhutto ’s case  (PLD 1988 SC 
416), Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case  (PLD 1993 SC 473), Wasey Zafar ’s case  (PLD 
1994 SC 621), I.A. Sharwani ’s case  (1991 SCMR 1041) and the Employees of Pakistan Law 
Commission ’s v. Ministry of Works  (1994 SCMR 1548), questions of general public importance, 
which affected the people at large, were involved.  In Asad Ali ’s case  (PLD 1998 SC 161), the 
Supreme Court entertained petition  directly for the r eason that the issue af fected the judicial 
system of the country.  The finding and conclusion of the Supreme Court in Syed Zulfiqar Mehdi 
v.  Pakistan International  Airlines Corporation  (1998 SCMR 793 ) have never been deviated 
from.  It is advantageo us to quote the relevant  observation occurring at page 801 of the report, 
which reads as under: -  
“The issues arising in a case, cannot be  considered as a question of public 
importance, if the decision of the is sues affects only the rights of an 
individual or a group of individuals.  The issue in order to assume the 
character of public import ance must be such that its decision affects the 
rights and liberties of people at larg e.  The adjective ‘public’ necessarily 
implies a thing belonging to people at large, the nation, the State or a 
community as a whole.  Th erefore, if a controversy is raised in which only a 
particular group of people is  interested and the body of the people as a whole 
or the entire community ha s no interest, it cannot be  treated as a case of 
public importance.”  
  19.              Same view has recently been taken in Watan Party ’s case  (PLD 2003 SC 74).  It was 
a 5 – member Bench judgment to  which one of us (Nazim Hussai n Siddiqui, now Chief Justice) 
was a party, wherein re liance was placed on Manzoor Elahi ’s case  and the above view was 
endorsed.  For facility of refe rence, the relevant observations in the latter case are reproduced 
below: -  
“Now, what is meant by a question of public importan ce.  The term ‘public’ 
is invariably employed in contradistinction to the terms private or individual, 
and connotes, as an adjective, someth ing pertaining to, or belonging to the 
people, relating to a na tion, State or community…”  
  
“The learned Attorney-General is clea rly right in saying that a case does not 
involve a question of publ ic importance merely b ecause it concerns the 
arrest and detention of an important pers on like a Member of  Parliament.  In 
order to acquire pub lic importance, the case must obviously raise a question, 
which is of interest to, or affects the whole body of people or an entire 
community.”    
  
Although the Supreme Court thereafter in a number of cases, such as Amanullah Khan v. 
Chairman, Medical Research Council  (1995 SCMR 202) and Mrs. Shahida Za hir Abbasi v. 
President of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 632) has taken a different view, ye t the cases under Article 
184(3) have been brought within the parameters of the observations referred to above.    
20.              Learned Attorney General took us through Article 32 of the Cons titution of India, 
which is pari materia  with Article 184(3) of th e Constitution of Pakistan .  It is noted that the 
words ‘ question of publ ic importance ’ are not used in Article 32 of the Constitution of India.  The 
Constitutions of 1956  and 1962 also did not ha ve these words.  There is a conscious departure 
and the words ‘ question of publ ic importance ’ in Article 184(3) have be en used with a purpose.  
The parameters of the ju risdiction under Article 18 4(3) are that the petiti on must raise a question of public importance.  In India, where there is no such requireme nt, the Supreme C ourt of India, 
has held that if the scope of Artic le 32 of the Indian Constitution were to be enlarged, it would 
immensely increase the dockets of  the Court.  Such jurisdicti on remains with the High Court.  
21.              Under Ar ticle 199 wider powe rs have been co nferred upon High C ourt than Supreme 
Court and these powers cover more areas than a mere enforcement of Funda mental Rights. It is 
significant to note that under Ar ticle 184(3), Supreme Court only in terferes in cases of violation 
of Fundamental Rights, which are of public importance, whereas, no such c ondition is provided 
under Article 199. Mere fact that a question of arrest or detent ion of an impo rtant person is 
involved, this by itself is not en ough to invoke clause (3) of Articl e 184. What is es sential is that 
the question so raised must rela te to the interest of whole bod y of the people or an entire 
community.  To put it in other wo rds, the case must be such, whic h raises a question affecting the 
legal rights or liabilities of the public or the comm unity at large, irrespective of the fact that who 
raised such question.  
22.              L earned Attorney General rightly contended that  the present petition, at best, raises an 
individual grievance and if the scope of jurisdicti on under Article 184(3) were enlarged, every habeas 
corpus petition would be filed in the Supreme Court.  However, wh ere a fundamental right has been 
breached, but the breach is of such a nature that it raises a question of  public importance, then a petition 
can be directly filed in the Supreme Court.   In National Steel Rolling Mill s v. Province of West 
Pakistan  (1968 SCMR 317), it was held  that the Court would not en tertain a petition, which had 
its basis on a premature act.  Th is has recently been followed in two judgm ents by the Lahore 
High Court, namely, Zakariya v. Agricultural De velopment Bank of Pakistan  (2002 CLD 953) 
and Liaqat Ali v. City Nazim  (2003 MLD 1635).  Clearly, the Court can be move d only when a 
violation of some legal or constit utional right actually takes place.  
23.              As  far as evidentiary value of press reports is concerned, it  is noted that one line of 
precedents in the jurisprudence of the country is that no  evidentiary value is attached to the press reports and no relian ce can be placed on a press report where a person claims a legal right on its 
basis.  The Courts do not decide cases on press reports. In the other line of authorities, such as 
Wali Khan ’s case , Ms Benazir Bhutto ’s case  and Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case , the 
press reports are relied upon , but these cases are distinguishable.   This Court in exercise of its 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) does not act as a Court of app eal, but as a Court of review.  
24.              Ba sically to believe or disbelieve the press reports is a question of fact and before 
reaching a positive conclusion su ch facts need to be examined, keeping in view their intrinsic 
value. Many such statements ar e given only for politi cal purposes, bu t the same cannot straight 
away be taken as proved nor at their own they create a legal righ t nor any eviden tiary value can 
be attached to press reports, unl ess irrefutable evidence is brought on record for esta blishing their 
correctness.  
25.              The conten tion of learned counsel fo r the petitioner that al ready instructions have 
been issued to all airports that  if the petitioner come s back to Pakistan he  shall be immediately 
deported back is without any tang ible evidence. No such document has been brought on record in 
support of this plea. It is me rely an apprehension in his mind and its legal adjudication is not 
possible nor it can be made a basis for invoking extr aordinary jurisdiction . Learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan , during the course of argum ents, repeatedly stated that an invitation would 
not be sent to him for returning to the country.  As regards the plea that in the recent past his 
family members were deported, it is significant to  note that neither fu ll particulars regarding 
alleged deportation have been brough t on record nor this plea is to  be resolved by this Court 
within the scope of clause  (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution. A petition cannot be entertained 
merely on apprehension whatever its nature may be.  
26.              Adverting to the facts of this case, it is noted that the petitioner in Const. Petition No.55/2003
has not raised any question of public importance. It appears that he left the country on his own an dnothing material has been brought on record to substan tiate the assertion that he was forced to live in
exile.  The petitioner has prayed for a relief, which, in fact, always remained available to him an d
he himself was solely responsible for not availing  it earlier. Const. Peti tion No.55 of 2003 is not
maintainable.  
27.              As  far as the plea regarding declaration of the petitioner  as proclaimed offender is 
concerned, it is noted that earl ier the petitioner had ne ver taken concrete step s for coming back to 
the country in spite of the fact that there was no order prohibitin g his entry in the country.  As 
such, it would be an exercise in  futility to examine the issue.  Even a proclaimed offender when 
arrested has a right to be tried according to law and th is right cannot be take n away from him. By 
remaining absconder one loses certa in rights but not th e right of trial accord ing to law. Learned 
counsel for the petitioner, during th e course of argum ents, submitted that the petitioner is ready to 
face the cases registered against him and he will not mind even if he is arrested at the airport. 
Under the circumstances, Civil Petit ion No.791 of 2004 also fails.  
28.              It is not denied by learned Attorney General for Pakistan and Advocate General 
Punjab nor so could be denied th at Article 15 of the Constitution bestows a ri ght on every citizen 
of Pakistan to enter or move fr eely throughout the country and to reside and settle  in any part 
thereof.  It is a settled proposit ion of law that the right to ente r in the country cannot be denied 
but a citizen can be restrained from going out of the country. Th e petitioner is  a citizen of 
Pakistan and has a constitutional righ t to enter and rema in in th e country.  
29.              Above are the r easons of the Short Order dated 7.4.2004, whereb y above petitions
were dismissed as under: -  
                   “During the course  of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner 
submitted that the petitioner is ready to face the case s registered against him. 
He also stated that the petitioner will not mind even if  he is arrested at the 
airport.  2.                For reasons to be recorded later on, both these petition are 
dismissed with an observation that the petitioner may come back from abroad 
subject to the la w of the country.”     
C.J. 
  
  J. 
  
  J. 
  
Islamabad  
7.4.2004  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  