IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
Justice Aqeel Ahmed Abbasi   
 
Criminal Original Petition No.  06 of 20 24 
(Contempt proceedings against Senator F esal Vawda 
on account of his press conference in the National 
Press Club, Islamabad on 15.05.2024)  
 
In attendance : 
On Court’s Notice:    Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
     Attorney -General for Pakistan  
     Malik Javed Iqbal,  
Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 
For Court’s Assista nce:  Hafiz Arfat Ahmed, ASC.  
 
For Contemnors:    Mr. Fesal Vawda, In-person a/w  
Mr. Saleem -ul-Haq, Advocate.   
 
Dr. Farogh Naseem, ASC  
     a/w Mr. Mustafa Kamal  
      
On behalf of  
26 News Channels:   Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC . 
a/w Rana Jawad, Director, G eo News.  
Mr. Javed Soomro, Bureau Chief,  
Hum News.  
Mr. Faisal Hakeem, Bureau Chief , 
Such News.  
Mr. Khalid Azeem, Bureau Chief,  
Samaa News.  
Mr. Abdul Jabbar, Bureau Chief,  
AAJ News.  
Mr. Nisar Abid, Bureau Chief,  
Capital T.V.  
Mr. Naeem Mehboob, Bureau Chief,  
Abb Takk News.  
Malik Manzoor, Bureau Chief,  
Channel 5.  
Mr. M. Bakhsh Soomro, Bureau Chief,  
Time News.  
Mr. Kashif Rafique, Bureau Chief,  
News One.  
Mr. Abdullah Qamar, Director,  
T.V. Today.  
Mr. Shahid Mehmood, GNN News.  
Mr. Jehanzaib Abbasi, Express News.  
Mr. Ghulam Murtaz, News One.  
Mr. Javed Baloch, Neo T.V.  
Mr. Qurban Baloch, AWAZ T.V.  Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  2
Mr. Qarar Hussain, Roz News . 
Mr. Azhar Farooq, ARY News.  
 
For Other Channels:   Mr. Amir Sohail, 7 News T.V.  
Mr. Adeel Waraich, Bureau Chief,  
Dunia News.  
Mr. Asif Jaffery , Bureau Chief,  
24 News.  
Mr. Faisal Sahi, Bureau Chief,  
Public News.  
Mr. Kamran Ilyas, Bureau Chief,  
92 News.  
Rana Qaiser, Director Suno News.  
Ms. Asia Kosar, Deputy Bureau Chief,  
Talon News.  
 
For PEMRA:     Nemo.  
  
Date of Hearing :   28.06.2024. 
 
ORDER  
 
1. The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  (‘the 
Constitution ’) has a few distinguishable features. One is that it 
commences ‘In the name of Allah, the most Benefic ent, the most Merciful ’ and 
its Preamble , a substantive part of the Constitutio n, stipulates that , 
‘sovereignty over the entire Universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and the 
authority to be exercised by the people of Pakistan within the limits 
prescribed by Him is a sacred trust ’.1 Therefore, at the outset , the 
Constitution negat es autocra cy, superior ity and exceptionalism while 
affirming accountability.  
 
2. This matter attends to a cherished fundamental right , freed om of 
speech and expression  and the freedom of the press . Another fundamental 
right, which may be relevant , is the right to have access to information . 
Articles 19 and 19A of the Constitution which attend to these rights are 
reproduced hereunder:  
‘19. Every citizen shall have the right to freedom of speech 
and expression, and there shall be freedom of the press, 
subject  to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the 
interest of the glory of Islam or the integrity, security or 
defence of Pakistan or any part thereof, friendly relations with 
foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation 
to contemp t of court, commission of or incitement to an 
offence. ’ 
 
                                                
1 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 2A.  Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  3
‘19A. Every citizen shall have the right to have access to 
information in all matters of public importance subject to 
regulation and reasonable restrictions imposed by law. ’  
 
3. The freedom of speec h and expression  and the freedom of the press , 
however, are not absolute and unfe ttered , as Article 19  mentions a few 
exception s, including committing  contempt of court. Article 204 of the 
Constitution describes what constitutes contempt of court , relevant  
provisions whereof are reproduced hereunder:  
204. 
‘(2)  A Court shall have power to punish any person who ’ 
 
‘(b) scandalizes the Court or otherwise does anything 
which tends to bring the Court or a Judge of the Court 
into hatred, ridicule or contempt;  
 
(c) does anything which tends to prejudice the 
determination of a matter pending before the Court; or  
 
(d) does any other thing which, by law, constitutes 
contempt of the Court. ’ 
 
 ‘In this Article, “Court” is mean t the Supreme Court or a High Court ’ 
(Article 204(1) of the Constitution).  
 
4. The law mentioned in Article s 19 and 204 is the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance, 2003  (‘the Ordinance ’).2 The Ordinance governs the powers of 
the Court with regard to contempt of court  and Order XXVII of the Supreme 
Court Rules, 1980  attends to proceedings in relation to the Contempt of 
Court . 
 
5. Pakistan was amongst the first countries to have signed t he Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights .3 Its article 19 states that ‘ everyone has the 
right to freedom of opinion and ex pression ’ but it too does not permit 
abusing or insulting anyone.  The International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights 1966,4 while guaranteeing  the right to freedom of 
expression, permits restrictions provided by law  including  for respect of the 
rights or reputations of others .5 
 
                                                
2 Ibid., Article 270AA.  
3 United Nations General Assembly resolution 217A proclaimed on 10 December 1948.  
4 International Cov enant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966, article 19(2), ratified by 
Pakistan on 23 June 2010.  
5 Ibid., article 19(3).  Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  4
6. On 15 May 2024 Mr. F esal Vawda, who is a Senator, held a press 
conference at the National Press Club, Islamabad which was broadcast on a 
number of television channels. In the press conference he leveled several 
serious and malicious allegations against the Judiciary, commented on the 
Judges of the superior courts and spoke about sub judice cases, including 
those before this Court. This Court took notice and the matter was 
numbered as Criminal Original Petition No. 6 of 2024 . A similar press 
conference was held by Mr. Mustafa Kamal, a Member of the National 
Assembly (‘ MNA ’), the following day on 16 May 2024, at the National Press 
Club, Islamabad, which was also broadcast live on a number of television 
channels.  
 
7. Mr. Fesal V awda  and Mr. Mustafa Kamal were issue d show cause 
notice s and provided time to submit their explanation s/replies.  They were 
also directed to be in attendance before this Court . Notice was also issued 
to the Attorney -General for Pakistan, under rule 7(2) of  Order XXVII of the 
Supreme Court Rules, 1980 . 
 
8. The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority ( ‘PEMRA ’) was 
directed to submit recording s of the two press  conferences together with 
their complete transcripts, including of the question and answer se ssion  
that followed , which PEMRA submitted (Cr.M.A. No. 683/2024).  
 
9. Mr. Mustafa Kamal had at the outset tendered an unconditional 
written apology  (Cr.M.A. No. 682/2024) . However, Mr. F esal Vawda in his 
reply (Cr.M.A. No. 689/2024) pointed out that obnox ious far more serious 
contemptuous statements were made about the Chief Justice of Pakistan 
but he (Qazi Faez Isa, CJ) has ignored them. He also referred to what an 
Hon’ble Judge had said about him and attributed that his press conference 
was held at someo ne’s behest. On 5 June 2024 Mr. F esal Vawda was given 
an opportunity to reflect and reconsider in the light of Islamic injunctions. 
A learned Advocate of this Court, Hafiz Arfat Ahmed , who was present in 
Court volunteered to provide a list of verses of the  Holy Qur’an and sayings 
of Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon him) with regard to 
backbiting, hurtful and/or slanderous speech.  
 
10. Mr. F esal Vawda ’s subsequent reply  (Cr.M.A. No. 895/2024)  states 
that having consulted religious scholars and c onsidered the injunctions of Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  5
Islam he realizes that he should not have said what he had said and 
tenders an unqualified apology for having done so.  
 
11. Learned Hafiz Arfat Ahmed has filed a 74 page document (CMA No. 
927/2024) which he states is a collecti on of verses from the Holy Qur’an, 
hadith and extracts from a book titled Backbiting and its Adverse Effects  by 
Husayn al -Awayishah .6 
 
12. The Holy Qur’an forbids scandalizing and slandering – ‘Woe to every 
scandalmonger and slanderer ’.7 Islam advocates pe ace, harmony and 
cooperation, and is against all those who feed discord and strife. ‘ Heed not 
a slanderer going about with malicious gossip ’.8 The Creator tells us that 
our words are recorded and we will be held accountable for each and every 
one of them – ‘not a word does he utter which is not recorded by the sentinel 
attached with him ’.9 And, if another says something scandalous/derogatory  
which is not true and one repeats it the one repeating is also accountable 
for it. Allah Almighty says, ‘ ascertain t he truth lest you harm a people 
unwittingly ’.10 Unfortunately, there are those who either knowingly, 
negligently or carelessly spread slander.  
 
13. This Court has to ensure to all that the constitutionally prescribed 
fundamental rights are not denied to the m. However, the right to freedom of 
speech and expression and the freedom of the press in Article 19 does not 
take precedence over the inviolability of the dignity  of persons and of the 
privacy of the home in Article 14, which incidentally is numerically a  prior 
fundamental right. The exhilarating elixir of free speech and media freedom 
does not permit slandering anyone, including judges and courts.  
 
14. Disagreement and discord has b ecome all too pervasive and it has 
permeated into peoples ’ behavior, ideas  and beliefs with the quick, easy and 
widespread dissemination of falsehoods and slander. The legal tool which is 
used for recompensing  the wronged and imposing heavy financial penalties  
remains under -developed and i t is effectively stymied in Pakistan. 
Resultantly defamation and spreading lies is not visited upon with 
consequences  which may curtail them . 
                                                
6 Translated by Huda Khattab, published by the International Islamic Publishing House.  
7 Al-Qur’an , surah al -Humazah (104) verse 1.  
8 Ibid., surah al -Qalam (68) verses 10 -11. 
9 Ibid., surah Qaf (50) verse 18.  
10 Ibid., surah al -Hujurat (49) verse 6.  Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  6
 
15. False accusation is a manifest sin11 and its significance is brought to 
bear by drawing a powerful similitude, ‘ Would you like to eat the flesh of 
your dead brother ’.12 To the question whether, ‘ We will be brought to account 
for what we say ’ the response of Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings 
be upon him) was rhetorical, ‘ Are people thrown onto their faces in Hell for 
anything other than the harvest of  their tongues? ’13 On another occasion he 
said that no one shall enter Paradise whose neighbor is not safe from the 
harm of his tongue.14 Imam Ghazali15 wrote that, ‘ To believe in defamation 
is worse than defamation, as defamation shows the way but belief in 
defamation gives permission. He who shows the path to a thing is not equal 
to one who admits it and gives permission. So beware of slander ers and 
defamers .’16 The broadcaster of slander, therefore, cannot take refuge in 
saying that he is not the originator of the slander ; the broadcaster must 
verify the truth or falsehood of the matter. Those who broadcast slander 
and defamatory material also corrupt those who hear it. Imam Ghazali 
wrote, ‘ The Prophet (peace and blessings be upon him) said: The hearer of 
back-biting is included within the back -biters. ’ However, he can be saved ‘ if 
the hearer protests by his tongue, he will be exempted from its sin.  If he 
cannot do it, he will think it bad in his mind. If he can shift from that place or 
change the topic, he wi ll be exempted. ’17 
 
16. In this age when lies can be globally spread with ease, and cannot be 
erased, extra care has to be exercised. If this is not done the public sphere 
is polluted and pol arised. Deception and disinformation elbows out decency 
and truth.  Those having the expertise in making lies prevail manage to 
instil hatred and destroy friendships and families. Lies also undermine the 
credibility of institutions, and have been known to set the world at war. The 
potential of harm that is in lies and sla nder can be undone and conviviality 
restored by expiation.  
 
17. ‘There are two modes of expiation of the sin of back -biting. The back -
biter will repent sincerely in mind and be sorry for that. Then he will seek 
                                                
11 Ibid., surah al -Ahzab (33) verse 58.  
12 Ibid., surah al -Hujurat (49) verse 12.  
13 Sunan al -Tirmidhi , Abwab al -Iman, Bab Ma Ja’ fi Hurmat al -Salah, Hadith No. 2616, 
transmitted by Mu’adh bin Jabal.  
14 Musnad Ahmad , Musnad al -Mukthirin, Hadith No. 6476, transmitted by Anas bin Malik.  
15 Abu Hamid al -Ghazali (1058 -1111 CE, 450 -504 Hijri) who is considered to be the 
century’s mujaddid , a renewer of the  faith.  
16 Ihya Ulum -id-Din, Chapter on Harms of the Tongue,’ quoting Musab bin Jubair.  
17 Ibid. Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  7
pardon of the back -bited person being very hu mble. ’18 Imam Ghazali follows 
this up with a discussion on whether the sin will be expiated if forgiveness 
is sought or whether for the sin to be expiated a pardon too has to be 
secured. However, we need not concern ourselves of this here because both 
the g entlemen before us realized their mistake and have in humility sought 
forgiveness and pardon.  
 
18. Mr. F esal Vawda and Mr. Mustafa Kamal  tendered unconditional 
apolog ies to this Court in writing. They have also verbally expressed 
remorse and reiterated the ir apologies in Court . There is no reason to doubt 
their sincere retrac tion and unconditional apologies. Therefore, the show 
cause notice s issued to them  are hereby withdrawn . However, if there is 
any subsequent transgression by them it may be visited upon  with 
consequences.  
 
19. Pursuant to the order dated 5 June 2024 we had issued notices to 34 
channels which had broadcast the press  conference of Mr. F esal Vawda  and 
to 28 channels which had broadcast the press conference of Mr. Mustafa 
Kamal , and had call ed upon them to submit their explanation/replies 
within two weeks as to why they should not be proceeded against for 
contempt of court. In response to the notices l earned Mr. Faisal Siddiqui 
states that he represents 26 channels , as under:  
 Television Chan nel operated by  Cr. M. A. No.  
(1) Awaz Television Networking (Pvt.) Ltd.  901/2024  
(2) Big Tree Media (Pvt.) Ltd.  902/2024  
(3) Sports Star International (Pvt.) Ltd.  903/2024  
(4) Central Media Network (Pvt.) Ltd.  904/2024  
(5) Ali Kazi (Pvt.) Ltd.  905/20 24 
(6) ARY Communications (Pvt.) Ltd.  906/2024  
(7) Jaag Broadcasting Systems (Pvt.) Ltd.  907/2024  
(8) Munta h-e-Noor Sachal T.V. (Pvt.) Ltd.  908/2024  
(9) Aurora Broadcasting Services (Pvt.) Ltd.  909/2024  
(10) M/s Vision Network Television  910/2024  
(11) Television Media Network (Pvt.) Ltd.  911/2024  
(12) Recorder T.V. Network (Pvt.) Ltd.  912/2024  
(13) M/s Iris Communications (Pvt.) Ltd.  913/2024  
                                                
18 Ibid. Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  8
(14) Royal Media Network (Pvt.) Ltd.  914/2024  
(15) East Films (Pvt.) Ltd.  915/2024  
(16) Roze (Pvt.) Ltd.  916/2024  
(17) H.B. Media (Pvt.) Ltd.  917/2024  
(18) M/s Galaxy Broadcasting Network  918/2024  
(19) Hum Network Limited  919/2024  
(20) Airwaves Media (Pvt.) Ltd.  920/2024  
(21) Interact (Pvt.) Ltd.  921/2024  
(22) Fun Infotainment SMC (Pvt.) Ltd.  922/2024  
(23) M/s National Communication Services  923/2024  
(24) Airwaves Media (Pvt.) Ltd.  924/2024  
(25) Apna T.V. Channel (Pvt.) Ltd.  925/2025  
(26) Independent Media Corp. (Pvt.) Ltd.  926/2026  
 
20. Learned Mr. Faisal Siddiqui states that he has filed ‘Prelimin ary 
Reply ’ on behalf of the abovementioned channels . However, significantly , 
not a single one of the documents , categorized as preliminary repl y, are 
signed by a representative of the said television channels . Instead they are 
signed by Mr. Faisal Siddiqui , Advocate Supreme Court, and Mr. 
Muhammad Usman Mirza, Advocate -on-Record. Therefore, the same cannot 
be categorized as replies submitted by the said channels. Nonetheless , and 
in deference to the learned counsel , we have cons idered the  said 
preliminary r eplies . All of them are identical  or nearly so, and state that 
contempt proceeding s can only be initiated if ‘mal-intent is shown ’, that it is 
a ‘settled principle of the law of Contempt ’ to establish  ‘mal-intent ’ and to 
broadcast press conferences is ‘in the public interest as it is their right and 
duty under Articles 19 and 19-A, Constitution, 1973 ’. In our considered view 
this explanation prima facie  is not justified, and all the more so, when the 
two gentlemen who had held the press conferences acknowle dge that the 
same constitute d contempt of court.  
 
21. If we accept that the said preliminary replies to be a response to the 
notices  it mean s that the television channels justify  the live broadcast of 
the said press conferences  and assume no responsibility  for their content , 
despite the learned Mr. Faisal Siddiqui stating that the contents of one of 
them did prima facie  constitute contempt . Their justification in doing so is 
that: (a) television channel s are not responsible for the content when they Criminal Original Petition No. 6/2024  9
broadca st what is said by another , (b) to constitute contempt there must be 
mal-intent and  (c) it is the right and duty of television channels to live 
broadcast  all press conferences . 
 
22. Those operating the said television channels were only issued a 
notice (an d not a show cause notice ). However, t hey have elected not to 
avail of the opportunity provided to them to reflect, relent and , if they so 
consider, to apologize. During the hearing it also transpired that even after 
the making of the contemptuous comments  they continued broadcasting 
and (later) re -broadcast the press conference(s) and/ or extracts therefrom. 
We inquired whether any retraction or apology was broadcast by any of the 
channels, and it transpired that this was not done. We are not unmindful 
that being commercial enterprises television channels make money by 
broadcasting  and advertisements . 
 
23. Therefore , we are constrained to issue show cause notices to all 34 
channels to show cause as to why they should not be proceeded against  for 
committing contempt of court . The show cause notice to be served through 
PEMRA . The replies to the show cause notices should be submitted within 
two weeks. The replies to the  show cause notice s should state (1) whether 
the press conferences were preceded with advertis ements, (2) whether there 
were any advertisements during the press conferences , (3) whether upon 
the conclusion of the press conferences there were advertisement s, (4) 
whether they were re-broadcast and (5) whether extracts therefrom were 
broadcast and (6) the amounts received in payment for  such 
advertisements . The replies to the show cause notices to be signed by the 
owner (if there is one) or the largest share /interest holder  (by whatever 
name called ) and by the operational head  of the television channel . 
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad:   
28.06.2024 
(Nasir Khan)  