Const.P No.6/2023, etc   1 
 
Table of Contents  of opinion of Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
 
Introduction   ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  ……………….. 2 
Interpretation of the phrase "subject to law" as used in Article 191  ................................ ..........  3 
Scope of entry 58 of the Federal Legislative List  ................................ ................................ ..........  6 
Intra -court appeal – a matter of practice and procedure  ................................ ............................  8 
Interpretation of entry 55 of the Federal Legislative List  ................................ ..........................  11 
Infringement of fundamental rights - a sel f-contradictory stance  ................................ .............  13 
Separation of powers vis -a-vis checks and balances  ................................ ................................ .. 14 
Legislative intervention – a check on the rule -making power of the Court  ...............................  15 
Question of maintainability of p etition and scope of Section 3 of the Act  ................................  16 
Status of benches constituted and decisions made by them during the suspension of th e Act  .............  19 
 
  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   2 
 
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - I have read the judgment authored by 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice and agree with the same. There are, however, 
some points argued by the learned counsel for the parties that I want to 
address. Hence, this note.  
Introduction  
2.    In the realm of public institutions, particularly within the 
hallowed halls of the Supreme Court, the principle of collegial working 
stands as a cornerstone for ensuring justice, fairness, and the larger 
good of the people who seek its intervention. The concentration of 
ultimate administrative powers in the hands of a single individual, such 
as the Chief Justice, runs counter to the ideals of democratic 
governance and judicial fairness. It is imperative that such powers, 
including crucial decisions on case allocations, be exercised collectively, 
harnessing the diverse perspectives and wisdom of a ll justices. This 
approach not only democratizes the decision -making process but also 
reinforces the integrity and impartiality of the court. Embracing 
collegiality in administrative decisions ensures that the court's 
functioning transcends the outdated no tion of a 'one -man show,' 
reflecting a more inclusive, transparent, and equitable judiciary that 
truly serves the public interest.  It would be hard to overestimate how 
important civility and collegiality are to the proper functioning of our 
legal system, a nd more specifically of our courts.  Nothing can be 
resolved in society without the ability to be civil and collegial. The 
stakes are high, and our ability to listen carefully, to express our ideas 
respectfully, and to collaborate for the greater good are m ore important 
than ever.1    
3.   The pivotal question involved in the present case as to the 
legislative competence of Parliament to enact the Supreme Court 
(Practice and Procedure) Act 2023 (“Act”)  revolves around the 
interpretation of the  phrase "subject to law" as used in Article 191 of 
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“Constitution”)  
and the scope of entries 55 and  58 of the Federal L egislative List as 
provided in the  Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .  
                                                           
1 Richard Wagner, Chief Justice of Canada . 
 Const.P No.6/2023, etc   3 
 
Interpretat ion of the phrase "subject to law" as used in Article 191  
4.  Let me  first take up and discuss the meaning of the phrase 
"subject to law" as used in Article 191 and then the scope of entries 55 
and 58. Article 191 is cited here for ease of reference:  
191. Rules of Procedure.  
Subject to  the Constitution and law, the Supreme Court may make 
rules regulating the practice and procedure of the Court.  
(Emhasis added)  
A bare reading of Article 191 shows that it confers the power on the 
Supreme Court to make rules of its practice and procedure  and makes 
that power “subject to the Constitution ” as well as “subject to law”. No 
one can say that the phrase "subject to law" just happened to be there 
in Article 191 accident ally without a ny meaning;  though opinions may 
differ, as they are, on what it actually means.  On its meaning, the 
learned counsel who argued before us took divergent positions and 
advanced extensive arguments to convince the Court , of their respective 
viewpoint s. To those who argued for the validity o f the Act, it means the 
law enacted by Parliament on the matter of practice and procedure of 
the Supreme Court, as the Act is;  while th ose who argued against the 
validity of the Act understand it as being some  “substantive law”  which 
operates as a limitati on on the power of the Supreme Court to make 
rules, in that if the Supreme Court makes a rule of its practice and 
procedure which conflicts with a statute enacting substantive law, in 
such an event the rule would fall because it conflicts with a substantiv e 
law. 
5.  Some of the learned counsel also argued, though half -
heartedly, that the “law” referred to in Article 191 includes the common 
law, i.e., the case law.  I would say, the term “law” has , no doubt,  been 
used in its generic and wider sense in some of the Articles of the 
Constitution,2 where it includes the common law; but when used along 
with the term “Constitution” ,3 as in Article 191,  it means as per my 
understanding the “statutory law”  only. So, w e can say that in Article 
191 the phrase “subject to law”  means subject to statutory law, i.e., the 
law made by the legislature. This point, however, does not need any 
detailed discussion , for all agree that the term “law ” wherever used in 
the Constitution  does include the statutory law.  So, one thing is clear  
                                                           
2 Such as, in Articles 4, 9 ad 24(1), etc.  
3 Such as, in Articles 175(2), 191, 202 and 275(5), etc.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   4 
 
and certain : the phrase “subject to law” in Article 191 of the 
Constitution at least means that the court in making rules of its 
practice and procedure acts subject to statutory law.  
6.  Once it is co nceded that the word “law” as used in Article 
191 of the Constitution means , or at least includes,  "statutory law", the 
bars are down; because if it means statutory law in any sense it means 
statutory law in all senses, substantive and procedural. The 
Constitution , in this regard,  makes no limitation either expressly or by 
necessary implication by adding some adjectival distinction. If our effort 
is to find the actual meaning which the words, as written  in the 
Constitution , were intende d to convey,  and not any  preconceived 
meaning, any implicit  limitation with the word " law" in the phrase 
"subject to law"  cannot be justified . I, therefore, do not subscribe  to the 
view that  the phrase "subject to law" as used in Article 19 1 means 
subject to "substantive  law” only. The word “law”  include s law in all 
senses - procedural and substantive ; enacted  directly on the matter of 
practi ce and procedure of the Supreme  Court or containing  only 
incidental or ancillary provisions .4   
7.  Nonetheless, as per the provisions of Article 191 of the 
Constitution, the initial and primary power or function, whatever may it 
be called, to make rules of its practice and procedure  is vested in the 
Supreme Cour t. But it is one thing to say  that the Supreme Court has 
the primary authority  to make rules of its practice and procedure , and  to 
assert that this authority is exclusive to the Supreme Court and the  
Legislature has  no authority  to do so  is quite another. Unless we ignore 
the phrase “ Subject to the Constitution and law”  in Article 191 , or say it 
to be redundant, t he assertion of exclusive authority of the Supreme 
Court in this regard is not sustainable . The power to deal with the 
subject of rules regulating its practice and procedure , no doubt,  
primarily vests in the Supreme Court but this is not exclusive to it. This 
rule-making power of the Supreme Court is subservient to the superior 
constituent  power and ordinary legislative power  of the Legislature.  The 
rules made by the Supreme Court are to hold the field unless changed 
                                                           
4 On this point , I am fortified by the opinion of Justice Case in Winberry v. Salisbury  5 N.J. 240 (1950) who 
interpreted in the same way,  the phrase “subject to law” in a similar provisions of Article VI, Sect ion II, paragraph 3 
of the Constitution  of the State of New Jersey (USA) which provides that "The Supreme Court shall make rules 
governing the administration of all courts in the State and, subject to law , the practice and procedure in all such 
courts."  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   5 
 
by the Legislature in the exercise of its constitu ent power  under Article 
238 or its  legislative power under Article 142 of the Constitution. This is 
my understanding  of the phrase “S ubject to the Constitution and law” 
as used in Article 191 of the Constitution.   
8.  In this regard, I am supported by the same understanding 
of the learned Judges of this Court who had made the Supreme Court 
Rules 1980 (“Rules”)  in the exercise of rule -making power conferred by 
Article 191 of the Constitution. In several provisions of the Rules , they 
specifically mentioned the Rules to be subservient to law made by the 
Legislature. Some of the such provisions of the Rules are cited here for 
reference:  
Rule 1 of Order VI:  
Save as otherwise provided by law  or these Rules, all applications shall 
be made before the Court on motion after notice to the parties affected 
thereby.  
Rule 1 of Order XI:  
Save as otherwise provided by law  or by these Rules every cause, 
appeal or matter shall be heard and disposed of by a Bench consisting 
of not less than three Judges to be nominated by the Chief Justice.  
Rule 6 of Order VII:  
Except as otherwise provided  in these Rules or by any law for t he time 
being in force , the Court fees set out in the Third Schedule to these 
Rules shall be payable on all documents mentioned therein.  
Rule 4 (1) of order XXXV:  
Save as otherwise provided by law  or by these Rules, the Chief Justice 
shall from time to t ime nominate Members from the Shariat Appellate 
Bench for hearing and disposal of cases...  
(Emphasis added)  
In the above rules, t he phrase s “save as oth erwise provided by law” and 
“except as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force” 
undoubtedly mean  statutory law , i.e., the law made by the Legislature . 
The R ules made by the Supreme Court itself, on the administrative side, 
recognize d that the Supreme Court’s  rule-making power is subject to 
legislative enactment. Thus, f rom the very be ginning after the 
promulgation of the Constitution , the Judges of the Supreme  Court 
understood  that their rule-making power is  susceptible to being 
superseded by legislative enactment , i.e., law. With respect , I am not 
able to  understand  how can the phrase  “subject to law” be inte rpreted 
as meaning anything other than what the plain meaning of these words 
state. Const.P No.6/2023, etc   6 
 
Scope of entry  58 of the Federal Legislative List  
9.  Now, I take up for discussion entry 58 of the Federal 
Legislative List which, in my opinion , further establishes  the legislative 
competence of Parliament to make law on the subject  of practice  and 
procedure  of the Supreme Court. However, before going on to that, I 
want to briefly state my understanding, in general, of the scope of the 
powers of the legislative organ of the State.  
10.  The preamble of the Constitution in unequivocal terms 
proclaims  that the sovereignty over the entire Universe belongs to 
Almighty Allah alone and the authority to be exercised by the people of 
Pakistan within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust, and that 
the State shall exercise its powers and authority through the chosen 
representatives of the people.  The people of Pakistan, as per this 
proclamation, are the trustee s of the sovereign powers and authorit y of 
the State and they are to exercise those powers and authority through 
their chosen representatives.  The L egislature is that organ of the State 
which  consists  of the chosen representatives of the people of Pakistan 
and is thus competent to exercise the  sovereign powers and authority of 
the State on behalf of the people of Pakistan. It is through the 
legislature that the people enact laws of their choice  to regulate all 
matters  in the State ; therefore,  in enacting laws the l egislature speak s 
for the people.  The legislative  power which emanates  from the people is 
plenary and embraces all law-making on every  subject  not prohibited  by 
the Constitution  either expressly5 or by necessary implication .6 In a 
Federation  like ours, the legislative powers are divided into two 
legislatures, i.e., the federal legislature (National Assembly and Senate) 
and the legislatures of the federating units  (provincial assemblies) . 
Because of this distribution of legislative powers, the questions may 
arise, as they often do , as to which legislatu re’s domain a particular 
matter  falls in; but it cannot be said without showing any express or 
implied prohibiti on in the Constitution that neither  the federal nor the 
concerned provincial legislature have the l egislative power on a 
particular subject.  In a constitutional democracy, the scope of the 
                                                           
5 Such as, Article 8 of the Constitution that prohibits making of any law which takes away or abridges any of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.  
6 Such as, Article 208 of the Constitution that confers the power, without making it subject to the Constitution or law,  
on the Supreme Court, the Federal Shariat Court and the High Courts to make rules for the appointment of officers 
and servants of those Courts and for their terms and conditions.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   7 
 
powers of the legislative organ of the State, consisting of the chosen 
representatives of the people,  unless prohibited  or circumscribed  by 
the Constitution  itself, is very wide and they (Parliament or the 
concerned provincial assembly are competent to enact laws on all 
subjects.  
11.  In the present case, it is axiomatic  that the provincial 
assemblies lack legislative competence to enact a law concerning the 
Supreme  Court; for they cannot enact a law for the whole of Pakistan7 
while the Supreme Court exercise s jurisdiction over entire contry.  
Parliament alone may legislat e through which the people of Pakistan 
can enact laws on subject s that relate to the whole of Pakistan, i.e., the 
Federation, and the entry that covers generally all those matters which 
relate to the Federation is entry 58 of the Federal L egislative List. The 
provisions whereof are reproduced here for ease of reference:  
58. Matters which  under the Constitution are within the legislative 
competence of [Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)] or relate to the Federation . 
(Emphasis added)  
This is a residuary and general entry on the legislative power of 
Parliament, and its scope extend s to and covers all those subjects  
which  are not specifically mentioned in any other entry in the List  but 
relate to the Federation and  are thus beyond the domain of p rovincia l 
assemblies’ legislative power .8  
12.  No provision in the Constitution has been p ointed out to us 
that prohibits either expressly or by necessary implication the exercise 
of legislative power of Parliament  on the subject  of practice and 
procedure of the Supreme Court, but rather the specific mention of the 
phrase “subject to law” in Article 191 of the Constitution suggests 
otherwise and repels the argument  of any implied prohibition that could  
have possibly been raised if this phrase had not been there . When 
instead of any such prohibition  there is a clear permis sibility  expressed 
by using the phrase “subject to law”  in Article 191,  the subject  of the 
practice and procedure  of the Supreme Court squarely falls within the 
scope of entry 58  of the Federal Legisla tive List and w ith respect to it,  
Parliament is fully competent to make law in the exercise of its 
                                                           
7 See The Constitution, Artic le 141.  
8 Sui Southern Gas Company v. Federation of Pakistan 2018 SCMR 802.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   8 
 
legislative power under Article 142(a) of the Constitution.  Therefore, I 
find that Parliament has competently enacted the Act on the subject of 
practice and procedure of th e Supreme Court .9 
Intra -court appeal  – a matter of practice and procedure   
13.  One matter in the Act, however, requires further 
discussion. This is Section 5 of the Act that has provided for an intra -
court appeal from an order of a b ench of the Supreme Court, exercising 
original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, to a larger 
bench.  All learned counsel conceded before us that the provisions of the 
Act generally relate to the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court;  
opinions are , however , divided  on the nature of Section 5 of the Act . 
Most of the learned counsel took it  as a substantive  provision that does 
not, according to them , fall within the scope of the practice and 
procedure of the Supreme Court.  With res pect, I hold a contrary view.  
14.  I must concede that the right of appeal is generally not a 
matter of mere procedure. Nonetheless, in the cases10 this principle was 
enunciated, the courts were dealing with a right of appeal against a 
judgment or order of a lower court to a higher court , not with an intra -
court appeal . During the hearing of arguments, I invited the attention of 
the lea rned counsel  to the two judgment s of the Lahore High Court that 
had dealt with the question as to the nature of an intra -court appeal 
and held that an intra -court appeal is not an appeal in the strict sense  
but an internal arrangement of the c ourt for reviewing its own decision . 
The purpose was that they might further assist on this point and bring 
in notice of the Court any contrary view, if any, so th at after examining 
the reasoning of  divergent views , the Court  could reach a better 
judgment.  No case pronouncing  the co ntrary view was, however, cited 
before the Court nor did any learned counsel advance arguments to 
establish that the reasoning of the Lahore High Court in holding the 
said view is in any manner flawed. The relevant extracts from the 
judgments of the Lahore  High Court are reproduced here for reference:  
                                                           
9 On this point , I am fortified by the opinion of Justice Hawkins  in Hall v.  State , 539 So. 2d 1338 (Miss. 1989 ), who 
has taken a similar view on the subject of enacting law by the  Legislature on the subject of procedure of courts by 
holding inter alia  that the power of the legislative organ of the State, being the voice of the people, extends to all 
subjects not prohibited  by the Federal or State Constitution.   
10 The principle was enunciated by the Privacy Council in Colonial Sugar Refining Co. v. Irving  (1905) AC  369, and 
adopted by this Court in Sutlej Cotton Mills  v. Industrial Court  PLD 1966 SC 472 (5MB).  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   9 
 
Muzaffar Din v. Allah Wasai PLD 1953 Lah 284 (DB)          
A Letters Patent Appeal is not really an appeal in the strict sense. It 
may be more aptly described as an internal arrangement of the Court 
for reviewing its own decision given in the first instance by one member 
of the Court. The first as well as the second decision re mains a decision 
of the Court.  
 
Abdul Haq v. Saif -Ur-Rehman PLD 1968 Lah 478 (DB)  
Even otherwise, in our opinion there is no question of any vested right 
of appeal in the appellant which was retrospectively taken away. In 
essence the Letters Patent Appeal under clause 10 is more in the 
nature of an intra Court arrangement designed to exercise control over 
its own affairs in the High Court. The appeal to the Division Bench 
against a judgment by the Single Bench is internal with the High Court 
and strictly speaking it is not in the nature of an appeal, to the superior 
Court against the decision of an inferior Court. …… Therefore, i t would 
not be correct to construe the provisions contained in clause 10 of the 
Letters Patent of the High Court of West Pakistan from the point of view 
of a right of appeal vested in the litigants.  
Needless to clarify, it is an intra -court appeal that has  been mentioned 
as Letters Patent Appeal in the above -cited observations , for it was 
called so at that time. The Division  Benches of the Lahore H igh Court 
that held the above view were headed by the distinguished Judges of 
the time ; three of whom later adorned the B ench of this Court as well. 
The Bench that decided Muzaffar Din   was headed by S. A. Rehman and 
Muhammad Jan, JJ ., while  the Bench in Abdul Haq  was comprised of 
Waheeduddin Ahmad, C. J. and Muhammad Akram, J . Having pondered  
upon the point profoundly, I find myself in agreement with their view.  
15.  No one can dispute that both the first decision by a bench 
of the c ourt and the second decision in intra -court appeal by a larger 
bench of the court are the decisions of the same c ourt rendered in the 
exercise o f the same jurisdiction, i.e. , in case of High Courts11 under the 
jurisdiction conferred by Article 199 of the Constitution and in case of 
this Court under the jurisdiction conferred by Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution . The provisions of law, like Section 5 of the Act  or Section 
3 of the Law Reforms Ordinance 1972 , which  provide for an intra -court 
appeal , do not confer any new jurisdiction. An intra -court appeal is an 
intra-court arrangement that regulate s the practice and procedure of 
the court in the exercise of a particular jurisdiction. Such an 
arrangement can be made by a court itself in the exercise of its rule -
making power  or by the competent legislature in the exercise of its 
legislative power.   
                                                           
11 Section 3 of the Law Reforms Ordinance 1972  provides for an intra -court appeal against a decree or a final order of 
a Single Bench of the High Court, passed in the exercise of original civil jurisdiction . Const.P No.6/2023, etc   10 
 
16.  This position may be illustrated by an example: if a High 
Court, in the exercise of its rule -making power,  provide s that a  petition 
filed under Article 199 of the Constitution shall be heard by a Bench of 
three Judges, no one can dispute that such power of the High Court 
relates to its practice and procedure;  likewise if a High Court by its 
rules provide s that such a petition  shall be first heard by a Single 
Bench and then by a Division B ench in intra -court appeal,  there can be 
no justifiable reason to deny that such exercise  of its rule-making power 
also relates  to the practice and procedure of the High Court . By the 
latter p rocedure, the High Court saves the time and labour of two of its 
Judges, to be utilised in dealing with other cases; for the Single Bench 
hears, discusses and decides the matter agitated in the petition and th e 
work of the Division Bench lessens  in intra -court appeal to only see 
whether there is any error in the judgment of the Single Bench and to 
correct the same, if any.12  
17.  Similar is the position with the rule -making pow er of the 
Supreme Court: it may have  in the exercise of its rule -making power  
provide d that a petition filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
would  be heard by a Full -Court Bench, as some from among the legal 
fraternity had so demand ed, or by a Bench of seven or more Judge s, or 
that such a petition would  be first heard by a Bench of three Judges 
and then by a larger Bench of four or more Judges. Both such rules 
would have  fallen within the domain of regulating the practice and 
procedure of the C ourt in exercising  one and the same jurisdiction.  
Instead of its hearing, in the first instance, by a Full -Court Bench or by 
a Bench of seven or more Judges,  the hearing of a petition filed under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution first by a Bench of three Judges and 
then by a Bench of four or more Judges in intra -court appeal clearly 
relates to regulating the practice and procedure of the Court in 
exercising its jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. The 
latter procedure would rather better serve the public interest as by such 
procedure the time and labour of many J udges of the Court is saved, to 
be utilise d in dealing with other cases. Therefore, in my considered 
view, Section 5 of the Act also fall s within the scope of the subject  of 
regulating the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court , and 
                                                           
12 Zafar Yab  v. Settlement Commissioner 1985 CLC  2647 (DB).  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   11 
 
Parliament has competently enacted it in the exercise of its legislative 
power under Article 142(a) of the Constitution  read with entry 58 of the 
Federal Legislative List.  
Interpretation of e ntry 55 of the Federal Legislative List  
18.  Even otherwise, if Section 5 of the Act is taken as the one 
that has conferred a substantive right of appeal on persons aggrieved  of 
an order passed under Article 184(3) and thus enlarged the appellate 
jurisdiction of this Court, the same will  then fall wi thin the  scope of  
entry 55 of the Federal Legislative List. The provisions of the said entry 
are reproduced  here, for ready reference:  
55. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, 
with respect to any of the matters in this List and , to such extent as is 
expressly authorized by or under the Constitution, the enlargement of 
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court , and the conferring thereon of 
supplemental powers.   
A bare reading of this entry shows that the matter of “enlargement of the 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court”  falls within the legislative competence 
of Parliament. By conferring intra -court appellate jurisdiction, Section 5 
of the Act has exactly done  this: it has enlarged the appellate 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The  point on which the learned 
counsel took divergent positions is that whether the phrase “to such 
extent as is expressly authorized by or under the Constitution” used in 
the entry is to be read with the part preceding thereto, i.e., with respect 
to the juri sdiction of other courts, or it is to be read with the part that 
follows  it, i.e., with respect to the enlargement of the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court.  I find that it is to be read with the preceding part. In 
this regard, I am fortified b y the opinion  of Ajmal Mian, CJ., expressed 
in Sh. Liaqat Hussain13. His lordship observed:    
The above entry [55] indicates that the Parliament can legislate in 
respect of jurisdiction and power of all Courts except the Supreme 
Court with respect to any of the matters in the aforesaid list but to 
such extent as is expressly authorised by or under the Constitution. It 
also indicates that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court can be 
enlarged but it cannot be curtailed.  
In the same case, Irshad Hasan Khan, J., also in his concurring note 
read entry 55 in the like manner, thus:  
                                                           
13 Sh. Liaqat Hussain v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1999 SC 504.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   12 
 
The above Entry [55] indicates that the Parliament can legislate in 
respect of jurisdiction and power of all Courts except the Supreme 
Court with respect to any of  the matters in the aforesaid List but to 
such extent as expressly authorised by or under the Constitution. 
Clearly, the jurisd iction of the Supreme Court can be enlarged but 
cannot be curtailed in any circumstances whatsoever.  
It may, however,  be mentioned here that Nasir Aslam Zahid, J. , read the 
said qualifying phrase, in N.I.C.C. Corporation ,14 with the latter part of 
the entry as to the enlargement of the jurisdiction  of the Supreme 
Court . But this view seems to be solitary and does not find support, as 
in the case of Baz Muhammad Kakar,15 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, 
CJ., again read entry 55 in the same sense as was read by Ajmal Mian, 
CJ., thus:  
At this juncture, it may also be noticed that Entry 55 of the Federal 
Legislative List (Fourth Schedule to the Constitution) authorizes the 
Parliament to make law on jurisdiction and powers of all courts with 
respect to any of the matters in the said List to such extent as is 
expressly authorized by or under the Constitution.  
Therefore , it can safely be concluded that the phrase “to such extent as 
is expressly authorized by or under the Constitution”  used in entry 55 is 
to be read with the part preceding thereto, i.e., with respect to the 
jurisdiction of other courts, and not with the part that follows  it, i.e., 
with respect to the enlargement of  the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court. There is  no constraint in the said entry as to the  enlargement of 
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the conferring thereon of 
supplemental powers.  The only limitation is that Parliament cannot 
curtail the jur isdiction of the Supreme Court.  
 Retrospective effect of right of intra -court appeal  
19.  Although subsection (2) of Section 5 of the Act has not 
obtained on its validity the support of the majority of this Bench, I want 
to say a few words on it before closing my discussion on Section 5.  
20.  Subsection (2) of Section 5 of  the Act  provides  that the right 
of intra -court appeal shall also be available to an aggrieved person 
against whom an order has been made under Article 184 (3) of the 
Constitution  prior t o the commencement of the  Act. We all know that a  
legislature that is competent to make  a law also has the power to 
legislate it retrospectively  and can by legislative fiat even take away 
                                                           
14 Province of Punjab  v. National Industrial Cooperative Credit Corporation 2000 S CMR 567 . 
15 Baz Muhammad Kakar v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2012 SC 923.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   13 
 
vested rights or affect past and closed transactions.16 When the 
legislature gives retrospective operation to the law enacted, the party 
affected thereby ca nnot plead infringement of his rights as a ground for 
declaring the law invalid.17 Our Constitution only bars retrospective 
legislation on criminal liabilities,  not on civil rights and obligations.18 
However,  whether or not subsection (2) of Section 5 of the Act has, in 
fact and in effect, affected vested rights or past and closed transaction s 
is a different question, which I find now unnecessary to decide upon.  
Infringement of fundamental rights - a self -contradictory stance  
21.  The Hon’ble Chief Justice has held in  his judgment that the 
Act does not in any manner compromise the independence of the 
judiciary but rather it does the very opposite in ensuring the 
enforcement of fundamental rights and strengthening the indepen dence 
of the Judiciary. I fully agree with this finding of his lordship  and am of  
the considered view that devolving two19 of the administrative powers of 
the office of the Chief Justice to the Committee of three Judges, which 
also includes the Chief Justice,  does not in any manner infringe the 
independen ce of the j udiciary  nor does the provision of a right of intra -
court appeal affect the right of access to justice. Further, I want to 
underline another aspect of the challenge made to the validity of the Act 
on this ground .    
22.  Almost all the learned counsel who argued against the 
constitutional validity of the Act admitted that the prov isions of the Act  
would bring more transparency in the working of this Court and 
improve the fair and efficient administration of justice  by it . Their 
contention basically was that such provisions should have been made 
by this Court in the exercise of its rule -making power  under Article 191 
of the Constitution , not by Parliament through the enactment of the 
Act. In essence, the y objected  that a wrong body has made  these 
provisions , not that the provisions are wrong . If it is so as they say, 
their stance th at the provisions of the Act have  infringed the 
fundamental rights becomes self -contradictory and does not survive; for 
                                                           
16 Haider Automobile  v. Pakistan 1969 SC 623 (5MB); Molasses Trading v. Federation of Pakistan  1993 SCMR 1905 
(5MB).  
17 Annoor Textile v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 1994 SC 568.  
18 The Constitution, Article 12.  
19 Powers to constitute benches  and invoke suo motu  original jurisdiction.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   14 
 
such provisions would not have  infringed  any of the fundamental rights 
if they had been included in the Rules of this Court, then cannot they 
do so while they are included in the Act. It amounts to blow ing hot and 
cold in the same breath if one says that such provisions added in the 
Rules of the Court would have been perfectly valid  on the touchstone of 
fundamental rights  but are invalid w hen they have been enacted in the 
Act.   
Separation of powers vis -a-vis checks and balances  
23.  In support of the said stance, some of the learned counsel 
arguing against the validity of the Act also referr ed to the doctrine of 
separation of powers between three organs of the State (legislature, 
executive and judiciary) and their independence in their respective 
domains.  In so referring, the learned counsel failed to appreciate that 
the doctrine of separation of powers does not stand alone but is 
interlinked with the doctrine of checks and balances.  
24.  The separation of powers, no doubt, serves as a 
foundational principle in constitutional governance, delineating distinct 
functions among the three organs of the State : the legislature entrusted 
with making laws, the executive with implementing laws, and the 
judiciary with interpreting and applying laws. All three organs of the 
State play their respective roles to achieve the common goal, i.e., the 
rule of law. Each organ operates indepe ndently within its designated 
sphere, without undue influence or interference from the others. This 
separation aims to prevent the concentration of power in  any one organ 
of the State and safeguards against tyranny by ensuring that no organ 
becomes too pow erful.  For, ‘ [t]he accumulation of all powers, legislative, 
executive, and judicia l, in the same hands, whether of one, a few, or 
many, and whether hereditary, self -appointed, or elective, may justly be 
pronounced the very definition of tyranny.’20 
25.  Concomitant with the doctrine of separation of powers is, 
however, the doctrine of ch ecks and balances. It  acknowledges that 
while each organ operates independently, there should be some 
mechanism to restrain each organ within the limits of its power and to 
counteract whenever such limits are exceeded.  It is through checks and 
                                                           
20 James Madison, The Federalist , ed. Jacob E. Cooke (Wesleyan University Press, 1961).  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   15 
 
balances that each organ  is empow ered to moni tor and, if necessary, 
undo  the actions of the  others, ensuring that no organ  exceeds its 
constitutional authority . The very strength of the separation of powers 
is thus dependent on the checks and balances, making  no organ 
absolutely unchecked . Therefore, i n essence, the separation of powers 
and the checks and balances are intertwined concepts that reinforce the 
stability and integrit y of a constitutional democracy; t hey provi de a 
framework where each organ  is both empowered and limited, foster ing 
both cooperation and accountability . 
26.  It is also important to emphasize  that although the three 
organ s of the State are separate, equal  and coordinate, they  are after all 
integral par ts of one State. Operating as parts of a single entity, these 
organs cannot function in isolation or within watertight compartments. 
For the State to  effectively serve its people, each organ should find 
cooperation from the other two. Confrontations arisin g from clashes in 
constitutional authority are rarely in the public interest and should be 
avoided whenever possible. Instead, the guiding principles of good 
gover nance, i.e., mutual understand ing, respect and self -restraint, 
should be pursued. These princ iples serve as the lubricants that 
facilitate the smooth functioning of the constitutional machinery of 
governance and foster an environment where the collective welfare of 
the public takes precedence.21 In this regard, ‘ a just respect for the 
legislature requires that the obligation of its laws should not be 
unnec essarily and wantonly assailed.’22  
Legislative intervention – a check on the rule -making power of the Court  
27.  As stated above , under Article 191 of the Constitution, the 
initial and primary power to make rules for regulating its practice and 
procedure is vested in the Supreme Court.  The power vested in the 
Legislatu re to enact a law on this subject  is, to my understanding, like a  
check on the rule -making power of the Supreme Court. I find that the 
constitution -makers intended  to give the Court , in the first instance,  the 
authority to  make the  rules regulating its practice and procedure  and 
leave to the  Legislature the authority to  intervene only when it is 
                                                           
21 See my opinions in Hadayat Ullah v. Federation of Pakistan 2022 SCMR 1691 and Imran Khan v. Federation of 
Pakistan  2023 SCP 326.  
22 Ex parte Randolph, 20 F. Cas. 242 (1833) per Marshall, C. J.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   16 
 
necessary to do so in  the public interest, with the belief that such  
necessity will seldom arise and that the Legislature will exercise its 
authority with the  restraint that  is befitting to the relations between the  
two organs of  the State . The final authority on the subject  is, thus, 
allocated to the Legislature, which is directly responsible to the people.  
So fa r as arising of the necessity of enacting the provisions that are 
included in the Act , in the public interest , is conce rned, such necessity 
was voiced by almost all segment s of the legal fraternity and i s well 
documented.23  
Question of maintainability of petition and s cope of Section 3 of the Act  
28.  Next, I want to deal with the contention of  some of the 
learned counsel as to the in validity of Section 3 of the Act  and their 
reliance in this regard on my two orders24 passed on chamber  appeals 
filed against the administrative orders of the Registrar  of this Court  
under the Rules . I would reproduc e the provisions of Section 3 of the 
Act here for the convenience of reference : 
Any matter invoking exercise of original jurisdiction under clause (3) of 
Article 184 of the Constitution  shall be first placed before the 
Committee  [comprising the Chief Justice and two most senior Judges]  
constituted under section 2 for examination and if the Committee is of 
the view that a question of public importance with reference to 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chap ter I of 
Part II of the Constitution is involved , it shall constitute a Bench 
comprising not less than three Judges of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan which may also include the members of the Committee, for 
adjudication of the matter.  
        (Emphasis adde d) 
It was argued that in the said orders , I held that the issue as to the 
maintainability of an appeal or petition cannot be decided by the 
Registrar in the exercise of its administrative powers under the Rules 
nor can it be decided by a Judge hearing an a dministrative appeal 
against an administrative order of the Registrar. If it is so as held by 
me, it was argued, then how can an admi nistrative Committee decide 
the question of maintainability of a petition under Article 184(3) of the 
                                                           
23 Pakistan Bar Council and Supreme Court Bar Association passed several resolutions on it; many Judges of the 
Supreme Court emphasized on it in their judgments; and the academia wrote much on it. See Yass er Kureshi, 
Seeking Supremacy: The Pursuit of Judicial Power in Pakistan  (2022); Asher Asif Qazi, A Government of Judges: A 
Story of The Pakistani Supreme Court's Strategic Expansion  (2018); Dr. Osama Siddique, The Judicialization of 
Politics in Pakistan: The Supreme Court after the Lawyers' Movement   (2015); Maryam S. Khan, Genesis and 
Evolution of Public Interest Litigation in the Supreme Court of Pakistan: Toward A Dynamic Theory of 
Judicialization  (2015).  
24 Qausain Faisal v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2 022 SC 675; Ahsan Abid v. Khusru Bakhtiar PLD 2022 SC 712.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   17 
 
Constitution  under Se ction 3 of the Act ? At first blush, I must concede, 
the argument  appears attractive but it does not survive closer scrutiny.  
29.  Section 3 of the Act has used the words “any matter”, not “a 
petition”, in relation to invoking original j urisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution  nor has it used the words “ suo motu ” or “on 
its own”. Therefore, there is an ambiguity as to the true meaning and 
scope of those words that calls for a judicial interpretation  until the 
legislature explains it by adding s ome explanation to Section 3 of the 
Act or making the language thereof more clear by amendment. The 
matter of ambiguity is whether the words “any matter” used in Section 
3 of the Act include both the petitions filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  and the suo motu  invoking of original jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution , or they only mean the latter .  
30.  It is by now well -accepted that in case of doubt or difficulty 
in ascribing proper meaning to a provision or a word in a provi sion of 
law, the Statement of Objects and Reasons in the Bill introduced for the 
enactment of that law  may also be looked into, to ascertain the  
intention of the Legislature .25 Given  this principle, when we see the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons in the Bill that was introduced in the 
National Assembly for the enactment of the Act, we find therein this 
statement:    
Whereas, the exercise of original jurisdiction by the Supreme Court 
under clause (3) of  Article 184 of  the Constitution has been a subject of 
discussion by various forums with respect to invoking of suo motu 
powers , constitution  of benches and the absence  of right of  appeal.  
 
               (Emphasis added)  
The above  statement greatly helps remove the ambiguity and identifies 
the intention of the Legislature  in enacting Section 3 of the Act . It shows 
in unequivocal  terms that it was “invoking of suo motu  powers”  in 
relation to the exercise of original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution that the Legislature intended to 
deal with. This intention of the Legislature is further evident from the 
                                                           
25 Paramatha Nath v. Kamir Mondal PLD 1965 SC 434; Aamer Raza v. Minhaj Ahmad 2012   SCMR   6; DBA, 
Rawalpindi v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2015 SC  401 per Khosa, J.; Rangaswamy v. Commissioner of We alth Tax 
1998   PTD   421. Const.P No.6/2023, etc   18 
 
matter described next in the above statement,  i.e., the constitution of 
benches. Both the p owers of suo motu  invoking original jurisdiction26 
and constituting benches27 were earlier being exercised by one person, 
the Chief Justice; it is these administrative powers that have now been  
conferred on the  Committee comprising three persons, i.e., the Chief 
Justice  and the two most senior Judges - nothing more nothing less. 
Neither the Chief Justice was earlier competent, or used, to decide the 
maintainability of the petitions filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitu tion, nor can the Committee do so under Section 3 of the Act. 
My orders referred to by the learned counsel , therefore,  do not conflict 
in any manner with such scope of Section 3 of the Act.  
31.  There is, however, one more thing that I want to underline 
in this regard. The ratio of the judgment passed by a five -member 
Bench of this Court in SMC No.4/202128 as partially modified by 
Section 3 of the Act is that now the Committee comprising the Chief 
Justice and two most senior Judges is the sole au thority by and 
through which the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution can be invoked suo motu ; no Judge or Bench of this Court 
can do so. This is the law of the land to date; it must be applied and 
complied with in letter and  spirit . The Benches of this Court hearing the 
petitions filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution should , therefore , 
as a first step  in the proceedings  ask the petitioner to show how he has 
an interest in the matter agitated in the petition. If he fa ils to do so , the 
petition  should be referred to the Committee to decide upon the 
question of whether  or not it finds appropriate to invoke the jurisdiction 
of the Court suo motu  in the matter agitated in the petition . The 
Benches of this Court hearing suc h petitions must be watchful that a 
petitioner who has at all no interest in the matter may not be allowed to 
indirectly frustrate the object o f Section 3 of the Act merely  by filing a 
petition under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution. It is a well -settled  
                                                           
26 A five -member Bench of this Court held in SMC No.4/2021 (PLD 2022 SC 306) that the Chief Justice is the sole 
authority by and through whom the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution can be invoked 
suo motu . 
27 The Rules, Order XI.  
28 PLD 2022 SC 306.   Const.P No.6/2023, etc   19 
 
principle of law that what cannot be done directly (per directum)  is not 
permissible to be done indirectly (per obliquum) .29 
Status of benches constituted and decisions made  by them during the 
suspension of the Act  
32.  Lastly, I want to address another submission of some of the 
learned counsel who argued  against the validity of the Act, i.e., if the 
validity of the Act is upheld by the Court, the constitution of Benches 
by the then Hon’ble Chief Justice and the decision made by those 
Benches during the period of suspension of the  operation of the  Act 
may be protected under the doctrine of past and closed transaction s. 
33.  To avoid this question, I had earlier expressed my view that 
until the question of the constitutionality of the Act was decided, the 
cases invoking the original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution or that which involved the interpretation of the 
constitutional provisions  should be adjourned or heard by a Full-Court 
Bench.30 Nonetheless, I have now thought over the question as it has 
actually arisen and the ramifications of its answer in either way, in light 
of the cases where this Court espoused the doctrine  of past and closed 
transaction s. The principle that I gathered from reading such cases31 is 
that the acts done in accordance with the law prevailing at the time  of 
their doing  are generally protected under this doctrine.  The operation of 
the Act having been suspended by an eight -member Bench of this Court, 
the then Hon’ble Chief Justice constituted the Benches in accordance 
with the law that was prevailing at that time, i.e., Order XI of the Rules. 
One may argue that the Court should not have suspended the operation 
of the Act, but cannot deny the fact that it was indeed suspended. So 
when applying  the said  principle to the question under consideration, we 
find that the act of constituting Benches by the then Hon’ble Chief  
Justice should be protected unless some exceptional circumstances  may 
justify departure f rom the principle. No one from  among the learned 
                                                           
29 Abdul Baqi v. Govt. of Pakistan PLD 1968 SC 313; Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan PLD 1993 SC 473; 
Hanif Abbasi v. Imran Khan PLD 2018 SC 189.  
30 See my note dated 22.06.2023 in Jawwad S.Khawaja v. Fderation of Pakistan (2023 SCP 190) and my notes dated 
18.08.2023 and 29.08.2023 in Imran Khan v. Federation of Pakistan (2023 SCP 228 and 267).  
31 Income -Tax Officer v. Cement Agencies Ltd. PLD 1969  SC  322; Faizur Rehman v. N.W.F.P. Public Service 
Commission 1996  SCMR  589; Govt. of N. W.F.P.  v. Muhammad Irshad P LD 1995 SC 281  (5MB); Mehram Ali v. 
Federation of Pakistan PLD 1998 SC 1445 (5MB); Liaqat  Hussain  v. Federation of Pakistan P LD 1999 SC 504  
(9MB) ; Said Muhammad v. State 2000  SCMR 1076; Pakistan Steel Mills v. Azam Katper 2002  SCMR  1023; 
Mubeen -us-Salam  v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2006 SC 602  (9MB); Muhammad Idrees v. Agricultural 
Developmen t Bank PLD 2007 SC  681 (9MB); Muhammad Ishaq v. Muhammad Shafiq 2007  SCMR  1773; 
Muhammad Safdar v. Punjab Land Commission 2012  SCMR  1725  (4MB); Moizuddin v. Mansoor Khalil 
2017  SCMR  1787.  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   20 
 
counsel who argued this case before us presented or pointed out any of 
such exceptional circumstances.  
34.  When the  inconvenience or injustice likely to occur due to 
applying or non -applying the doctrine  of past and closed transaction s is 
measured on the principle of proportionality, the scales tilt in favour of 
following the above principle rather than the exception  thereof; for a 
great amount of public time had been spent in hearing and deciding the 
cases by the Benches of this Court constituted by the then Hon’ble 
Chief Justice.  I would therefore apply the doctrine of past and closed 
transactions to the acts of const itution of benches and decisions of the 
cases by those benches during the period of suspension of the operation 
of the Act.  
35.  However , in order to give effect to  the provisions of Section s 
4 and 5 of the Act to a possible extent , the review petitions filed against 
orders passed in jurisdiction under Article 184(3) should  be treated as 
appeal s, on applications made in this regard, with permission to file 
additional grounds of challenge and dealt with accordi ngly under 
Section 5 of  the Act  while the review petitions filed in other cases that 
fall within the category mentioned in Section 4 of the Act may be fixed 
for hearing before the Bench es comprising not less than five Judges of 
the Court . This course, in my view, would best serv e the public interest.  
36.  Since I have addressed  herein  some points that are not 
included in the lead ing judgment authored by the Hon’ble Chief Justice, 
let this be circulated among my learned colleagues  who joined in para 1 
of the short order of the Cou rt in sustain ing the constitutional validity 
of the Act . 
 
Judge  
  Const.P No.6/2023, etc   21 
 
