IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
 
Constitution Petition No.35 of 2013  
(Multi Billion Scam in the EOBI)  
 
Voluntary App eared: Mr. Huzaifa Rehman, Special Correspondence  
    (Investigation), Capital TV)  
On Court Notice:   Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG  
For M/o OP & HRD:  Mr. Munir Qureshi, Secretary  
For EOBI :   Mr. M. Bilal, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Babar Bilal, ASC  
    Mr. Parvez Ahme d, Director General (Audit)  
    Mr. Asif Azad, Director (Investment)  
    Mr. Abdul Latif, Director (Law)  
 
For FIA:    Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Addl. D.G.  
    Mr. Qudrat Ullah Khan, Director, Punjab  
    Mr. Jamil Ahmed Khan Mayo, A.D. FIA  
For DHA, Islamabad : Mr. Ahmar Bilal Soofi, ASC  
    Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
For Pak -Arab Housing  Mr. Ali Sibtain Fazli, ASC  
Scheme & M/s Vital  Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR  
Enterprizes Pvt. Ltd:   
 
For Vision Developer  
Pvt. Ltd.    Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
 
For Capital T.V.:   Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC  (Voluntarily appeared)  
     
Date of hearing   19.7.2013  
 
O R D E R  
 On the last date of hearing we have passed the following order. Paragraph 
2 of the same is reproduced as under: - 
“2. Mr. Ahmar Bilal, Soofi, learned ASC for DHA, c ontroverted the 
stand and stated that title of plots have been conferred upon the owners by 
executing allotment letters in their favour. It is to be noted that 
transfer/proprietary rights of the plots cannot be conferred merely on the 
basis of allotment le tters, unless there is proper documentation as per 
Transfer of Property Act, Stamp Act and Registration Act. Be that as it may, 
to watch the interest  of the old age employees, who are the contributories to 
this fund and contribution is being deducted from their monthly salaries, we 
direct that pending decision of this Constitution Petition, the DHA shall Const. P.35 of 2013  2
deposit the amount noted above with the Registrar of this Court on or before 
19th July, 2013, who shall invest the same in some profit bearing scheme. ”  
2. Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Additional D.G. FIA has submitted a 
report in respect of 321 kanals land and plots purchased in Sector F, Phase -
I, DHA Islamabad, Rawalpindi. Details of the amounts have been 
mentioned as follows: - 
 I “Purchase of 321 kanals land b y EOBI from DHA, Islamabad  
a. EOBI invested an amount of Rs.15.473 billion for purchase of 
321 kanal commercial land from DHA Islamabad through an 
agreement in January, 2012. The entire amount has been paid 
by EOBI to DHA in lieu of allotment letters of the p lots but 
nothing is in physical possession of EOBI, as the said area 
has not been fully developed so far.  
b. The property under reference was got evaluated by M/s 
Diamen Associates by EOBI. The employee of the evaluator 
when confronted during enquiry, it tra nspired that the land 
was actually evaluated by one Shujja, a rep of the company 
based at Islamabad, who had no relevant 
qualification/experience of evaluation of property involving 
such heavy amount as he had always been working in a 
pharmaceutical compan y and it was his first experience.  
c. It is interested to note that EOBI got assessed 93 properties 
purchased by them from M/s Diamen Associates and paid an 
amount of Rs.44 millions for the said job.  
d. During enquiry, various persons voluntrarily appeared befo re 
the inquiry officer and claimed that the title/ownership of the 
property, which has been purchased by EOBI from DHA is 
still not clear, for which the revenue authorities and CDA 
have been asked to confirm the reality.  
e. The purchase has not been found in  accordance with PPRA 
Rules as neither any advertisement was given nor bids were 
invited, hence, the transparency was seriously compromised 
in this shady deal.  
f. In terms of Clause 3.1 of the agreement dated 18.01.2012, the 
DHA was bound to given possession  of land to EOBI after 
receipt of the payment of total consideration, however, the 
said possession has not been delivered to EOBI so far.  
g. According to the agreement, DHA was supposed to complete 
the development work within 03 months of the signing of 
agreement dated 18.1.2012, however, the same has not still 
been completed.  
h. Col. ® Tariq Mahmood, ex -Director DHA produced a copy of 
an agreement signed by DHA Islamabad, Bharia Town Ltd 
(BTL) and Habib Rafique Ltd. (HRL) on 2.6.2009. On perusal 
of the said agr eement, it appears that according to various Const. P.35 of 2013  3
clauses of the said agreement (clause 4.12, 5.4, 5.7 etc) DHA 
had surrendered all rights of dealing with, marketing, 
promoting and selling of the said land (which is now a part of 
the sale agreement executed bet ween EOBI and DHA) 
Similarly, according to clause 8.5, 8.52 (a,d), the DHA 
agreed that 70% proceed of the sale of the said commercial 
area will go to Bahria Town. In order to verify the existence 
of the said agreement, the officers of DHA, the management 
of HRL and Malik Riaz Hussain, who was one of the 
signatory of the agreement on behalf  f Bahria Town Limited 
have been examined. All the three parties have sta ted that  
subsequent to the agreement dated 2.7.2009 it was mutually 
allowed to DHA to sell the la nd in question  to EOIB. This 
aspect needs further verification during enquiry.  
i. The purchase of property has been made without approval of 
the trustee, as pointed out in the audit report.  
Similarly regarding purchase of Phase No.1, DHA following details  have been 
furnished :- 
II Purchase of property in Phase -1, Sector F, DHA,             
Rawalpindi  
a. The said purchase including 23 co mmercial plots (08 
marlas each), 12 residential plots (02 kanal each), 162 
defence villas of 03 bedrooms and 29 defence villas of 05 
bedrooms.  
b. The deal made on 5.3.2013 in lieu of consideration of 
Rs.6.825 billion without prior approval of the BOT.  
c. M/s NESPAK has been requested for evaluation of the 
said property as per market value, Similarly , CDA and 
ICT Revenue Authorities appr oached for the 
determination of the title/ownership of the property.”  
  
When we inquired from learned counsel appearing for DHA as to whether in 
compliance of direction of this Court amount  of rupees 22.295 billion received 
from EOBI by  DHA , have been depo sited with the Registrar of this Court 
pending decision of the case , he explain ed that DHA has transferred title of the 
plots to EOBI by issuing provisional allotment letter. We have examined the 
same. Prima facie,  this document by no standard can be consi dered to be a 
transfer deed under the Transfer of Property Act read with Registration and the 
Stamp Act, etc. However, he further stated that the amount received from the 
EOBI was spent in clearing the liabilities of the DHA and out of 22 billions Const. P.35 of 2013  4
about 12  billions ha ve been paid to Bahria Town, Pvt. Ltd. for development 
purposes. Be that as it may, we are not concerned about merit of the transaction 
between DHA and Bahria Town because, prima facie , we noted that both EOBI 
and DHA have entered into transact ion which is not transparent , as our concern 
is to watch and protect the interest of the old age employees, who are the 
contributories to this fund and contribution is being deducted from their monthly 
salaries.   
2. Therefore,  under the circumstances, we d irect that all the amounts lying in 
the accounts of DHA Islamabad Rawalpindi  respectively shall stand frozen 
henceforth till the amount of Rs.22.295  is deposited with the Registrar. As far as 
the transaction towards the receipt of the amount is concerned, no fresh account 
shall be open ed and the already operating account s shall remain accumulating 
towards the amount noted herein above. However, during course of the day 
learned counsel shall supply  the complete account numbers  maintained by DHA, 
Islamabad an d Rawalpindi  with the Banks (Financial Institutions) alongwith 
Balance in each account, to the Registrar. The concerned bank s having accounts 
of DHA shall be sending daily report to the Registrar about the amount which is 
being received. In the meanwhile, whenever, both the DHAs agree to deposit the 
amount an application shall be moved for passing appropriate orders. In view of 
the facts and circumstances, the FIA shall continue its inquiries and proceed 
against those persons whosoever are responsible both from EOBI and from the 
DHAs, etc.  
3. The FIA in Enquiries Nos.233/2013 FIA A CC. Lahore and No.237/2013 
FIA A CC. Lahore  with regard to Eden Housing Scheme Pvt. Ltd., have made 
following observations :- 
 “The detail of the schemes of the Eden Housing Ltd, in which the EOBI 
has invested a sum of Rs.1.90 billion, has been made in five schemes of the 
Eden Housing Pvt. Limited on exorbitant price. One Scheme is situated in 
Faisalabad and 4 housing Schemes are situated in Lahore. Mr. Zia Altaf, 
present Chief Execut ive/Director of M/s Eden Housing joined enquiry on Const. P.35 of 2013  5
6.7.2013 and submitted an Undertaking on Stamp Paper, duly attested by 
the notary public, the relevant para of the same is reproduced as under: - 
‘Be that as it may, in order to show its bonafides, Eden 
unconditionally offers to buy back the sale deeds/transaction 
and or to accept cancellation for the same and to return the 
entire sum of money (Rs.1,875,999,938/ -) to the EOBI’s 
account in exchange for return of the land by EOBI to Eden. ’ 
Likewise in Enquiry No.237/2013 FIA ACC LHR, has observed as under: - 
 “Enquiry No.237/2013 FIA ACC, LAHORE”  
“EOBI had purchased land measuring 2162 Marlas comprising 
(350 residential plots of various sizes) and 339.19 Marlas 
(comprising 65 commercial plots of various sizes) l ocated at Eden 
Villas Housing Scheme, Faisalabad from Dr. Mohammad Amjad 
(Chairman Eden Housing Ltd.) having its office at Eden Tower M -
3, 82/E -1, Boulevard, Gulberg -III, Lahore at highly inflated price 
of Rs.900 Million. During the enquiry process, Mr. Zi a Altaf 
present Chief Executive/Director of M/s Eden  Housing joined 
enquiry on 6.7.2013 and submitted an Undertaking on Stamp 
Paper, duly attested by the notary public, the relevant para of the 
same is reproduced as under:  
“Be that as it may, ir order to s how its bonafides,     Eden 
unconditionally offers to buy back the sale 
deeds/transaction and or to accept cancellation of the 
sdame and to return the entire sum of money (Rs.1, 876 
Million) to the EOBI’s account in exchange for return of 
the land by EOBI to Eden.”  
The Additional D.G. FIA stated that according to his information Eden Housing 
Ltd. has deposited a cheque s in the sum noted above in both the enquiries with  
the Registrar  of this Court . In such view of the matter, we direct the Additional 
D.G. to  ascertain  as to whether cheque s have been deposited in respect of both 
the transactions noted herein above and if not so the persons responsible on 
behalf of Eden Housing Pvt. Ltd. be directed to do the needful during course of 
the day failing which Regis trar shall submit a report for passing appropriate 
orders by one of us in Chambers.  
4. In Enquiry No.232/2013 FIA ACCT/LHR the seller has made following 
statement: - 
“The seller has submitted an affidavit mentioning that, if EOBI 
deems fit,  he is willing t o return the full amount and take back his 
property.”  
 
5. In Enquiry No.234/2013 FIA ACC/LHR, M/s Vision Developers Pvt. Ltd 
has made following statement: - 
“he has finalized the deal with bona fide intentions but he is 
voluntarily ready to cancel the deal and ready to pay back the 
entire amount to EOBI within a reasonable period in lieu of 
property sold to avoid any dispute.”  Const. P.35 of 2013  6
6. In Enquir y No.238/2013 FIA ACC, Lahore the following statement has 
been made by the M/s Vision Developers before the inquiry team :- 
“he has finalized the deal with bona fide intentions but he is 
voluntarily ready to cancel the  deal and ready to pay back 
the entire amount to EOBI within a reasonable period in 
lieu of property sold to avoid any dispute.”   
7. In Enquiry No.240/2013 FIA  ACC, Lahore an affidavit has signed by the 
CEO of Pak Arab Housing Scheme in the following terms: - 
“It is submitted that should the EOBI so required Vital 
Enterprises Pvt. Ltd should be pleased to return the 
payments received thus far, as per the express provisions of 
the agreement”  
As above parties have shown interest to deposit the amount as per the statement 
which has been reproduced herein above for the property solely purchased by 
them from EOBI  and on 17.7.2013 they were to deposit amounts received b y 
them but so far said amounts have  not been deposited with the Registrar, 
therefore, the order of even date which has been passed against the DHA, 
Islamabad and Rawalpindi shall also operate in the same manners against  all of 
them as well.   
8. In respect  of transaction of the land measuring 1  kanal 19 marlas situated 
at Odharwal, District Chakwal, the following observations have been made: - 
 “During inquiry, the record from EOBI was procured and the 
revenue record has also been collected. The statement of  Halqa 
Patwari has been recorded. On perusal of record and statement of 
Halqa Patwari, the following facts have come  on record :- 
a. The purchase was made in response to an offer made 
by one Muhammad Sana ul Haq without observing the 
PPRA  
Rules/ EOBI Rules an d without seeking approval from 
BOT. The seller himself has mentioned the price of the 
land @ Rs.12,00,000/ - per marla approx. whereas the 
deal was finally struck @ Rs.15,50,000/ - per marla.  
b. The property as per EOBI document was purchased 
against considera tion of Rs.6,04,50,000/ - whereas, 
according to registered deed, the price was shown as 
Rs.1,17, 00,000/ - 
c. As per Valuation Table of the Board of Revenue, 
Punjab, District Chakwal, the price of the commercial 
land in the said village has been fixed as Rs.60, 000/- 
per marla, whereas, EOBI purchased the said Const. P.35 of 2013  7
commercial plot in the same village against 
Rs.15,50,000/ - per marla.  
d. The title of the property purchased by EOBI is not 
clear and the litigation is still pending in the Civil 
Court.  
e. As per information gat hered during enquiry, Mr. Sana ul 
Haq, seller of the land, is happens to be the brother of 
Raja Azeem (son in law ) of Raja Parvez Ashraf, Ex - 
Prima Minister , is a political worker of PPP and he was 
given party ticket for contesting election in NA -60. 
f. It ha s also been noticed that the property was 
purchased from Mr. Sana ul Haq, but the cheques 
against the price of land were issued by EOBI in the 
name of one Azhar Hussain on behalf of the owner.  
g. It is evident from the above mentioned facts that 
through this  fraudulent deal huge loss was caused to 
the Govt. Exchequer and wrongful gain was given to 
the seller on political consideration. However, the 
concurrence officers/officials of EOBI and seller are 
yet to be examined ”. 
Additional D.G. also informed us that in respect of the above case FIR No.26/2013 
under Sections 409, 420, 109 PPC read with Section 5  (2) of the Act-II, 1947 has  
been registered but so far no arrest has been caused. The FIA is directed to cause 
arrest of the culprits involved in the above sc am without any delay.   
9. The Additional D.G. further state d that in respect of the purchase of plot 
measuring 8 kanals located at mouza Kallar Kahar , in the report  FIA ha d made 
following observations: - 
“a. This property was also purchased without seeking approval 
form BOT and despite objection from two members of purchase 
committee for investment in small towns.  
b. As per sale deed, the property was purchased from one 
Maqsood ul Hassan, the brother of Sana ul Haq, from whom a 
land measuring 01 kanal 19 marla  in Chakwal was purchased 
by EOBI.  
c. The land in question is a joint property, which was purchased 
for Rs.320,00,000/ - (Rs.200,000/ - per marla) whereas, 
according to sale deed, the price of the property is mentioned 
as Rs.52,80,000/ -. On the other hand, acco rding to Valuation 
Table of the Revenue Department, the commercial property in 
the said village has been determined @ Rs.30,000/ - per marla.  Const. P.35 of 2013  8
d. The cheques for payment in this deal also were issued by EOBI 
in favour of Mr. Azhar Hussain, who had received the amount 
of the sale of property purchased by EOBI in Chakwal.  
e. According to the statement of Halqa Patwari, the possession of 
the land is still with the seller party.  
f. It is evident from the above mentioned facts that through this 
fraudulent deal huge loss wa s caused to the Govt. Exchequer 
and wrongful gain was given to the seller on political 
consideration. However, the concerned officres/officials of 
EOBI and seller are yet to be examined.  
He stated that FIR in the above case is likely to be registered duri ng course of the 
day and the accused persons involved in the scam shall also be arrested.  
10. So far as the property of Crown Plaza Plot No.5 -A, F-7 Markaz, Islamabad 
is concerned, the inquiry is under process , as evaluation reports have not been 
received  so far .  
11. It is further stated by Additional D.G. FIA that an FIR No.25/13 has been 
registered in respect of the vehicle i.e. Prado Land Cruiser allegedly purchased by 
the EOBI in violation of rules. He added that the vehicle has been recovered and 
seized and the  person involved namely Wahid Khurshid, Director Investigation , 
has already in custody in a case registered at Karachi.  
12. As far as enquiries with regard to the properties situated in other cities  
owned by EOBI are concerned, the same are likely to be completed before the 
next date of hearing.  
13. Mr. Huzaifa Rehman , Special Corresponde nt, Capital TV  appeared and 
stated that he was threatened by the son of the owner of Capital T.V. , namely , 
Hassaam Riaz Sheikh.  It is to be noted that reportedly  action  against the persons 
who ha d threatened him has already been initiated  by the Police.  Mr. Tariq 
Mehmood, learned ASC appeared voluntarily on behalf of the said TV Channel 
and stated that he is not the only person who has disclosed the instant alleg ed 
scam, but it is a team work  which is  headed by one Abdul Sattar , therefore, Mr. Const. P.35 of 2013  9
Huzaifa Rehman who is  a youngman, should not  claim credit of this news item  
alone . As far as registration of FIR by the Police against the owner of T.V. 
Channel  is concerned , no action is called for by this Court , as now it is the job of 
the Police to deal with the issue.  
 The matter is adjourned to 26.7.2013. All concerned be informed  
accordingly.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
  
 
              Judge  
 
           
              Judge  
 
Islamabad, the  
19th July, 2013.         
M. Azhar Malik  * 