IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ather Saeed  
 
 
 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 74 OF 2012 IN SUO MOTU 
CASE NO. 04 OF 2010   
 
 
Contempt Proceedings against Raja Pervaiz Ashraf, the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan in compliance with this Court’s order 
dated 08.08.2012 . 
 
 
 
In attendance : Raja Pervaiz Ashraf, Prime Minister 
of Pakistan  with  
 Mr. Farooq H. Naik, Federal Minister 
for Law & Justice . 
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Irfan Qadir ,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan  with 
Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, 
Deputy Attorney -General for 
Pakistan.  
 
Date of hearing:    18.09.2012  
 
 
ORDER  
 
 
On the last date o f hearing , i.e.  27.08.2012 the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan Raja Pervaiz Ashraf had appeared before this 
Court  in person alongwith the Federal Minister for  Law and  Justice  
and had sought time to understand the issue at hand in all its 
complexities and to mak e serious, sincere and earnest effort s to 
take steps towards implementation of the direction contained  in 
paragraph No. 178 of the judgment handed down by this Court  in 
the case of Dr. Mubashir Hassan  and thus, the hearing of this Criminal Original Petition No. 74 o f 2012 in Suo Motu Case No. 04 of 2010  
 2 
matter had been adjourned  till today. The Prime Minister of 
Pakistan has again appeared before the Cour t today and at the 
outset he has  informed that he has already issued the necessary 
direction to the Federa l Minister for Law and Justice  to implement 
the relevant direction conta ined in paragraph No. 178 of the afore -
referred judgment. During the course of his appearance he has, 
within the view of the Court , once again directed the Federal 
Minister for Law and Justice regarding implementation of this 
Court’s above said direction  in its letter and spirit. The Prime 
Minister of Pakistan has gone on to s ubmit  that there are certain 
concerns of the Federation  of Pakistan which may be attended to 
by this Court while finally disposing of the matter and that till 
such final disposition of  the matter his personal appearance may 
be dispensed with. We appreciate the efforts made by the Prime 
Minister towards resolution of this long -standing issue and have 
apprised  him that for final disposition of the matter certain steps 
need to be taken whi ch include  a written authorization by the 
Prime Minister regarding such implementation, drafting of the 
relevant communication, dispatch of such communication  to and 
receipt  of the same  by the Swiss and other authorities and final 
confirmation  of such rece ipt of the relevant communication by the 
concerned authorities abroad. The Prime Minister has directed the 
Federal Minister for Law and Justice present in the Court to 
cooperate with the Court regarding taking of all such steps. We 
understand that taking o f all such steps may require some  time for 
which a time -frame needs to be determined. In this connection the 
Prime Minister and the Federal Minister for Law and Justice have 
undertaken that on  25.09.2012 the necessary authorization shall 
be produced before  this Court and a draft communication shall 
also be made available before this Court for this Court to examine 
as to whether the same meets the requirements of paragraph No. 
178 of the judgment handed down by this Court in the case of Dr. 
Mubashir Hassan  or not .  After th ose stages are  over a time -frame 
shall be fixed by the Court for taking of the remaining  steps.  
 Criminal Original Petition No. 74 o f 2012 in Suo Motu Case No. 04 of 2010  
 3 
2. Adjourned to 25.09.2012.  The appearance of Raja Pervaiz 
Ashraf, Prime Minister of Pakistan / Chief Executive of the 
Federation  in Court in  person in the present proceedings  is 
exempted till further orders.  
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge                             Judge  
 
Judge                             Judge  
 
Islamabad  
18.09.2012  
Arif 