IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Civil Petition No.1 59 of 2024.   
(Against the order of Lahore High Court , Lahore dated 12.1.2024, passed 
in Writ Petition No. 2224 /2024)  
 
Umar Aslam Khan  
           …….Petitioner  
 
Versus  
Election Commission of Pakistan, etc  
            ….Respondent(s)  
 
For the Petitioner (s):  Syed Ali Zafar, ASC.  
    Zahid Nawaz Cheema, ASC.  
Ch. Akhtar Ali , AOR.  
 
For the respondents:  Mr. Rashid Hanif, ASC.  
Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR.  
 
For the ECP:   Falak Sher, Consultant Law.  
 
Date of hearing:   26.01.2024  
 
ORDER  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J . – The petitioner s eeks leave to appeal 
against the order dated 1 2.01.2024, passed by a Full Bench of the 
Lahore High Court, Lahore, whereby his nomination paper for seat of 
the National Assembly from NA-87, Khushab , was rejected  on the 
ground that he is a proclaimed offender in a criminal case.  
2.   Briefly, the facts are that the nomination paper of the 
petitioner was rejected by the Returning Officer (“RO”)  on the same 
ground on 30.12.2023 , however, on appeal , the Appellate Tribunal set 
aside the order of the RO and accepted the nomination paper o f the 
petitioner.  The objector -respondent challenged the order of the 
Appellate Tribunal through a writ petition in the High Court , which vide 
order dated 12. 01.2024  was allowed and the nomination paper of the 
petitione r stood rejected . 
3.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have 
gone through the record. It is pointed out that the same bench of the 
High Court vide order of the even date in another election case (W.P. 
2383/2024) titled Tajammal Abbas v. Returning Officer, et c  discarded C.P. No.159/2024 . 2 
 
the ground of proclaimed offender and accepted the nomination paper 
of the candidate by holding  that “[i]t is settled law that if a person is 
fugitive from law, he does not lose all his rights and mere abscondence 
of an accused is nowhere reco gnized ground to eliminate him to contest  
the election.”  Yet a diametrically opposite view was taken by the same 
bench of the High Court, in a case having similar facts , in the impugned 
order.  
4.  Learned counsel for the respondent as well as the learned  
counsel for the ECP were asked to refer to any provision of law that 
disqualifies a proclaimed offender from contesting the elections but they 
were unable to refer to any provision from the Election s Act, 2017 or 
from the Constitution. Since there is no p rovision either in the 
Constitution or in the Elections Act that makes a proclaimed offender 
disqualified from contesting the election, the courts cannot on their own 
create such additional disqualification, without any backing of the law. 
Further, i n this  particular case, the petitioner was declared a 
proclaimed  offender in criminal case FIR N o. 231/23 registered at Police 
Station, Khushab. However, he obtained a protective bail in the said 
case by surrender ing himself t o the court; he, therefore,  cann ot be 
considered a proclaimed offender.  We may point out that Article 62 (1) 
(d), (e), (f) and (g) has been recently declared by this Court, in Civil 
Appeal No. 982 of 2018 etc titled Hamza Rasheed K han v. Election 
Appellate Tribunal  & Others , not to be self -executory and to serve as 
guideline s for the voters in  exercising their right to vote, hence even 
being a proclaimed offender does not attract  the disqualification under 
the said provision s.    
5.  In view of the above , this petition is converted into an 
appeal and the same is allowed . The impugned order of the High Court 
is set aside and the nomination paper of the petitioner for the seat of a 
Member of the National Assembly , NA-87, Khushab -I, stand s accepted. 
The Elec tion Commission of Pakistan shall ensure that all the necessary 
steps to be taken  in the electoral process are completed forthwith  so 
that the petitioner can contest the election on the scheduled date for 
the said seat, without fail.    
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
26th January, 2024.  
Approved for reporting  Judge  
 
Judge  
 
 C.P. No.159/2024 . 3 
 
Sadaqat  Judge  
 