IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
 
 PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah    
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
   Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
   Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
    
 
SUO MOTU  CASE NO. 1 OF 20 23 
(Suo Motu Regarding Holding of General Elections  
to the Provincial Assemblies of Punjab and KP)  
And  
CONST. PETITION NO.1 OF 2023  
And  
CONST. PETITION NO.2 OF 2023  
 
 
 
Islamabad High Court Bar Association 
Islamabad through its Presiden t Muhammad 
Shoaib Shaheen, ASC Islamabad  
(in Const.P.1/2023)   
  
Muhammad Sibtain Khan and others  
(in Const.P.2/2023)                 
…Petitioner(s)  
  
Versus  
 
Election Commission of Pakistan through 
the Chief Election Commissioner, Islamabad 
and othe rs   
(in Const.P.1&2/2023)                
…Respondent(s)  
  
 
 
For the petitioner  : Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC.  
Mr. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC.  
Assisted by :  
Ayan Memon, Adv.  
Ms. Amna Khalili, Adv.  
Mr. Agha Ali Durrani, Adv.  
Mr. Arif Ansari, Adv.  
 (in Const. P.1 o f 202 3) 
   SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  2
   
For the petitioner  : Syed Ali Zafar, ASC  
Mr. Sarfraz Ahmad Cheema, ASC  
Mr. Zahid Nawaz Cheema, ASC  
Ch. Faisal Fareed, ASC.  
Mr. Safdar Shaheen Pirzada, ASC  
Mr. Ashfaq Ahmed Kharal, ASC  
Mr. Amir Saeed Rawn, ASC  
(in Const. P. 2 of 2023)  
 
On Court’s Notice    
   
For Federation of Pak.  : Mr. Shehzad Ata Elahi,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
Malik Javaid Iqbal Wains, Addl. AG  
Assisted by:  
Ms. Mehwish Batool, Adv.  
Mr. Aitzaz ul Haque, Adv.  
Ms. Maryam Rasheed, Adv .  
 
For President of Pak.  : Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
Mr. Amir Malik, AOR  
Assisted by:  
Malik Ghulam Sabir, Adv.  
Mr. M . Shakeel Mughal, Adv.  
Mr. Maqbool Ahmed, Adv.  
Sameen Qureshi, Adv.  
   
For Governor KP  : Mr. Khalid Ishaq, ASC.  
   
For Governor Pu njab  : Mr. Mustafa Ramday, ASC.  
Mr. Jahanzeb Awan, ASC  
Mr. Rashid Hafeez, ASC.  
Assisted by:  
Ms. Zoe K. Khan, Adv.  
Mr. Ahmed Junaid, Adv.  
Mr. Akbar Khan, Adv.  
Mr. Uzair Shafi, Adv.  
Barrister Maria Haq, Adv.  
Barrister Salman Ahmed, Adv.   
   
For ECP  : Mr. Sajeel Shehryar Swati, ASC.  
Assisted by:  
Barrister Saman Mamoon, Adv.  
Ms. Kiran Khadijah, Adv.  
Mr. Zafar Iqbal, Special Secy.  
Mr. Muhammad Arshad, DG Law  
Mr. Khurram Shehzad, Addl. DG Law   
Ms. Saima Tariq Janjua, DD (Law)  
Ms. Bushra Rasheed, Law Officer  
Mr. Zaigh um Anees, Law Officer  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Muhammad Shan Gul, AG  
Malik Waseem Mumtaz, Addl. AG  
Mr. Sana Ullah Zahid, Addl. AG  SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  3
Assisted by:  
Mr. Khurram Chughtai, Adv.  
Mr. Usman Ghani, Adv.  
Mr. Raza Rehman, Adv.  
Mr. Ahmed Raza Sarwar,  
Addl. Chief Sec. Law (Pb)   
   
For Govt. of KPK  : Mr. Aamir  Javaid , AG 
Sardar Ali Raza, Addl. AG  
Mian Shafaqat Jan, Addl. AG  
   
For Govt. of  
Baluchistan  : Mr. Asif Reki, A .G 
Mr. M. Ayaz Swati, Addl. AG.  
   
For Govt. of Sindh  : Mr. Hassan Akbar, A .G  
Mr. Saifullah, AAG  
(through V.L. Karachi)  
Mr. Fauzi Zafar, Addl. AG  
Mr. Zeeshan Edhi, Addl. AG  
   
For ICT  : Mr. Jehangir Khan Jadoon,  AG 
   
For Pak. Bar Council  : Mr. Haroon -ur-Rasheed, ASC.  
Vice Chairman, PBC  
Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, ASC.  
Chairman, E xecutive Council.  
   
For Supreme Court  
Bar Association  : Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC.  
President SCBA  
Mr. Muqtadir Akhtar Shabbir, ASC /  
Secretary SCBA    
Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman,  ASC/ Addl. 
Secretary  
   
For PTI  : Syed Ali Zafar, ASC.  
Ch. Faisal Fareed , ASC.  
Mr. Safdar Shaheen Pirzada, ASC  
Mr. Ashfaq Kharal, ASC  
   
For PPPP  : Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC.  
Assisted by:  
Barrister Sheraz Shaukat  Rajpar   
 
For PML(N)  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, ASC.  
Mr. Anees Shehzad, AOR.  
   
For JUIP  : Mr. Kamran Mu rtaza, Sr. ASC.  
   
For Jamat -e-Islami  : Mr.Ghulam Mohyuddin Malik, ASC  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
   
For PML (Awami)  : Mr. Azhar Siddiqui, ASC  
   
Date of h earing   : 28.02.2023.  
 
* * * * * * * * *  SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  4
O R D E R  
 
   By a majority of 3:2 (Mr. Just ice Syed Mansoor Ali  
Shah and Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail dissenting) and 
for detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject to what is 
set out therein by way of amplification or otherwise, these 
matters are disposed  of in the following terms:  
 
1. Parliamentary democrac y is one of the salient features of 
the Constitution. There can be no parliamentary democracy 
without Parliament or the Provincial Assemblies. And there can 
be neither Parliament nor Provincial Assemblies without the 
holding of general elections as envisag ed, required and 
mandated by and under the Constitution and in accordance 
therewith.  Elections, and the periodic holding of elections, 
therefore underpin the very fabric of the Constitution . They are a 
sine qua  non for parliamentary dem ocracy , and ensure that t he 
sacred trust of sovereignty entrusted to the people of Pakistan is 
always in the hands of their chosen representatives . 
 
2. While the holding of general elections has different 
aspects an d requirements, one that is absolutely cruci al is t he 
timeframe or period in which such elections are to be held. The 
Constitution envisages two such periods, being of sixty and 
ninety days respectively . In relation to a Provincial Assem bly,  
the first period applies when the Assembly dissolves on t he 
expiration of its term  under Article 107  and the se cond period is 
prescribed when it is sooner dissolved  under Article 112 . The 
time periods so set down in Article 22 4(1) and (2) r espect ively 
are constitutional imperatives that command c omplete fidelity . SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  5
We are here concerned with the dissolution of two Provincial 
Assemblies before the expiry of their terms and the refore to the 
holding of general elections in relation to each within 90 days.  
  
3. It is in the foregoing context that t hree questions have to 
be consider ed by the Court. The Assemblies in question are 
those  of the Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  Provinces, wh ich 
dissol ved on 14.01.2023 and 18.01.2023 respectively . In both 
cases, the then Chief Ministers tendered advice to their 
respective Governors  under Article 112(1) of the Constitution to 
dissolve the Assem bly. In the case of the Punjab Province the 
Governo r chose not to act on the said advice so that the 
Assembly stood dissolved on the expiry of 48 hours, on the date 
just mentioned. In the case of the KPK Province, the Governor 
did act on the advice and mad e an order dissolving the 
Assembly, on 18.01.2023. The questions which have been 
considered with the assistance of learned counsel for the various 
parties and the Law Officers are as follows:  
 
1.  Who has the constitutional responsibility and 
authority for  appointing the date for the holding of a 
general e lection to a Provincial Assembly, upon its 
dissolution in the various situations envisaged by and 
under the Constitution?  
 
2.  How and when is  this constitutional responsibility 
to be discharged?  
 
3.  What  are the constitutional responsibilities and 
duties  of the Federation and the Province with regard to 
the holding of the general election?  
 
 
4. The Constitution envisages three situations for the 
dissolution of a Provincial Assembly. These, in the context of t he 
role of the Governor, are as follows.  SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  6
 
5. The firs t situation is set out in clause (2) of Article 112. 
This envisages the dissolution of the Assembly by an order made 
by the Governor at his di scretion, subject to the previous 
approval of the Preside nt and fulfillment of the conditions set 
out therein. In this situation, the Assembly cannot, and does 
not, dissolve without an order being made by the Governor , and 
dissolves immediately on the maki ng of the order . 
 
6. The second situation is set out in clause (1) of Article 112, 
when the Chief Minister advises  dissolution. This situation can 
be divided into two sub -categories, which are as follows:  
 
a. The first is where the Governor acts on the advice 
tendered and makes an order dissolving the 
Assembly. Here, the Ass embly dissolves immediately 
on the making of the o rder. 
 
b. The second sub -category is where the Governor does 
not make an order of dissolution  on the advice 
tendered. Here, the Assembly stands d issolved on 
the expiry of forty -eight hours from the tendering o f 
the advice by the Chief Minister  (i.e., by the e fflux of 
time) , and  that does not require an order of the 
Governor.  
 
7. The third situation is set out in Article 107. This provides 
that unless an Assembly is sooner dissolved (i.e., in terms of 
either of the  two preceding situations) , it stands dissolved af ter a 
term of five years. Here, the Governor has no role at all; the 
Assembly dissolves by the efflux of time . 
 SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  7
8. Article 105(3)(a) provides tha t where the Governor 
dissolves the Assembly he shall appoint a d ate for the holding of 
a general election there to, being a date not later than 90 days 
from the date of the dissolution.  
 
9. The Elections Act, 2017 (“2017 Act”) has been enacted by 
Parliament in  exercise of its legislative competence under the 
Constitution. That includes, in addition to Entry 41 of the 
Fourth Schedule , a specific provision in the body of the 
Constitution, being Article 222 , that expressly articulates  a list 
of matters relating to  elections which are within the Federal 
domain. The 2017 Act  applies, inter alia, to both the National  
and the Pro vincial Assemblies . Section 57(1) thereof provides 
that the President shall “ announce the date or dates of the 
general elections after consult ation with the  Commission ”. 
  
10. On a conjoint reading of the foregoing pro visions we 
conclude and hold as follows:  
 
a. In situa tions where the Assembly is dissolved by an 
order of the Governor, the constitutional 
responsibility of appointing a date for the gene ral 
election that must follow  is to be discharged by the 
Governor as pro vided in terms of Article 105( 3)(a). 
These are the  situations described in paras 5 and 
6(a) above.  
 
b. In situations where the Assembly is not dissolved by 
an order of the Governor, the c onstitutional 
responsibility of appointing a date for the general 
election that must follow is to be discharged by the 
President as provided in terms of s. 57(1) of the SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  8
2017 Act. These are the situations described in 
paras 6(b) and 7 above.  
 
11. Since the gene ral election on a dissolution of a Provincial 
Assembly ha s to be held w ithin a time period stipulated by the 
Constitution itself, which is a constitutional imperative, the 
President or, as the case may be, the Governor must discharge 
the constitutional res ponsibility of appointing a date for the said 
election swiftly and with out any delay  and within the shortest 
time possible . The Election Commission must proactively be 
available to the President or the Governor , and be prepared  for 
such consultation as req uired  for a date for the holding of 
general election s. 
 
12. It follows from the forego ing that in relation to the 
dissolution of the Punj ab Assembly, to which the situation 
described in para 6(b) above applied, the constitutional 
responsibility for appointing a date for the general election that 
must follow was to be discharged by the Presi dent. However, in 
relation to the dissolution of th e KPK Assembly, to which the 
situation described in para 6(a) above applied, the constitutional 
responsibility for appointi ng a date for the general election that 
must follow was to be discharged by the Go vernor.  
 
13. It further follows that the order of the P resident dated 
20.02.2023 is constitutionally  competent and subject to what is 
observed below , it is hereby affirmed insofa r as it applies to the SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  9
Punjab Assembly ; but the same is constitutionally invalid 
insofar as it applies to the KPK Assembly and is the refore hereby 
set aside. It also follows that the G overnor of KPK Province, 
inasmuch as he has not appointed a date for the  holding of the 
general election to the Assembly of that Province is in breach of 
his constitutional responsibility.  
 
14. It is further  declared and directed as follows  in relation to 
the matters before the Court : 
 
a. In ordinary circumstances t he general electio n to 
the Punjab Assembly ought to b e held on 
09.04.2023, the date a nnounced  by the President in 
terms of his order of 20.02.2023.  However, we are 
informed that on account of the delay in the 
emergence of the date for the holding of the general 
election, it  may not be possible to meet the 90 day 
deadline stipulated by the Constitution.  It is also the 
case that  (possibly on account of a 
misunderstanding of the law ) the Election 
Commission  did not make itself available for 
consultation as required under s. 57( 1) of the 2017 
Act.  The Election Commission is therefore directed 
to use its utmost efforts to immediately propose,  
keeping in mind  ss. 57 and 58 of the 2017 Act , a 
date to the Presid ent that is compliant with the 
aforesaid deadline. If such a  course is not available , 
then the Election Commission shall in like manner 
propose a date for the holding of the poll  that 
deviates to the bares t minim um from the aforesaid  
deadline. After consul tation with the Election 
Commission the President shall announce a date for 
the holding of the general election to the Punjab 
Assembly.  
 SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  10
b. The Governor of the KPK Province mus t after 
consultation  with the Election Commission  
forthwith appoint a date for t he holding of the 
general election to the KPK Assem bly and the 
preceding cl ause (a) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply 
in relation thereto.   
 
15. It is the constitutional duty of the Federation, in terms of 
clause (3) of Article 148, “to ensure that the Government  of every 
Province is carried on in accordance with  the provisions of the 
Constitution ”. There can be no doubt that this duty includes 
ensuring that a general election to the Assembly of every 
Province is held, and enabled to be held, in a timely manner 
within the period set out in the Constitution. This d uty is in 
addition to , and applies independently of,  the duty cast under 
Article 220 on “all executive authorities in the Federation and in 
the Provinces to assist the Commissioner and the Election 
Commiss ion in the discharge of his or their functions ”. It follows 
that the Federa tion, and in particular the Federal Government, 
is, inter alia,  obligated , on an immediate and urgent basis,  to 
forthwith provide the Election Commission with all such 
facilities , personnel and security as it may require for the 
holding of the general elec tions.  In like manner, it is the duty of 
the Provincial Governments, acting under the Caretaker 
Cabinets, to proactively provide all aid and assistance as may be 
required by the Ele ction Commission. The duty cast upon the 
authoritie s as set out in s. 50 of  the 2017 Act must also be 
discharged forthwith and proactively.  
 SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  11
16. The three matters before the Court are found 
maintainable and stand disposed of as above.  
 
 
              
 
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
I have appended my separate order.  
Sd/-  
 Judge  
  
 
Sd/- 
  
 
 Judge  
I have appended my note along with 
the main order.  
Sd/-  
 Judge  
  
 
 
Sd/- 
  
 Judge  
 
Announced in Court  
at Islamabad  
on 01.03.2023.   
 
 
      Sd/- 
                Chief Justice  
   
 
 
  NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  12
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah and Ja mal Khan Mandokhail, 
JJ.- For the reasons to be recorded later, we hold that:  
 
i. The suo motu  proceedings (SMC No. 1 of 2023) , in the 
facts and circumstances of the case , are wholly 
unjustified in the mode and manner they were taken up 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan  (“Constitution”) , besides being 
initiated with undue haste . 
 
ii. The Suo Motu Case No.1 of 2023 and the two Const. 
Petition s No. 1 & 2 of 2023 under Article 184(3)  of the 
Constitution , in the light of the  principle s settled in 
Manzoor Ilahi1 and Benzair Bhutto2, do not constitute a 
fit case to exercise the extraordinary original jurisdiction 
of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution and 
are thus not maintainable as the same constitutional 
and legal issue s seeking the same relief are pending 
and being deliberated upon by the respective Provincial 
High Courts in Lahore and Peshawar , without there 
being any inordinate delay in the conduct of the 
proceedings before them.  
 
iii. There is no justification to invoke our extraordinary 
jurisdiction  under Article 184(3) to initiate suo motu  
proceedings or entertain petitions under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution, as a  single Bench of the Lahore High 
Court has already decided the matter in favour of the 
petitioner befor e the said High Court vide judg ment 
dated  10.02.2023 and the said judgment i s still in the 
field. The intra court appeal s (ICAs) filed against the 
said judgment are pending before the Division Bench of 
the Lahore  High Court  (and none of the said  petitioners 
has approached this Court  under Article 185(3) of the 
Constitution ).  
 
                                                
1 PLD 1975 SC 66  
2 PLD 1988 SC 416  SMC.1 o f 2023, etc.  13
iv. Once a constitutional issue is pending before a Provincial 
High Court, keeping in view the Federal structure of our 
Constitution the autonomy and independence of the 
apex p rovincial constitutional court , should not be 
readily interfere d with rather be support ed to strengthen 
the provincial autonomy and avoid undermining the 
autonomy of the provincial constitutional courts .    
v. There is no inordinate delay in the proceedings pending 
before the High Court s, infact the  instant  proceedings 
have unnecessarily delayed the matter before the High 
Courts. H owever , consid ering the importance of the 
matter we expect that the respective High Courts shall  
decide the matters pending before them within three 
working days from today.  
 
vi. Even otherwise without prejudice to the above , such like 
matters should best be resolved by the Parliament.  
2.  We, therefore, agree with the order s dated 23.02.2023 
passed by our learned brother s, Yahya Afridi and Athar Minallah, 
JJ3., and dismiss the present constitution petitions  and drop the 
suo motu  proceedings.  
 
        Sd/- 
Judge  
 
       Sd/- 
Judge  
Islamabad,  
1st March, 2023.  
                                                
3 Initially a nine member bench heard this ma tter. The aforementioned t wo Hon ’ble 
Judges decided  the matter by dismissing the said petitions. Later on two other  Hon’ble  
Judges disassociated  themselves from the Bench for personal  reasons and as th e two 
aforementioned  judges had dismissed the matter , the Bench was reconstituted into a 
five member bench  vide order dated  27.02.2023 .  The decisions of the aforementioned 
two Hon’ble Judges dated 23.2.2023 form  part of the record of this case.   