IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present . 
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, HCJ  
  Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
  Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
 
 
 
Const itution Petition No .77 of 2010 and HRC No s.13124 -P, 
40303 -P, 40220 -G an d 43103 -B/2011 And CMA  Nos. 42-43/2012  
 
President Balochistan High  
Court Bar Association      Petitioner  
 
VERSUS  
 
Federation of Pakistan & others    Respondents  
 
AND  
 
C.M.A NO.431 OF 2012 In Const. Petition No.77 of 2010  
(Gruesome & Sensational Murder of w ife and daughter of Mir 
Bakhtiar Domki at Karachi on 30.01.2012)  
 
AND  
 
CMA NO.178 -Q OF 2012 In Const. P.No.77 of 2010  
(Appeal for missing persons cases of Balochistan)  
 
 
For the Petitioner (s):  Malik Zahoor Shahwani, Adv / 
     President Balochistan High   
     Court Bar  
 
On Court Notice:    Maulvi Anwarul Haq, AGP  
      
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:   Mr. Amanullah Kanrani,     
     Advocate General  
     Mr. Babar Yaqoob Fateh Muhammad,  
     Chief Secy. Balochistan  
     Qazi Abdul Wahid, DIG Operation  
     Wazir Hussain, Inspector;  
     Mansab Khan, SI;  
     Muhammad Ramzan a/w  
     Mir Jan S/o Amir Khan; Amir Khan S/o Gul  
     Bahar; and Gul Mir S/o Bahran Khan   
     (Missing persons)  
 
For KPK Govt  :  Mr. Asadullah Chamkani, AG  
     Syed Arshad Hussain Shah,  Addl.AG  
     Mr. Ghulam Dastgir, Chief Secy.  
 Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  2 
For Punjab Govt  :  Mr. Mudassar Khalid Abbasi, AAG  
     Mr. Khizar Hayat Gondal, Secy. L&G  
     Mr. Sikandar Suleman Raja, Secy.   
         
For Sindh  Govt.  :  Mr. Abdul Fateh Malik, AG  
     Mr. Qasim Mirjat, Ad dl.AG  
     Raja M. Abbas, Chief Secy.  
     Syed Mushtaq Ahmed Shah, IG  
     Mr. Mushtaq Mahr, DIG. CID  
     Mr. Aftab Nasir, SSP South  
     Mr. Zameer Ahmed Abbasi, DSP  
     Muhammad Mubeen, SHO/IO  
 
For M/o Defence   : Cmdr. Hussain Shahbaz, Dir (Legal)  
 
For FC & IB    : Nemo.  
 
Date of Hearing   : 12.04.2012  
 
ORDER  
 
  In continuation of earlier order of this Court dated 
06.04.2012 , the learned Advocate General , Balochistan alongwith 
Qazi Abdul Wahid, DIG (Operations)  has appeared and produced  
three missing pe rsons, namely Mir Jan S/o Amir Khan;  Amir Khan 
S/o Gul Bahar; and  Gul Mir S/o B ahran Khan , all residents of Saryab 
Mills, an area within the jurisdiction of Police Station New Saryab, 
District Quetta. According to these persons, they were forcibly taken 
away during night time from their houses and were kept in the 
custody of unknown persons for about 40 days and as at the time of 
their arrest they were blind folded, therefore, they could not know 
that where they were taken and detained during this period , and 
thereafter they were left in the area of Khuchlak from where they 
were taken into custody by the police.  
 
2.  When we have inquired from the learned Advocate 
General , Balochistan, as to whether the aforementioned persons are 
involved in any case, he un der instructions of Qazi  Abdul  Wahid, 
DIG (Operations) has stated that they have been detained under Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  3 
MPO, however, when asked, no such order has been produced. He 
further explains that after effecting their recovery a message ha s 
been sent to different Police Stations in the province of Balochistan 
to inquire as to whether they are involved in some case or not. We 
failed to understand the excuses being offered by the learned 
Advocate General. The Police or for that matter any other agency 
has no authority t o detain the persons , without showing their arrest s 
in a particular case and obtaining their remand s from the Court of 
law. In this view of the matter, we set at liberty the afore -noted 
persons and direct DIG (Operations) to take them safely to their 
house s so they may not face any difficulty and no one should cause 
their arrest in future without informing this Court.  
 
3.  The statement so submitted by Mr. Hamid Shakeel, 
Acting DIG (Investigation) , about effecting the recovery of said three 
persons seems to  be unbelievable under the facts and 
circumstances  and p rima facie  we are of the opinion that these 
persons have been recovered from some particular place, but the 
names of the agencies /authorities, who kept them in custody, are 
not being disclosed. Also i t cannot be ruled out that perhaps they 
were detained by the police, which kept them without any legal 
justification and after issuing directions by this Court, they had been 
released on the pretext that they were missing , otherwise in such a 
situation the y should disclose the particulars of the 
agencies/persons, who have been curtailing the liberty of these 
persons as well as four other persons, who were recovered on the 
last date of hearing. The Acting DIG (Investigation) , against whom it 
is alleged that he had effected the ir recovery , is directed to appear in Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  4 
person before this Court tomorrow i.e. 13.04.2012  and expla in in 
writing that from which area these persons have been recovered.  
 
4.  On the last date of hearing, three other persons namely 
Dr. Nase er Ahmed; Akhtar Langoo; and Hafeez Rodiani were also 
reported ly picked up and the IGP, Balochistan assured th is Court 
that their recovery shall be effected, but it seems that no progress so 
far has been made. The IGP Balochistan is directed to appear in 
Court tomorrow and explain as to why he failed to fulfill his 
commitment, which he made with the Court. At the same time, the 
SHO as well as the SP  Incharge of the area from where the said 
persons were allegedly picked up shall appear and submit their 
repor ts by tomorrow i.e. 13.04.2012 and also to explain as to why 
proceedings against them should not be initiated  because it was 
their duty to provide protection of life and liberty to the persons living 
within the area of their jurisdiction , which they have f ailed to do so.   
 
5.  Similarly, another person namely Mazar Khan has not 
been recovered, although commitment was made before this Court 
on the last date of hearing to effect his recovery.  It has been 
informed that a case has been registered against SHO No or Bakhsh 
and presently he is behind the bars because reported ly the said 
person was picked up by some unknown persons in the presence  of 
said SHO  and no action was taken by him by showing resistance. As 
said SHO is in custody, therefore, SP Incharge of th e area namely 
Fareed Waraich is directed to appear  in person before this Court 
tomorrow and explain as to why he should not be ordered to be 
proceeded against according to law because the above -noted 
person was illegally removed from his jurisdiction and h e (the SP) Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  5 
being Incharge of the area has failed to provide him (missing person) 
the security.  
 
6.  The learned Advocate General, Balochistan informed 
that during the inquiry conducted in respect of the confinement of 
Hafiz Saeed -ur-Rehman S/o Allah Bakhs h in Gujranwala Jail,  it has 
been revealed that the latter was ne ver confined in the said Jail and 
the National Crises Management Cell, vide letter dated 06.06.2009, 
has furnished wrong information and qua the same an inquiry is 
underway. The learned Attor ney General for Pakistan as well as the 
learned Advocate General, Balochistan state that as the matter is 
being probed into, therefore, some time may be given to do the 
needful.  
 
7.  The learned Advocate General states that so far no 
progress could be mad e in the case of Dr. Din Muhammad, who was 
allegedly picked up on 28.06.2009 from the area of Mashakai, 
District Awaran. The Home Secretary, Balochistan, is directed to 
conduct an inquiry and take all necessary steps to effect his (Dr. Din 
Muhammad ) recove ry and submit compliance report on the next 
date of hearing.  
 
8.  The IGP Balochistan is also directed to submit a 
comprehensive report in respect of the incident, which took place in 
between the night of 9/10 April, 2012 on Prince Road wherein 6 
persons w ere murdered, including the incident near Bolan  Medical 
College wherein six persons were killed and on Mir Ahmed Khan 
Road wherein two persons were murdered.  
 Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  6 
 
9.  The Chief Secretary, Balochistan, has submitted a 
report wherein different aspects of the law and order situation , 
prevailing in the Province of Balochistan , has been highlighted, 
including the one incident , which allegedly took place in the area of 
Tehsil Baghbana, District Khuzdar  in respect whereof a Civil 
Miscellaneous Application was filed  by Mr. Sajid Tareen, learned 
ASC, wherein it was reported that 30 persons were picked up and 
out of them 16 persons have been recovered whereas 14 persons 
are still missing.  Contents of the said report are reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  7 
 
 
 
10.  Copy of this order be sent to Mr. Sajid Tareen, learned 
Advocate , for filing of his comments, if need be, on the report 
submitted by the Tehsildar , reproduced hereinabove,  so that we may 
decide the CMA filed by him to the extent of missing of 30 person , 
which was also published /reported  in Daily Intikhab , from the area of 
Tutak Sub Tehsil Baghbana, District Khuzdar .  
 
 
11.  The Inspector General of Police, Sindh has appeared 
and stated that Mr. Shabbir Sheikh, A dditional IG, who was Incharge 
of the inves tigation of the case of murder of the  wife of Sardar 
Bakhtiar Khan Domki (granddaughter of late Nawab Akbar Khan 
Bughti)  has left for America to attend a departmental course , but 
remaining members of the same team are conducting the 
investigation. He also states that he himself has taken over the 
charge of the investigation of the case and meanwhile in view of the 
importance of the case he will make efforts to call Mr. Shabbir 
Sheikh , Additional IG,  back . We have informed  him that a person , 
who had been heading the investigation of such an importance case , 
which has direct and indirect repercussions on the law and order 
situation, prevailing in the Province of Balochistan , instead of leaving 
for America should have given importance to it.  
 
12.  Mr. Mubeen, SHO/IO of the case has appeared and 
submitted a report claim ing its confidentiality . Though it is too early, Constitution Petition No.77 of 2010  8 
yet we are hopeful that the accused persons involved in the case 
shall be soon traced out.  The said report has been returned to him.  
IO requests that as he requires some assistance from Inspector 
General of Police, Islamabad, therefore, directions may be given to 
him to cooperate with the former in making a breakthrough in the 
case. Order accordingly.  
 
13.  In response to the notices, the Chief Secr etaries of all 
the Provinces, except Chief Secretary, Balochistan, who has already 
submitted his report before this Court at Quetta on the last date of 
hearing, undertake to file their respective reports. The case is 
adjourned  enabling the m to consult thei r respective Governments  
and present schedule s for holding local government elections under 
the command of the Constitution in terms of Articles 32 and 140A 
(latter incorporated in pursuance of 18th Amendment of the 
Constitution) . 
 
14.  The matter to the e xtent of recovery of missing persons 
and appearance as well as submissions of reports by Police 
Officer/Officials shall be taken up tomorrow i.e. 13.04.2012  at 
Islamabad , however, the main case shall be put up for hearing on 
30th instant  at Quetta Branch R egistry.        
    
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD   
12.04.2012  
Zubair  