 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
 (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J.  
MR. JUSTICE GHULAM RABBANI  
MR. JUSTICE KHALIL -UR-REHMAN RAMDAY  
 
 
Constitution Petitions Nos. 20 to 27, 39 & 45 of 2009  
H.R Cases Nos. 20424 -P, 20982 -P/2009 and 19465 -P/2010  
C.M.A. No.1703 of 2010 in Const. P.39/09  
 
 
 
The Bank of Punjab       
NIB Bank  
 …Petitioners  
 
Versus  
 
 
 
 
Haris Steel Industries (Pvt) Ltd & others   …Respondents (Const. P 20/09)  
Sheikh Muhammad Afzal, etc.     …Respondents (Con st. P 21/09)  
Haris Afzal, etc.       …Respondents (Const. P 22/09)  
Hamesh Khan & others.      …Respondents (Const. P 23/09)  
Muhammad Zia -ul-Haq, etc.     …Respondents (Const. P 24/09)  
Haroon Aziz, etc.       …Respondents (Const. P 25/09)  
Muhammad Shoaib Quresh i,  etc.   …Respondents (Const. P 26/09)  
Aziz-ur-Rehman, etc.     …Respondents (Const. P 27/09)  
Haris Steel Industries, Ltd.     …Respondents (Const. P. 39 & 45/09)  
 
 
For the petitioner:    Kh. Haris Ahmad, ASC  
(in Const.Ps. 20 -27 &39/09)  Mr. Arshad Ali Chaud hry, AOR  
 
For the Petitioner    Nemo  
(in Const. P. 45/2009)  
 
On Court Notice:    Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, 
     Attorney General  for Pakistan  
 
For respondents    
 
 (in Const.P.22/2010)   Mr.M.S. Khattak, AOR  
      a/w Haris Afzal  
 
(in Const.P.23 /2010)   Nemo  
 
(in Const.P.24/2010)   Nemo  
 
(in Const.P.2 5/2010)   Nemo  
 
(in Const.P.26/2010)   Nemo  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 2 :- 
 
(in Const.P.27/2010)   Nemo  
 
 
For the NAB    Mr. Irfan Qadir, P.G. NAB  
Mr. Akbar Tarar, Addl. P.G. NAB  
     
 
For state Bank   Raja Abdul Ghafoor, ASC/AOR  
 
For Foreign Office   Nemo  
 
For F.I.A.    Nemo  
 
For Govt. of Punjab   Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser, Addl. A.G.  
Mr. Hassan Akhtar, Dy. Secy. Home  
 
Date of hearing:   07.07.2010 . 
*-*-*-*-* 
JUDGMENT  
  GHULAM RABBANI , J.-   This order shall dispose of 
CMA No.1703/2010. However, it is deemed n ecessary to re -
capitulate background of the case , which is that M/s Haris Steel 
Industries , Haider Steel Industries  and Prime Steel Industries 
availed various credit facilities amounting to Rs.720 million s, 
Rs.325 million s and Rs.1000 million s respectively  during the period  
2005 -2008 from the Bank of Punjab against mortgage d property 
belonging to different persons. O stensibly 23 independent Accounts 
were opened in the name of different  proprietorships from March, 
2006 to April, 2007 in different  Branches of Bank of Punjab. 
During the month of May, 2007 , in a routine audit , it was re vealed 
that 23 accounts pertained  to fake accounts holders and were not 
adequately secured and credit facilities had been advanced and 
finances disbursed by the Branch Managers  in visible haste . The 
Bank Management took action against the Branch Managers by 
initiating disciplinary proceedings. The Director s/Proprietors of the 
above mentioned Steel Industries took step forward and offered to C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 3 :- 
take over the entire liabilities agains t 23 accounts and the bank’s 
management agreed to the same. During the time of appropriation 
it transpired that value of the mortgage d properties were shown 
more than the actual value. In June, 2006 this fraud for the  first 
time came in a news  item appeari ng in daily “The News” dated 
21.6.2007 when the  State Bank of Pakistan took action by calling a 
report from the Bank. The matter was taken up by the NAB 
authorities and DG NAB authorized an inquiry under Section 18(c) 
of the NAO, 1999. The Chairman , NAB  authorized arrest of various 
person s involved in the scam and Accountability Court issued 
search warrants of the Premises belonging to Sh. Afzal (Principal 
accused). The accused filed writ petitions against the order of the 
Chairman, NAB as well as the NAB C ourts. A number of W rit 
Petitions  were also filed by the other accused;  all these were 
clubbed together. The accused approached the Supreme Court by 
filing Const. Petitions  for transfer of all the Writ Petitions  filed in 
the matter pending before th e Lahor e High Court  directly to the 
Supreme Court of Pa kistan and later on all the Writ Petitions  were 
ordered to be tran sferred from Lahore High Court, Lahore to 
Islamabad High Court, Islamabad.  
2.  The Bank of Punjab filed listed Const. P etition No.20 of 2009 
under Article 186 -A read with Article 187 of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan with the prayer that W rit Petition 
pending before Islamabad High Court be heard by this Court. 
Preliminary hearing of the case took place on 27.5.2009 when this 
Court ordered notices to be issued to the parties with directions to C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 4 :- 
maintain status -quo in respect of alienation of properties belonging 
to the accused.  
3. In the meanwhile CMA  No.2403/2009  was filed on 30.7.2009 
with the prayer  that order dated 29.9.2008 restraining the NAB 
from taking proceedings under the Reference to enable 
continuation of proceedings in investigation and the reference may 
be vacated because on account of pendency of the cases before 
Islamabad High Court  the proceedings before the NAB were stayed. 
On this an order was passed by this Court  on 3.8.2009 . Relevant 
para therefrom is reproduced hereinbelow:  
“The learned Prosecutor General, NAB who has appeared, stated 
that he is ready to extend full cooperation to the DG, FIA. However, 
his ap prehension was that as the Islamabad High Court and this 
Court had issued restraint orders against the arrest of Hamesh 
Khan, the process of bringing him back to Pakistan was not being 
pursued/followed up. We may clarify that we have issued direction 
to Ha mesh Khan through is counsel Mr. Talib H. Rizvi, AS C time 
and again for appearance before this  Court but he has not 
honoured the orders of this Court. We, therefore, observe that there 
shall not be any restraint order or impediment in the way of the 
NAB in  bringing him to Pakistan and producing him in Court. The 
NAB authorities are free to take all necessary steps expeditiously to 
do the needful with the cooperation of the FIA. As the DG, FIA is 
also head of Interpol, the Prosecutor General will have a meet ing 
with him today and shall chalk  out a comprehensive plan to ensure 
the presence of Hamesh Khan before this Court as early as 
possible but not beyond the period of seven days. “  
It would not be out  of context to note that to ensure transparent 
investigat ion, inquiry  and  proceedings in the above noted case a 
compre hensive order was passed on 27.5.2010. Relevant paras 
therefrom are reproduced hereinbelow:  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 5 :- 
“2. In response to the processes issued from time to time to 
procure the attendance of the accused, it was reported that the then 
President of the BoP, namely, Hamesh Khan had left the country in 
violation and in defiance of the orders passed by the Interior 
Ministry, placing his name on the Exit Control List (ECL), and 
restraining him from leaving the coun try. Similarly, one Sheikh Afzal 
and his family members, including his son Sheikh Haris had also 
left the country. The NAB authorities, however, commenced 
proceedings against them under the National Accountability 
Ordinance, 1999 (NAO 1999), by initiating the requisite 
investigations and inquiry. It was reported then that a huge amount 
of about nine billion rupees had been misappropriated in just one of 
the transactions involving the said Haris Steel Mills. The NAB 
officials and the FIA, headed at that time  by Mr. Tariq Khosa as its 
Director General, made concerted efforts, on the directions of this 
Court, to bring the absconding accused back to Pakistan to face 
proceedings before this Court as also before the NAB authorities.  
3.   It may be noticed here fo r the sake of record that at 
the very initial stages, i.e. in the year 2008 this Court, as it then 
stood constituted, was approached and an order had been secured 
for the transfer of the cases pending before the Lahore High Court to 
the Islamabad High Cour t. This aspect has got its own factual 
background, which need not be detailed at this stage but which 
would be mentioned in its requisite details when this matter is being 
finally disposed of by this Court. Besides the NAB and the FIA, the 
Foreign Office w as also associated at a later stage, and these 
functionaries, in pursuance of the directions of the Court to achieve 
the object, adopted various strategies and ultimately succeeded in 
achieving the object. As a result thereof, all the concerned persons, 
including Hamesh Khan, a former President, BoP involved in the 
present proceedings as also in the proceedings pending before the 
NAB authorities/courts were brought back to Pakistan. Some of the 
respondents and the accused persons before the NAB courts enter ed 
into voluntary plea bargain and surrendered their movable and 
immovable properties to return the allegedly misappropriated 
amounts of money of the BoP. The said exercise is still continuing 
and is presently passing through its different phases. The act of the 
NAB, the FIA and of the Foreign Office in bringing the said 
absconding accused back to the arms of law is really creditable as it 
is very rare that the availability of such like persons, once they had 
left the country, could ever be secured in such a short span of time. 
Naturally, this was the result of the cooperation, which was also C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 6 :- 
extended to the Pakistani authorities by the respective governments 
of various foreign countries, including Malaysia, UAE and the USA 
from where they have been brought back to Pakistan. Progress of the 
cases, however, continued during this period. Meanwhile, after his 
arrest, Sheikh Afzal accused made disclosures before the NAB 
authorities, through a hand written statement mentioning how the 
allegedly misappropriated amo unts were distributed by him to 
various prominent personalities named therein and stated also that 
he was ready to settle his accounts with the BoP. It is to be noted 
that Sheikh Afzal was also produced in this Court when he brought 
his statement in writin g, which was placed on record.  
4.   The concerned authorities of the NAB have been 
submitting periodical progress reports. On 26.05.2010, a detailed 
report was filed, but the learned Prosecutor appearing on behalf of 
the NAB failed to convince the Court a bout the positive steps being 
taken in this behalf. We feel that there are, prima facie, reasons 
which have hindered them in conducting an across -the-board 
investigation of the case. This Court had, while deciding the case of 
Dr. Mubashir Hasan v. Federati on of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265), 
for reasons mentioned therein suggested to the government for 
removal of the Chairman of the NAB. The statement of Sheikh Afzal 
also revealed that he had paid an amount of Rs.3,50,00,000/ - to Mr. 
Babar Awan and other lawye rs, according to him, for getting 
favourable decisions from the High Court and from this Court. It is 
also an admitted fact that the said Mr. Babar Awan is now the Law 
Minister of the country and according to the Rules of Business, the 
NAB is an attached d epartment of the Law Ministry, though 
otherwise it is an independent institution, which is required to 
function independently to avoid injustice to any of the parties 
involved in the cases falling under the NAO, 1999. This could not 
have been the only reas on. Few days ago, Mr. Irfan Qadir has been 
appointed as the Prosecutor General of the NAB against whom also 
it had been alleged by the above -mentioned Sheikh Afzal that he 
had been receiving huge amounts of money from him for the purpose 
of making payments  to the lawyers whose names have been 
mentioned by him in the statement with assurances to him that 
favourable orders would be secured for them from the concerned 
courts including this Court. There are also available on record, 
statements of some other per sons including Irfan Ali who is a 
witness of making of the said payments. Above all, no sooner 
Hamesh Khan was brought back to Pakistan, there were a number 
of rumours and speculations about the involvement of some well -C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 7 :- 
placed political and non -political i nfluential personalities in the said 
Bank scam.  
5.   We do appreciate that despite all these odds, the 
concerned authorities have done their best but it has become 
necessary in the above -noticed circumstances that there should be a 
highly transparent inqu iry/investigation to ensure that everyone 
involved in the case is dealt with according to law and no injustice is 
done to anyone. It is to be noted that Article 10 -A of the Constitution 
ensures, as a fundamental right, a fair trial of the accused facing th e 
charges. Needless to add that even in absence of this provision of 
the Constitution, the Courts in Pakistan had been putting their best 
efforts in order to ensure fair and independent trials, but after 
incorporation of this new provision in the Constitut ion, it has also 
become all the more important that the investigations and inquiries 
should be fully transparent. On having seen the report, which was 
submitted on 26.05.2010 and discussing various aspects of the 
matter  when Hamesh Khan was produced befor e this Court, we 
realized that the Chairman NAB, in exercise of his powers, needed to 
personally look into the matter. Therefore, Raja Aamir Abbas, 
Deputy Prosecutor General, who has remained associated with these 
proceedings before this Court throughout a nd had held meetings 
with the officials of the Foreign Office, the NAB, the FIA and others 
from time to time, was asked to discuss this matter with the 
Chairman, and bring all these factors to his notice because in the 
interest of this nation and to save i ts wealth, everyone, including the 
Supreme Court is bound to take necessary steps for the purpose of 
recovering moneys belonging to the public exchequer, whether inside 
or outside the country.  
6.   Today, he submitted a report wherein different teams 
have been constituted, comprising officers of the NAB, who according 
to the Chairman had a known reputation of honesty. Having gone 
through the said report, however, we noticed that there was no 
officer of a senior rank having requisite experience and expertis e in 
the matter of investigations in these teams because conducting 
investigations of criminal cases itself is an independent subject and 
the ultimate fate of a criminal case also depends upon the same. As 
it is in our notice that Mr. Tariq Khosa, former D .G., FIA, who is now 
the Acting Secretary, Narcotics Division, Government of Pakistan, 
remained associated with this case for a considerable period of time 
and it was on account of the efforts made by him, in collaboration 
with the NAB and the FIA that he had successfully achieved the 
object by utilizing his official position as D.G. FIA, which is a C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 8 :- 
renowned investigation agency of the country. He is one of the most 
senior and experienced police officers who has also been the 
Inspector General of Police. He  now also has the honour of being a 
Member of the Executive Committee of INTERPOL. Raja Aamir 
Abbas, Deputy Prosecutor General was, therefore, asked to discuss 
this aspect of the matter also with the Chairman because this Court 
feels that in the absence of  a highly skilled person, such a high 
profile case could not be investigated properly.  
7.   We are informed that a meeting was accordingly held 
by the Chairman, NAB with Mr. Tariq Khosa, Acting Secretary, 
Narcotics Control Division and minutes of the said  meeting have 
been placed on record. Mr. Tariq Khosa also appeared along with the 
Chairman, NAB and submitted that subject to approval by the 
competent authority he would obey the judicial orders because being 
a public servant, he was in fact a servant of law.”  
4.  It shall not be out of place to mention that Constitution 
Petition No.20 of 2009 was followed by Constitution Petitions No.21 
to 27,39 & 45 of 2009, praying for different reliefs under various 
provisions of the Constitution including Article 184 (3) thereof 
seeking, inter-alia, the intervention of this Court for protection of 
the said huge amounts of public money of at least a million 
innocent depositors and to come to their rescue as their life -savings 
and consequently, their Fundamental Right to  property was under 
serious threat.  
5. When this Court had taken  cognizance of the matter about a 
year ago, it transpired, to our horror: - 
(i) that billions of rupees of public 
money had been doled out by the Bank of 
Punjab to a group of persons but in fak e 
names or in the names of persons who did 
not exist or in the names of businesses 
and factories which were sham;  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 9 :- 
(ii) that these huge loans and advances 
had been made by the said Bank either 
without any securities or where securities 
had been taken, the s ame comprised 
properties which were non -existent or were 
highly over -valued;  
(iii) that it was not just these billions of 
around a million depositors which were at 
stake but what was under serious threat 
was the very existence of the Bank of 
Punjab which w as a project of the 
Government of Punjab; and further  
 
6.  Therefore, f inding constitutionally obligated to defend 
the constitutionally guaranteed public rights and realising  the 
severity of the threat and the magnitude of the damage, the matter 
was taken  up on almost fortnightly and at times even on weekly 
basis for almost one year now. As a result of the orders passed by 
this Court and on account of the consequent and appreciable efforts 
of all the concerned agencies and officials, what has been managed 
so far  beside that achieved as mentioned hereinabove , is as under: - 
 
 (i) valuable moveable and immovable 
assets and properties of the accused  
persons were traced and identified not 
only in Pakistan but also in Malaysia and 
U.A.E. and on account of reques ts made by 
the NAB and others to these foreign 
governments for Mutual Legal Assistance, 
most of the said properties have since been 
attached and frozen and the ones owning 
these properties had even executed 
General Powers of Attorney in favour of the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 10 :- 
NAB/T he Bank of Punjab which are now 
at their disposal;  
(ii) according to report of the NAB dated 
28.5.2010 (CMA No.1482/2010), an 
amount of RUPEES 1518.602 MILLION  had 
since been paid back to the Bank of Punjab 
IN CASH ; around 125 IMMOVABLE 
PROPERTIES COMPRISI NG PLOTS, HOUSES 
AND APARTMENTS  had since been placed 
by the accused persons at the disposal of 
the Bank of Punjab; JEWELLERY  AND 
EXPENSIVE WATCHES  worth about 101 
million rupees also stood placed by the 
accused at the disposal of the said Bank 
and around THIRTY vehicles  including a 
Porsche, Range Rovers, B.M.Ws, Mercedes , 
had also been handed over by the accused 
persons to the said Bank;  
(iii) this Court has, with the consent and 
with the representation of the parties 
including the accused persons, set up a 
committee headed by a former Judge of  
this Court to sell al these properties, the 
proceeds whereof will again go to the 
victim Bank; and  
(iv) the NAB, the Foreign Office and the 
F.I.A. are reported to be actively pursuing 
encashment and receipt of money  likely to 
accrue from the above -mentioned 
properties, Bank Accounts and share -
holdings of the accused persons in the 
above -noticed foreign countries.  
It could thus be said that on account of the intervention of this 
Court and the consequent efforts made b y all concerned, almost all 
the accused persons were in place and equally importantly, the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 11 :- 
repayment of the enormous amount of money in question had since 
been almost secured.  
7.  We were, however, bemused rather shocked, at the 
grievance rather vociferous ly raised, not by the accused persons of 
this case but by the learned Prosecutor General Accountability, Mr. 
Irfan Qadir, that the above -noticed intervention by this Court in the 
investigation of the case in question, was an illegal and an un -
constitutiona l interference by it which was likely to “ CAUSE 
PREJUDICE TO THE CAUSE OF THE ACCUSED PERSONS ”. We shall 
deal with this grief and un -happiness of the learned Prosecutor 
General in some detail in the succeeding parts of this order as we 
propose to notice, f irst, the submissions made by Khawaja Haris 
Ahmad, Sr. ASC in support of this application under adjudication.  
8.  With respect to the assumption of the office of the 
Acting Chairman of the NAB by its Deputy Chairman, it was 
contended by the learned counsel  for the applicant Bank that the 
same was an illegal and an unlawful act being violative of the 
provisions of section 6(c) of the NAB Ordinance of 1999. It was 
argued that the law permitted a Deputy Chairman to act as the 
Chairman only when the Chairman ex isted but was temporarily 
absent or was unable to discharge functions of his office for 
whatever reason and not when there was no Chairman at all and 
the office lay vacant. Our attention was drawn to various other 
provisions in the Constitution which speci fically provided for an 
Acting incumbent of an office even when the office was vacant e.g. 
Articles 180, 196 and 217 of the Constitution which envisaged C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 12 :- 
appointment of an Acting Chief Justice of Pakistan; an Acting Chief 
Justice of a High Court or an Actin g Chief Election Commissioner 
not only when the incumbent was absent or was unable to perform 
functions of his office but even when such an office had become 
vacant. Reference had also been made to similar provisions of the 
Establishment of the Office of W afaqi Mohtasib (Ombudsman) 
Order being President’s Order No.1 of 1983; to the Office of 
Ombudsman Ordinances of Sindh, Punjab and Baluchistan; to the 
Establishment of the Office of the Federal Tax Mohtasib Ordinance, 
2000 and to the provisions of the Punja b Ordinances No. XXIX and 
LVIII of 2002. It was highlighted that whenever the law -giver 
intended to have an acting incumbent for some office even when 
the office had fallen vacant, it was always specifically so provided. 
As against this, the provisions in question of section 6(c) of the NAB 
Ordinance allowed the Deputy Chairman to act as the Chairman 
only when the incumbent was absent or was unable to perform his 
functions and not when the office was vacant.  
9.  It was, consequently, stressed that the impug ned 
assumption of office by the respondent Deputy Chairman was an 
unlawful act on his part as a result whereof all actions taken and 
being taken by him were a nullity in the eyes of law and of no legal 
effect which could seriously and adversely affect the interests of his 
client who was a victim of a crime being presently dealt with by the 
NAB.. It had been resultantly prayed that the competent authority 
be directed to immediately appoint the Chairman of the NAB to 
avoid prejudice to the applicant Bank and to a large number of C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 13 :- 
other persons who were parties in the matters being handled under 
the said Ordinance of 1999.  
10.  With respect to the appointment of Mr. Irfan Qadir, 
Advocate as the learned Prosecutor General Accountability under 
the N.A.B. Ordinance , it was submitted by Khawaja Haris Ahmed, 
Sr. ASC that his appointment to the said office was a serious 
offence against the provisions of section 8(a)(iii) of the National 
Accountability Ordinance of 1999 which provisions had declared, in 
unequivocal term s, that the Prosecutor General could hold the said 
office only for a “ NON -EXTENDABLE ” period of three years. It had 
been added that since Mr. Irfan Qadir had already held the said 
office for a full term of three years i.e. from 4.12.2003 to 3.12.2006, 
therefore, circumventing the said legal command through a fresh 
appointment was a violation of the said provisions. The case of the 
applicant Bank was that what the law did not allow to be achieved 
directly, could not ever be allowed to be acquired indirectly.  
Reliance in this connection had been placed by the learned counsel 
on the STATUTORY INTERPRETATION  by Bennion, PRINCIPLES OF 
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION  by Guru Prasanna Singh and on the 
cases of ZAHID IMRAN AND OTHERS  (PLD 2006 SC 109) , IMTIAZ 
AHMED LALI  (PLD 2007 SC 369) , MIAN MUHAMMAD NAWAZ SHARIF  
(PLD 1993 SC 473)  and on the case of HAJI MUHAMMAD BOOTA AND 
OTHERS (PLD 2003 SC 979) . 
11.  It had also been argued by the learned counsel that the 
office of the Prosecutor General Accountability was a high offic e, 
the importance of which could be gauged by the fact that as per the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 14 :- 
provisions of section 8(a)(i) of the N.A.B. Ordinance of 1999, it was 
only a person who was qualified to be appointed as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan who could be appointed as the 
Prosecutor General and further that the Prosecutor General could 
not be removed from his office except on the grounds on which a 
Judge of the Supreme Court could be removed. The office was, 
therefore, one which was an extremely important office and thus a 
person appointed to the said office had, of necessity, to be one who 
was of an impeccable character. The learned counsel, however, 
placed before us and read out to us the extracts of a statement 
made by one Sheikh Afzal who was one of the principal accused 
persons of the above -noticed Bank fraud case. The said extracts of 
the said statements are reproduced hereunder: - 
“MR. IRFAN QADIR, ADVOCATE  
Para 1.  Sh. Afzal  
Initially during May, 2008, I engaged 
services of Mr. Irfan Qadir, advocate to file 
writ petition against proceedings of NAB 
and paid him agreed amount of Rs.1.00M 
as legal fee.  
Para 2. Sh. Afzal:  
When NAB officials raided my house on 
18.06.2008, I complained to Mr. Irfan Qadir 
that he was unable to handle the case.  Mr. 
Irfan Qadir, advocat e suggested that we 
should a panel of famous lawyers who can 
influence the Court.  Mr. Irfan Qadir then 
informed me that he had contacted and 
engaged Mr. Waseem Sajjad and Mr. 
Sharifuddin Pirzada Advocates.  I was 
conveyed by Mr. Irfan Qadir that Mr. 
Shari fuddin Pirzada would charge legal fee 
of Rs.10.00 M till finalization of the case.  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 15 :- 
Whereas Mr. Waseem Sajjad agreed for 
Rs.2.00 M till finalization of the case.  I 
managed to deliver Rs.12.00 M in total to 
Irfan Qadir through my manager Irfan Ali 
for paym ent to Sharifuddin Pirzada and Mr. 
Waseem Sajjad.  
IRFAN ALI:   I delivered an amount of Rs. 
12.00 M (cash) in June, 2008 to Mr. Irfan 
Qadir on road near Fortress Stadium, 
Lahore  
Para 4. Sh. Afzal:  
Later on, NAB conducted search of my 
office on 24.6.2008, I once against asked 
Mr. Irfan Qadir as to why they were not 
able to stop all this.  Mr. Irfan Qadir again 
suggested that we should engage Mr. 
Babar Awan who may have some influence 
in the Courts. Mr. Irfan Qadir negotiated 
with Mr. Babar Awan and informed m e 
that he (Babar Awan) was ready to contest  
our case for an amount of Rs.5.00 M as 
legal fee till the finalization of the case.  Mr. 
Babar Awan appeared before the LHC on 
behalf of Harris Group.  The legal fee was 
paid to Mr. Babar Awan through Irfan 
Qadir . 
Para 8, 6 th line.  Sh. Afzal  
Mr. Malik Qayyum later informed me that 
he had visited Lahore and had a meeting 
with my counsel Mr. Waseem Sajjad and 
Irfan Qadir in Pearl Continental Hotel 
Lahore.  Mr. Malik Qayyum further 
informed me that he had talked to relevant 
judges of LHC on telephone in presence of 
my counsel and assured me that  relief 
would be granted to you ……… 
Para 9.  Sh. Afzal:  
During June, 2008, I contacted Mr. 
Sharifuddin Pirzada who told me that he in C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 16 :- 
consultation with Mr. Malik Qayyum (the 
then attorney General), Mr. Irfan Qadir 
Advocate and Mr. Waseem Sajjad Advocate 
had decided to arrange transfer of the case 
form LHC to Supreme Court.  Mr. 
Sharifuddin Pirzada told me that he and 
members of other panel could obtain 
decisions in their favour from the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan.  
Para 12, 6 th sub para.  Sh Afzal:  
During July, 2008, Mr. Pirzada told me that 
Irfan Qadir had transferred him Rs.7 M as 
against agreed amount of Rs.10 M. I had to 
pay balance Rs.3.00 M to Mr. Pirzada.  This 
amount was pa id by Irfan Ali  
I contacted Mr. Irfan Qadir who told me 
that it was his share.  I told him not to 
appear on my behalf any more.  
Later on I came to know that Irfan Qadir  
had delivered only Rs.1.00 M to Mr. 
Waseem Sajjad and rest is pending.  I 
against paid  Rs.1.00 M to Mr. Waseem 
Sajjad through Irfan Ali in July, 2008.  
MR. BABAR AWAN, ADVOCATE  
Para 4, 3 rd line. Sh. Afzal:  
……Mr. Irfan Qadir again suggested that 
we should engage Mr. Babar Awan who 
may have some influence in the Cour ts.  
Mr. Irfan Qadir negoti ated with Mr. Babar 
Awan and informed me that he (Babar 
Awan) was ready to contest our case for an 
amount of Rs.5.00 M as legal fee till the 
finalization of the case.  Mr. Babar Awan 
appeared before the LHC on behalf of 
Harris Group.  The legal fee was pai d to 
Mr. Babar Awan through Irfan Qadir.  
Para 13. Sh. Afzal:  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 17 :- 
……During July, 2008 Mr. Malik Qayyum 
informed me that ‘Mr. Babar Awan is a 
friend of mine, is a Senator and it is 
necessary to pay him over and above the 
agreed amount of Rs.5.00M’ which had 
already been paid.  Mr. Malik Qayyum 
further informed that Mr. Babar Awan was 
sitting with the then  _________________ of 
Supreme Court and he (M Q) happened to 
be there.  He quoted Babar Awan telling to 
the Judge that his case should be decided 
in our favour.  Mr. Malik Qayyum argued 
that Mr. Babar Awan had a great influence, 
therefore, more amounts should be paid to 
him. 
 
I asked Irfan Ali to deliver Rs.3.00M to Mr. 
Malik Qayyum for onward submission to 
Mr. Babar Awan.  After this Mr. Babar 
Awan started appear ing in Supreme Court 
regularly.  I also asked Mr. Malik Qayyum 
to deliver Rs.2.00 M to Babar Awan from 
the amount already held by Mr. Malik 
Qayyum.  He confirmed that the said 
amount had been paid.  
 
Irfan Ali:  
I delivered Rs.3.00 M in July, 2008 to Mr. 
Malik Qayyum in his office in Islamabad  
 
Sh. Afzal:  
Later on Mr. Malik Qayyum told me that he 
could manage a guaranteed deal with Mr. 
Babar Awan for Rs.35 M.  It was the time 
when the case was being ordered to be 
transferred to LHC.  I allowed him to 
deliver Rs.15.00 M to Babar Awan which 
he confirmed me.  I also called Mr. Babar 
Awan who assured me that apart from his C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 18 :- 
legal fee of Rs. 5.00 M he would charge 
Rs.35 M.  He assured me that he had 
discussed the case with the Judges and 
the case would be quashed wi thin 15 days.  
Beside fee, I had already paid him Rs. 20 
M.  Irfan Ali and Malik Qayyum further 
delivered an amount of Rs.5.00 M  in the 
office of Mr. Babar Awan in Blue Area.  
Whereas an other amount of Rs. 10.00 M 
was paid by Mr. Malik Qayyum to Mr. 
Baba r Awan in September, 2008.  In this 
way, besides the legal fee I paid Rs.25 M to 
Mr. Babar Awan till September 2008.  
 
Irfan Ali:    
I delivered Rs.5.00 to Mr. Babar Awan in 
September, 2009, Mr. Malik Qayyum and 
Ravid Sami were with me.  Amount was 
delivere d in his office in Blue Area.  
Para 14. Sh. Afzal:  
……asked Mr. Babar Awan that he should 
personally meet him in UAE and give him 
commitment for his satisfaction.  I advised 
Irfan Ali to manage a return ticket of Mr. 
Babar Awan.  
 
4th Line.  Irfan Ali:  
……I arranged return ticket of Mr. Babar 
Awan from Mahnoor Travels, Near Shimla 
Pahari, Lahore and made the payment.  
 
Sh. Afzal:  
Mr. Babar Awan arrived in UAE, Dubai in 
Ramzan of 2008.  I received him in Grand 
Hyatt Hotel and arranged a room in Grand 
Hyatt for o ne night.  I had meeting with him 
in presence of my son Harris Afzal.  My 
secretary was also there for some time.  Mr. 
Babar Awan assured me that after C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 19 :- 
payment of full amount of deal, the case 
will be quashed by the IHC and if appealed 
by the NAB, the same  will be decided in our 
favour from the SC within 15 days as he 
pretended that he had settled all the 
matters with the Judges.  
 
Harris Afzal:  
I was present in the meeting.  Mr. Babar 
Awan assured us that he had managed all 
the affairs and he would comply w ith the 
terms of the deal.  
 
Sh. Afzal:  
Babar Awan asked me to pay balance 
amount of Rs.5.00 M.  I paid him in UAE 
Dirhams 250,000.  My secretary Khawaja 
Arshad and my son are witnesses.  At this 
point of time entire amount of deal Rs.25 M 
was completed.  M r. Babar Awan again 
asked me to give him some more amounts 
for shopping.  I gave him another 50,000 
UAE Dirhams.  Harris my son accompanied 
him to different shopping centres.  When 
they returned Mr. Babar Awan told me that 
he had spent 65,000 Dirhams.  I p aid him 
another 15000 Dirhams.  Mr. Malik 
Qayyum had got commission of Rs.600 M 
out of payments made to Mr. Babar Awan.  
 
Harris Afzal:  
I accompanied Mr. Babar Awan for 
shopping.  When we returned he asked my 
father to pay another 15000 Dirhams 
because as p er his statement he had spent 
65000 Dirhams.  My father paid.  
 
Khawara Arshad  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 20 :- 
My boss paid 250,000 Dirhams to Babar 
Awan in my presence.  I was staying with 
Sh. Afzal in Grand Hyatt.  
 
Para 15, 2 nd sub para.  Sh. Afzal:  
Later on Mr. Babar Awan took charge o f my 
legal team and appeared in the Islamabad 
High Court and Reference was stayed.  
Then he became a minister, and he refused 
to appear on behalf of Harris Group.  He 
started avoiding me and never attended my 
phone. ” 
It was consequently submitted by the le arned counsel that 
notwithstanding the respect that he had for Mr. Irfan Qadir, 
Advocate as a colleague in the profession, his character and 
conduct was not such which qualified him for appointment as the 
Prosecutor General Accountability on account of abo ve-noticed  
provision which desired a person of an un -impeachable character 
to be appointed as the Prosecutor General.  
12.  Molvi Anwar -ul-Haq, the learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan entered appearance and submitted that he was not 
representing any of th e respondents in this matter but was 
appearing in this case only on account of the notice issued to him 
by this Court seeking his assistance in the matter.  
13.  He added that he had had a meeting with the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan to seek instructions vi s-à-vis the appointment 
of the Chairman of the NAB after the office had fallen vacant on 
account of the resignation tendered by the incumbent of the said 
office and that the Prime Minister had told him that the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 21 :- 
appointment of the regular Chairman N.A.B. wa s in the process 
and would b e made within a matter of days.  
14.  About the validity and the legality of a Deputy Chairman 
of the N.A.B. acting as the Chairman when the office of Chairman 
had fallen vacant, the learned Attorney General submitted that 
where the said office fell vacant on account of some unforeseeable 
reasons, then some immediate arrangement was required to be 
made so that everything which was happening under the said 
Ordinance did not come to a stand still.  
15.  When questioned about the leg ality of the appointment 
of a person as the Prosecutor General who had already held the 
said office for a full term of three years and which term stood 
declared by law to be un -extendable, the reply of the learned 
Attorney General was that the present case  was not one where the 
term of the incumbent holder of the said office had been extended 
but was one where the said person had been appointed afresh to 
the said office.  
16.  Before proceeding to notice the submissions made by 
Mr. Irfan Qadir, the learned P rosecutor General, in defence of the 
assumption of office of Acting Chairman of the N.A.B. by the 
Deputy Chairman thereof and in defence of his own appointment as 
the Prosecutor General Accountability, we would like to bring on 
record that when we took up this matter on the last date of hearing 
we had noticed that no reply to the application under adjudication 
had been filed either by the N.A.B. or by anyone else and observed 
that the N.A.B., the Acting Chairman of the N.A.B. and the learned C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 22 :- 
Prosecutor Gene ral whose appointments were in question, should 
feel free to file their replies by the next date of hearing. Today, when 
this matter was taken up for hearing, Mr. Irfan Qadir rose and 
submitted that he had prepared a concise statement on behalf of 
himself and on behalf of the Acting Chairman of the N.A.B. which, 
however, could not be filed in Court because the Advocate -on-
Record representing them had, after putting his signatures thereon, 
cut across the same because on going through the contents thereof, 
he had refused to own the said concise statement or to file the 
same in Court. The learned Prosecutor General was reminded that 
as per the Supreme Court Rules, 1980, no concise statement could 
be filed in Court except through a duly authorized Advocate -on-
Record. He was, however, informed and allowed that  
notwithstanding the non -submission of their reply, he should feel 
free to submit orally whatever he wished to state or canvas or argue 
before this Court. Needless to say th at he was then heard at length.  
17.  He admitted that he had been a counsel for the accused 
persons of the first above -noticed Bank fraud case which is 
generally known as Haris Steel Mills case and that the said case 
was presently under investigation with none other than the N.A.B. 
itself with Ministry of Law as their Administrative Ministry and with 
him as its Prosecutor General. He added that he was the one who 
had filed all the cases on behalf of the accused persons of the said 
fraud case in the Lahore High Court and even in this Court a nd 
claimed that he had won all the said cases for them. He further 
added that he was the one who had engaged some other senior 
Advocates also to represent the said accused persons in the High C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 23 :- 
Court and in this Court at that time not because he wanted so to  
do but because the said accused persons had desired that he 
should also associate some senior advocates with him who enjoyed 
influence with the Judges of the High Courts and of the Supreme 
Court and that it was in deference to the said desire of his said 
clients that he had engaged Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, Mr. Waseem 
Sajjad and Mr. Babar Awan, Advocates to represent the said 
accused persons in the said cases. He, however, denied the 
allegation that he had taken any money from his said clients for 
any coll ateral purposes or that he had mis -appropriated any part of 
any money given to him by his said clients for onward payment to 
the said learned Advocates. He also reacted to the above -noticed  
accusations levelled by Khawaja Haris Ahmed, Advocate and 
submitt ed that he (Khawaja Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC) had also 
charged fat fees from the Bank of Punjab and was staying in 
expensive hotels at its expense while visiting Islamabad to enter 
appearance in this case.  
18.  The submissions made by Mr. Irfan Qadir, in defen ce of 
the application under adjudication, related mainly to the 
maintainability of the said application and to the jurisdiction, or to 
be more precise, the absence of jurisdiction of this Court to deal 
with the matter in question.  
19.  His precise submissi ons were as under: - 
(i) that C.M. No.1703 of 2010 which is 
under adjudication, had been filed before 
this Court in the proceedings commenced 
by this Court neither under the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 24 :- 
Constitution nor under the N.A.B. 
Ordinance of 1999, therefore, this Court 
had no jurisdiction to control, supervise or 
in any manner interfere with the 
investigation being conducted by the 
officers of the N.A.B. under the said N.A.B. 
Ordinance of 1999;  
(ii) that the jurisdiction of this Court is 
confined to the powers conferred on it 
either by the Constitution or by the law 
and since no provision existed in any law 
allowing this Court to deal with or to 
supervise the investigations, therefore, this 
Court had no jurisdiction to deal with the 
matter in question;  
(iii) that the investigat ion was an 
executive and not a judicial function;  
(iv) that the power of judicial review was 
available only where some legal provision 
had been violated and since no statutory 
provision had been breached  in the present 
case, therefore, this Court lacked 
jurisdiction to intervene in the matter;  
(v) that the entertainment of application 
in question i.e. C.M.A. No.1703 of 2003 by 
this Court , was violative of Ar ticle 10 -A of 
the Constitution and was likely to cause 
prejudice to the accused persons of the 
said case;  
(vi) that this was the first case ever in 
which this Court had controlled the 
investigation of a case at the instance of 
the complainant;  
(vii) that neither the Government of 
Punjab nor even the Bank of Punjab had C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 25 :- 
any locus -standi to file the applic ation in 
question; and that 
(viii) the appointment of holders of public 
offices could not be challenged in collateral 
proceedings.  
20.  With respect to the legality of assumption of office of 
Acting Chairman by the Deputy Chairman of N.A.B., it was 
submit ted by Mr. Irfan Qadir, the learned Prosecutor General, that 
the same was valid in view of the provisions of section 19 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 and in defence of his own appointment 
as the learned Prosecutor General, his only submission was that 
his was a fresh appointment and not an extension of his earlier 
tenure and that section 8 of the N.A.B. Ordinance of 1999 created 
no bar on a fresh appointment of a person as the Prosecutor 
General who had already exhausted one term of three years in that 
office. Reliance in this connection had been placed on the Black’s 
Law Dictionary and on the cases of MALIK SHAUKAT ALI DOGAR 
AND 12 OTHERS VS. GHULAM QASIM KHAN KHAKWANI AND OTHERS  
(PLD 1994 SC 281)  and PIR SABIR SHAH VS. FEDERATION OF 
PAKISTAN & OTHERS  (PLD 1994 S.C. 738) . 
21.  We shall first take up the objection of the learned 
Prosecutor General with respect to the maintainability of this 
Application and to the assumption of jurisdiction by this Court 
with respect to the matter in question.  
22.  As has been mentioned above, the matter in question 
relates to one of the gravest financial scams in the banking history 
of our country as a result of which the Bank of Punjab stood C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 26 :- 
cheated of an enormous amount of around eleven billion rupees 
which amount of mon ey in fact belonged to around one million 
innocent depositors including depositors of small amounts of 
money whose life -savings and property had come under serious 
threat casting thus an obligation on this Court to move in to 
protect and defend the right o f property of such a large section of 
the population i.e. about ten lakh depositors and customers of the 
Bank of Punjab which right of property stood guaranteed to them 
by Article 24 and Article 9 of the Constitution.  
23.  The background of the case in qu estion has been 
noticed in some detail in the earlier parts of this order and it 
appears that it was in view of the said facts and circumstances that  
the Bank of Punjab had felt compelled to approach this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution rea d with Order XXXIII 
Rule 6 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1980 through Constitutional 
Original Petition No.39 of 2009 with the following prayer: - 
“It is, therefore, prayed that given the callus 
manner and the enormity of the fraud played 
by the Respondents , and the resultant threat 
to the safety of the savings of more than 
9,00,000 innocent small -scale depositors of 
the BoP holding Rs.100,000 or less in their 
respective Accounts) on account of this fraud, 
as result of which a sum of upward of Rs. 10 
Billion  belonging to inter alia these small -
scale borrowers and fraudulently withdrawn 
from the Bank and misappropriated by 
Respondent No.1 -3, is not even secured to the 
extent of 10% of this amount coupled with the 
fact that these respondents and their C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 27 :- 
associate s are hooding and supporting 
holders of fake CNIC’s and identities, against 
which they are holding more than 120 urban 
Properties in DHA, Lahore Cantt etc., and 
another 105 properties, which are 
predominantly rural (though mostly 
worthless) in Kasur, Chuni an, Muridke etc., 
and are dealing with or are likely to deal 
with hundreds of persons/citizens and with 
Banks etc. on the basis of these fake 
identities, and even travel abroad on that 
basis, besides being a security threat to the 
state, it is evident that  this is case which, 
consistent with the pronouncements of this 
august Court, is one involving serious 
violations of and threat of violation of 
fundamental rights of hundreds and, 
potentially, thousands of innocent persons 
and, as such, the issues involved  herein may 
be taken up b y this august Court, directly 
under this august Court’s jurisdiction under 
article 184(3) of the constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, and appropriate 
dictations be given and orders passed tope 
secure the fundame ntal rights of more than 
”9,00,000 small -scale depositors of BoP.  
It is further prayed that during the pendency 
of this petition the NAB or any other 
Investigation Agency may very kindly be 
directed to initiate and carry out full 
investigation in the case , and, for this 
purpose, to have full power and authority to 
associate any and all persons in the 
investigation, including the respondents 
herein as well as the Writ Petitioner, and if 
sufficient incriminating evidence is found or 
is available against them , to forthwith arrest, 
detain and interrogate in accordance with 
law.  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 28 :- 
It is further prayed that the immoveable 
property belonging to the respondents Nos.1 -
5 and their associates may very kindly be 
ordered to be attached and possession 
delivered to BoP and  the vehicles recovered 
from them may very graciously be allowed to 
be sold and sale proceeds utilized towards 
partial adjustments of the outstanding 
amounts.  
Any other interim order which is deemed fit 
and proper by this hon’ble court under the 
facts and  circumstances of the case and to 
secure the rights of the small scale depositors 
of BoP may also be passed in the interest of 
justice, equity and fairplay .” 
24.  As has been mentioned above , besides other petitions  
filed in this Court under various other  provisions of the 
Constitution and the law, Constitution Petition No.39 of 2009 had 
been filed under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution which 
clause (3) reads as under: - 
“3. Without prejudice to the provisions of 
Article 199, the Supreme Court  shall, if it 
considers that a question of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement 
of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred 
by Chapter I of Part II is involved, have the 
power to make an order of the nature 
mentioned in the said Article. ” 
25.  A perusal of the above quoted provision would 
demonstrate that this Court was possessed of powers to make any 
order of the nature mentioned in Article -199 of the Constitution, if, 
in the opinion of this Court, a question of public importance 
relating to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights was C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 29 :- 
involved in the matter. As has been mentioned in the preceding 
parts of this order, what was at stake was not only a colossal  
amount of money/property belonging to at least one million 
depositors i.e. a large section of the public but what was reportedly 
at stake was also the very existence of the Bank of Punjab which 
could have sunk on account of the mega fraud in question and 
with which would have drowned not only the said one million 
depositors but eve n others dealing with the said Bank. And what 
had been sought from this Court was the protection and defence of 
the said public property. It was thus not only the right of this 
Court but in fact its onerous obligation to intervene to defend the 
said assaul t on the said fundamental right to life and to property of 
the said public.  
26.  In questioning the jurisdiction of this Court, Mr. Irfan 
Qadir, the learned Prosecutor General for the NAB submitted, as 
has been noticed above, that this Court had no jurisdi ction to 
control investigation of a criminal case and the reason offered by 
him in support of the said submission was that such a control over 
the Investigation of a criminal case by this Court could be 
“PREJUDICIAL TO THE A CCUSED .” The only judgment cited  by him 
to buttress his said plea was the case of MALIK SHAUKAT ALI 
DOGAR AND 12 OTHERS VS. GHULAM QASIM KHA N KHAKWANI AND 
OTHERS  (PLD 1994 S.C. 281) . 
27.  It was rather interesting to find that it was the 
Prosecutor General who had risen in defence of the  accused 
persons complaining of prejudice to them through the alleged C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 30 :- 
interference by this Court with the investigation of the crime in 
question while the accused persons of the said case were 
expressing gratification, satisfaction and their faith in the s aid 
intervention. It is on record, as noticed above, that one of the 
principal accused persons of this case, namely, Hamesh Khan who 
was the President of the Bank of Punjab at the relevant time and 
who was an American citizen, had volunteered to return to 
Pakistan on account of the orders passed by this Court and before 
so doing, he had expressed his complete confidence in this Court 
while still being in a foreign land i.e. in U.S.A.. Similar was the  
situation with other main accused persons e.g. Sheikh Afz al, his 
son Haris Afzal and others.  
28.  Be that as it may, a perusal of the said cited judgment 
which emanated from a learned Bench of this Court comprising 
two Honourable Members, would reveal that the only reason which 
had weighed with the said learned  Bench in reaching the above 
conclusion was the judgment delivered by the Privy Council in 
KHAWAJA NAZIR’S  case  reported as AIR 1945 P.C. 18 . Suffice it to 
say that what was in issue in the said KHAWAJA NAZIR’S  case was 
an intervention by the Lahore High C ourt in the purported exercise 
of its powers under section 561 -A of the Cr.P.C. which provision of 
law authorized the High Court “ TO MAKE SUCH ORDERS AS MAY BE 
NECESSARY TO GIVE EFFECT TO ANY ORDER UNDER THIS CODE; 
OR TO PREVENT ABUSE OF PROCESS OF ANY COU RT OR 
OTHERWISE TO SECURE ENDS OF JUSTICE .” Needless to add that 
unlike the situation obtaining in the year 1945 and earlier, this 
Court and the High Court now stand vested with extraordinary C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 31 :- 
powers available under Article 199 of the Constitution which are  
not limited to the bounds of the above -noticed sub -constitutional 
provision of section 561 -A Cr.P.C.. Nor was the said case of 
KHAWAJA NAZIR AHMED  one where the jurisdiction of a High Court 
had been invoked or exercised in defence of an aggression against  
the fundamental rights of the public at large. Therefore, the dictum 
laid down in KHAWAJA NAZIR’S  case was not applicable to the 
present situation and seeking its application to the facts and 
circumstances of the present case was misplaced. While we are o n  
the subject, we would like to refer to a judgment of this Court 
delivered in the case of ADVOCATE GENERAL SIN DH VS. FARMAN 
HUSSAIN AND OTHERS  (PLD 1995 SC 1)  which judgment was then 
cited with approval in a recent judgment of this Court, namely, 
ZAHID I MRAN AND OTHERS VS. THE STATE AND OTHERS  (PLD 2006 
SC 109) . The principle which had been highlighted in the said 
judgments was that the approach of a Court of law while dealing 
with criminal matters had to be dynamic keeping in view the facts 
and circumsta nces of each case and also the surrounding situation 
obtaining in the country. The relevant passage reads as under: - 
“This Court in more than one case has held 
that the approach of the Court while 
considering criminal matters should be 
dynamic and it shou ld take into 
consideration the surrounding situation 
obtaining in the country……… ” 
In view of the facts and circumstances of the present case 
summarized above, it would have been felonious and un -
conscionable on the part of this Court if it had refused to i ntervene C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 32 :- 
to defend the fundamental rights of such a large section of the 
public and leaving it only to the concerned officials of the NAB who 
had done nothing at all in the matter for almost TWO YEARS ; who 
had remained only the silent spectators of this en tire drama and 
had only witnessed the escape of the accused persons to foreign 
lands. It is to check and cater for such kind of gross negligence, 
non-feasance and mal -feasance that the framers of the 
Constitution had obligated the High Court under Article 199 and 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution to intervene in 
the matter exercising their power to review administrative and 
executive actions. This is then what the Constitution had expected 
of this Court through its Article 184(3) and this is exactly what this 
Court had done.  
29.  It may be mentioned here that in order to ensure peace 
in a society, the laws are required to keep pace with the changing 
times and as has been noticed above with reference to the case of 
ADVOCATE GENERAL, SINDH ( supra) , even the approach of the 
courts has to be dynamic keeping in view the ever -changing 
ground realities. It was for this very reason that even in the matter 
of investigations, a role was carved for the courts by addition of 
sub-section (6) in section 22-A of the Cr.P.C. through the 
Amending Ordinance No.CXXXI of 2002 of which provisions, the 
learned Prosecutor General appears to be ignorant. A reference 
may also be made to a judgment delivered by a 17 Member Bench 
of this Court in MUBASHIR HASAN’S  case  (PLD 2010 SC 265)  especially 
to the discussion on the question of investigation as contained in C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 33 :- 
para 102 thereof which is reproduced hereunder for ready 
reference: - 
“102. Apart from above two cases, there is yet 
another case from UK jurisdiction i.e. Hig h Court 
of Justice, Queen's Bench Division, in Re: The 
Queen on the Application of Corner House 
Research and Campaign Against Arms Trade v. 
The Director of The Serious Fraud Office and BAE 
Systems PLC [(2008) EWHC 714]. The brief 
summary of the facts is as  under:  
The BAE Systems was under a contract 
with Saudi Arabia for the purchase of Al -
Yamamah aircrafts. In relation to this 
contract, several allegations of bribery had 
been made against the BAE. The Serious 
Fraud Office (SFO) had been appointed to 
invest igate into the matter. In the course of 
this investigation the BAE was asked to 
disclose the details of payments to agents 
and the consultants with respect to the 
contract of the aircrafts.  
In response to this, the solicitors for BAE wrote 
back to SFO sayi ng that the investigations should 
be halted; as the continuing investigations would 
seriously affect the diplomatic relations between 
the U.K and Saudi Arabia and also that the 
safety of the British Citizens would be affected. 
Further, also that the invest igations would 
prevent UK from clinching the largest export 
contract of Al -Yamamah aircrafts. This however, 
did not stop the investigations from continuing.  
In July 2006, the SFO was about to access the 
Swiss Bank accounts of BAE. This caused a stir 
and ma de the Prince Bandar of Arabia to convey 
to the then Prime Minister of UK, that if the SFO C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 34 :- 
did not stop looking at the Swiss Bank accounts 
of BAE, and also cease other investigation, then 
the contract for the aircrafts would be called off 
and both intellig ence and diplomatic relations 
between the two countries would be seriously 
ceased.  
This made the government to rethink its policy, 
and it was agreed among the Prime Minister and 
other ministers that 'if the investigation into this 
continued then the relati ons between the two 
countries would be affected and a severe blow 
would also be dealt on UK's foreign policy 
objectives in the Middle East. Further, there 
would be a threat to the internal security of the 
country.  
In light of the above developments on 14 
December 2006 the Director of SFO terminated all 
investigation proceedings as it was felt that the 
continued investigation posed a serious threat to 
the country's National and International security 
and would also affect the lives of their citizens. It 
was in this light that an NGO called Corner 
House Research, applied for a judicial review of 
the decision to terminate the investigation 
process.  
The Court, apart from other findings, made the 
following observations: -- 
The principle of separation of powers can not be 
applied in the cases of executive's decisions 
affecting foreign policy. The courts can take notice 
of those cases where the threat involved is not 
simply against the country's commercial, 
diplomatic and security interest but also against 
its legal s ystem.  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 35 :- 
It is the responsibility of the court to provide 
protection. Threats to the administration of public 
justice within a country are the concern primarily 
of the courts, not the executive.  
The rule of law requires that the Director should 
act in a mann er consistent, the well recognized 
standards, which the courts impose by way of 
judicial review. At the heart of the obligations of 
the courts and of the judges lies the duty to 
protect the rule of law.  
The Rule of law is nothing if it fails to constrain 
overweening power.  
The courts fulfill their obligation to protect the rule 
of law by ensuring that a decision maker on 
whom statutory powers are conferred exercises 
those powers independently and without 
surrendering them to a third party.  
The executive, Di rector and the attorney should 
not make any decision in submission to the 
threats. The courts cannot exercise jurisdiction on 
the foreign state, however, the legal relationships 
of the different branches of the government and 
the separation of power depend s upon internal 
constitutional arrangements. They are of no 
concern to foreign states.  
A resolute refusal to any foreign threat is the only 
way to protect national interest. While exercising 
statutory power an independent prosecutor is not 
entitled to surr ender to the threat of a third party 
or the foreign state.  
The discontinuation of the investigation has in 
fact caused actual damage to the national 
security, the integrity of criminal justice system 
and the rule of law.  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 36 :- 
The Director has acted on erroneous  
interpretation of Art 5 of OECD and both the 
Director and the government have failed to 
recognize that the rule of law required the 
decision to discontinue to be reached as an 
exercise of independent judgment, in pursuance 
of power conferred by statute. T o preserve the 
integrity and independence of that judgment 
demanded resistance to the pressure exerted by 
means of a specific threat. That threat was 
intended to prevent the Director from pursuing the 
course of investigation. It achieved its purpose.  
On th e basis of above findings, the Court 
ultimately came to the following conclusion: - 
"The Court has a responsibility to secure the rule 
of law. The Director was required to satisfy the 
court that all that could reasonably be done had 
been done to resist the threat. He has failed to do 
so. He submitted too readily because he, like the 
executive, concentrated on the effects which were 
feared should the threat be carried out and not on 
how the threat might be resisted. No one whether 
within this "country or outs ide is entitled to 
interfere with the course of our justice. It is the 
failure of govt. and the defendant to bear the 
essential principle in mind that justifies the 
intervention of this court. We shall hear further 
arguments as to the nature of such interv ention. 
But we intervene in fulfillment of our responsibility 
to protect the independence of the Director and of 
our criminal justice system from threat. On 11 Dec. 
2006, Prime Minister said that this was the 
clearest case for intervention in the public in terest 
he had seen. We agree.”  
30.  The learned Prosecutor General had also pressed into 
service the provisions of the newly added Article 10 -A in the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 37 :- 
Constitution to plead that the interference in question by this 
Court was violative of the said Fundament al Right of a fair trial 
guaranteed to an accused person and thus causing harm and 
injury to their interests. The said provisions of Article 10 -A inserted 
in the Constitution by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) 
Act, 2010, read as under: - 
“10-A.  For  determination of his civil rights 
and obligations or in any criminal charge 
against him a person sha ll be entitled to a 
fair trial i n due process.”  
The submission, to say the least, is based upon the learned 
counsel’s misconception about the purpose, the concept and the 
true meanings of ‘ INVESTIGATION ’. Section 4(1)( l) of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 defines the said word in the following 
terms: - 
“(l) ‘INVESTIGATION ’ includes all the 
proceedings under this Code for the 
COLLECTION OF EVIDENCE  conduc ted 
by a police officer or by any other  
person……… ”  
Investigation, therefore, means nothing more than collection of 
evidence. Needless to say that it is evidence and evidence alone 
which could lead a court of law to a just and fair conclusion about 
the gui lt or innocence of an accused person. It is, therefore, only an 
honest investigation which could guarantee a fair trial and 
conceiving a fair trial in the absence of an impartial and a just 
investigation would be a mere illusion and a mirage. It is, hence,  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 38 :- 
only a fair investigation which could assure a fair trial and thus 
any act which ensures a clean investigation which is above board, 
is an act in aid of securing the said guaranteed right and not in 
derogation thereof. However, before we part with this as pect of the 
matter, we may add that if the learned counsel had cared to go 
through various orders passed by this Court in the main 
Constitution Original Petition No.39 of 2009, he would have 
discovered that the said orders were restricted only to ensuring 
that the investigating agency did what it was required by law to do; 
did it honestly, fairly and efficiently; did not sleep over the matter 
as it had done for almost TWO YEARS  and that not a word had been 
said by this Court about what evidence to collect a nd what 
evidence not to collect or about the worth or veracity of the 
collected evidence.  
31.  Having thus examined all aspects of the matter 
emanating from the submissions of the learned Prosecutor General 
noticed at seria l number (i) to (vii) in para 19  supra, we say that 
while we do acknowledge his concern for the welfare and the 
interests of the accused persons of the case in hand, we find and 
hold that in the given facts and circumstances of this case, the 
petitioner’s approach to this Court and this C ourt’s response 
thereto was perfectly constitutional and legal. The said contentions 
of the learned Prosecutor General are, therefore, repelled.  
32.  The next submission of the learned Prosecutor General 
noticed at Sl.No. (viii) of para 19  above, was that the appointments 
of the holders of public offices could not be challenged in collateral C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 39 :- 
proceedings. The precise submission was that since the grievance 
in the main Constitution Petition No.39 of 2009 related to the 
alleged looting of public money lying in  trust with the Bank of 
Punjab, therefore, the question of the validity of assumption of the 
office of the Acting Chairman of NAB by a Deputy Chairman thereof 
and the issue of the legality of the appointment of the learned 
Prosecutor General of the said or ganization, could not be 
entertained by this Court nor decided in the said proceedings. 
Reliance had been placed by the learned Prosecutor General on PIR 
SABIR SHAH’S  case  (PLD 1994 SC 738)  wherein it had been observed 
at page 769 that the appointment of a  holder of a public office 
could not be challenged in collateral proceedings.  
33.  This was a case where Pir Sabir Shah, a deposed Chief 
Minister of the then NWFP (now Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa) had 
challenged the Proclamation of Emergency issued by the then 
President of Pakistan under Article 234 of the Constitution whereby 
the said Chief Minister and all the Provincial Ministers had been 
ousted from their respective offices; the Governor had been directed 
to assume all functions of the Government of that Provi nce and the 
powers of the Provincial Assembly had been ordered to be 
exercisable by or under the authority of the Parliament. The reliefs 
claimed by the said deposed Chief Minister, through a petition filed 
in this Court  under Article 17 read with Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, were as under: - 
a) Declaration that the Proclamation 
issued under Article 234 was null and void 
and of no legal effect;  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 40 :- 
b) Declaration that any action taken 
either by or ON THE REPORT  or ADVICE  of 
respondent No.4 (the Governor) was 
contrary to law and of no legal effect and 
restraining him from taking any actions 
under colour of law in purported exercise of 
the functions of the Governor of the Frontier 
Province;  
c) Restraining the Federal Government 
and/or the President from inte rfering with or 
meddling in the affairs of the Government of 
the Frontier Province;  
d) Declaration that the Government 
headed by the petitioner was the duly 
constituted Government of the Frontier 
Province and was authorised to exercise all 
powers and disch arge all responsibilities 
accordingly;  
e) Restraining the respondents or any of 
them acting either directly or indirectly from 
interfering with the functioning of the 
Government of the Frontier Province;  
f) Such other relief as may be deemed 
appropriate by  this Hon’ble Court;  
g) Costs of the case.  
Just a bare look at the facts of this case would have revealed to the 
learned Prosecutor General that said was a case where what had, 
in fact, been challenged was a report or an advice submitted by the 
Governor to  the President on which an emergency had been 
imposed and one of the grounds urged during the course of 
arguments, to canvass illegality of the said report/advice was that 
the Governor who had submitted the said report was not a 
constitutionally appointed Governor. No frontal attack, at all, had 
ever been made to the Governor’s appointment as such and a 
perusal of the above -quoted prayer clause of the petition would also C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 41 :- 
show that not even a prayer had been made about the alleged 
illegal appointment of the said Governor. As against this, in the 
present case, however, it was not any act or action of the Acting 
Chairman or of the learned Prosecutor General which had been 
impugned and it was not to seek invalidation of any such action 
that the illegality of the  appointment of these public office holders 
had been incidentally pleaded as a ground for the purpose. But 
what had been done in the present case was a direct challenge 
thrown to the said appointments through an independent 
application.  
34.  In this view o f the matter, the reliance placed by the 
learned Prosecutor General on PIR SABIR SHAH’S  case was totally 
misplaced.  
35.  Having thus dealt with all the above -noticed 
submissions, we now proceed to examine the merits of the case.  
36.  We will first take up  the matter of the assumption of 
office of the Acting Chairman of the NAB by a Deputy Chairman of 
the said Bureau.  
37.  The National Accountability Bureau being Ordinance 
No. XVIII of 1999 was promulgated on 16 th November, 1999, inter-
alia, “TO PROVIDE FO R EFFECTIVE MEASURES FOR THE 
DETECTION, INVESTIGATION, PROSECUTION AND SPEEDY DISPOSAL 
OF CASES INVOLVING CORRUPTION, CORRUPT PRACTICES, MISUSE 
OR ABUSE OF POWER OR AUTHORITY, MISAPPROPRIATION OF 
PROPERTY, TAKING OF KICK -BACKS, COMMISSIONS AND FOR C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 42 :- 
MATTERS CONNECTED AND ANCILLARY OR INCIDENTAL THERETO .” 
And for “ RECOVERY OF OUTSTANDING AMOUNTS FROM THOSE 
PERSONS WHO HAVE COMMITTED DEFAULT IN RE -PAYMENT OF 
AMOUNTS TO BANKS, FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, GOVERNMENT 
AGENCIES AND OTHER AGENCIES .” The persons liable to  be 
PROCEEDED AGAINST , ARRESTED  and PROSECUTED  under the said 
Ordinance, as per section 9 thereof read with section 5(m), included 
persons of the level and status of the SITTING PRIME MINISTER , the 
sitting Chairman of the Senate, the sitting Speaker of the  National 
Assembly, Federal Ministers, Attorney General, the sitting Chief 
Ministers, the sitting Speakers of the Provincial Assemblies, 
Provincial Ministers, Members of the Parliament and Members of 
the Provincial Assemblies. And the person empowered to i nitiate 
and take such -like steps against such -like accused persons and 
others, including ordering their arrest, their prosecution and even 
confiscation of their properties, was the Chairman of the said 
Bureau. The provisions of section 6(b) of the said Ord inance then 
talked of the appointment and the terms and conditions of the 
office or the said Chairman, as originally enacted , was  in the 
following terms: - 
  “6(b) Chairman National Accountability Bureau:  
(i) There shall be a Chairman NAB to be 
appointed by the  President for such 
period as the Chief Executive of 
Pakistan may determine and consider 
proper and necessary.  
(ii) The Chairman NAB shall be appointed 
on such terms and conditions and shall C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 43 :- 
have the status and privileges as may 
be determined by the Chief Execu tive. 
(iii) The Chairman NAB may resign his 
office by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Chief Executive.”  
The matter of accountability under the said Ordinance and the 
status of the persons charged with the responsibilities envisaged by 
the said Ordinance,  came to be examined by this Court in KHAN 
ASFAND YAR WALI’S  case (PLD 2001 S.C. 607) . This Court was 
appalled to find that no qualifications stood prescribed for persons 
who could be appointed as officers with the above kind of high 
obligations nor did su ch like officers, who stood commanded to 
proceed even against the sitting Prime Minister, have any security 
of service or of any terms and conditions of their service. It was, 
therefore, found imperative by this Court that the office of the 
Chairman should  be made secure and strong and be manned by 
persons of high qualities to be able to cope with the high degree of 
responsibilities cast on it. It had consequently been observed 
through para 288 of the above -mentioned judgment that the 
Chairman of the NAB sh ould be appointed by the President in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan; that the tenure of 
his office be secured; that he should also be protected against 
removal from office and should not be removable from the said 
office except on grounds  on which a Judge of the Supreme Court 
could be removed and that the salary and allowances etc. to which 
such a Chairman was entitled should also be fixed and determined 
and should not be allowed to be varied during the term of his office.  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 44 :- 
38.  It was in v iew of these recommendations and 
observations made by this Court through the above -mentioned 
judgment delivered in April, 2001 that amendments were made in 
the above -mentioned Ordinance through an Amending Ordinance 
No.XXXV of 2001 which was promulgated on  August, 10, 2001 and 
the substituted provisions of section 6(b) above -quoted then read 
as under: - 
“(b) Chairman National Accountability 
Bureau:  
(i) There shall be a Chairman NAB 
to be appointed by the President in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan for a period of three years on 
such terms and conditions as may be 
determined by the President and shall 
not be removed except on the grounds 
of removal of Judge of Supreme Court 
of Pakistan. ” 
39.  It may, however, be mentioned that in the month of  
November, 2002, amongst others, a new sub -section (ba) was 
added to the above -mentioned section 6 through the Amending 
Ordinance No. CXXXIII of 2002 whereby the qualifications for a 
person to be appointed as the Chairman NAB were also prescribed 
which wer e as under: - 
“6(ba) A person shall not be appointed as 
Chairman NAB unless he - 
(i) is a retired Chief Justice or a 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a 
Chief Justice of a High Court; or  
(ii) is a retired officer of the Armed 
Forces of Pakistan equivalent to C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 45 :- 
the rank of  a Lieutenant General; 
or 
(iii) is a retired Federal Government 
Officer in BPS 22 or equivalent. ” 
But in the same breath, an amendment was also made in sub -
section (b) of the said section 6 whereby consultation with the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan in the matter of  the said appointment was 
omitted. It may well have been just a coincidence but historically 
speaking the elimination of the Chief Justice of Pakistan from the 
said scene coincided with the General Elections in the country in  
the year 2002 after which ele ctions serious allegations became 
public regarding the misuse of this NAB Ordinance for political 
purposes.  
40.  Be that as it may, what is still strikingly noticeable is 
that irrespective of the fact whether the said Chairman was 
appointable with or with out the consultation of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, the fact remains that the qualifications prescribed for the 
said office are a definite indicator of the high status of the said 
office which is obviously in consonance with the high obligations 
cast on  the incumbent i.e. a Chairman being a person who had 
held the office of the Chief Justice of Pakistan or of the Judge of the 
Supreme Court or of the Chief Justice of a High Court or was a 
retired officer of the Armed Forces of Pakistan of the rank of a 
Lieutenant General or who was a retired Federal Government 
Officer in BPS -22. 
41.  The reason for looking for a person of such an eminence 
and prestige for appointment as the Chairman of NAB is not far to C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 46 :- 
find. A bare perusal of the provisions of sections 5( m), 7, 8, 12, 
16(a), 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26 and 28 of the said NAB 
Ordinance would show the importance and the momentousness of 
the office of the Chairman under the said Ordinance. He is the 
person to be consulted by the President of Pakistan for t he 
appointment of a Deputy Chairman of the NAB and for the 
appointment of the Prosecutor General Accountability; he appoints 
all other officers of the NAB; he is the one to decide whether to 
make or not to make a Reference with respect to corruption or 
corrupt practices and no Court could take cognizance of any such 
offence unless such a Reference was made by him or by an officer 
authorized by him; he is the one who could order initiation of 
proceedings under this Ordinance or order an inquiry or 
investigat ion in the matter; he is one who directs and authorizes 
arrests of accused persons under the said Ordinance; he is the one 
who has the power to freeze properties which are the subject matter 
of an offence under the said Ordinance and who could, in certain 
cases, even order sale of the said property and he has the authority 
to call for any record or information with respect to any matter 
covered by the NAB Ordinance. All Banks and Financial 
Institutions stand commanded to report all unusual financial 
transac tions to him. It is he who stands authorized to communicate 
with foreign Governments for their assistance; he is the authority 
to accept plea -bargains and he is the one who has the power to 
tender pardon to any person accused of an offence under the said 
Ordinance. Needless to add that such like orders could be passed C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 47 :- 
by him against any holder of any Public Office including a sitting 
Prime Minister of the country.  
42.  As against this, a Deputy Chairman of the NAB is 
appointed, as has been mentioned above,  in consultation with the 
Chairman. He is so appointed only to assist the Chairman and 
stands ordained to carry out only such functions as may be 
directed by the Chairman. Reference may be made to the provisions 
of section 7(a) of the NAB Ordinance. Accord ing to section 7(aa) the  
qualifications prescribed for appointment as the said Deputy 
Chairman are: - 
“(a) is or has been an officer of the Armed 
Forces of Pakistan equivalent of the rank 
of a Major General; or  
(b) is or has been a Federal Government 
officer in BPS -21 or equivalent.”  
As against the security of tenure guaranteed to the Chairman who 
is removable from office only on the grounds prescribed by the 
Constitution for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan, the ground for removal of  a Deputy Chairman from office 
is misconduct as defined by the Government Servants (Efficiency & 
Disciplines) Rules of 1973.  
43.  This is then the difference between the status of the 
Chairman and the level of a Deputy Chairman whose functioning 
and exerci se of powers are at the mercy of the Chairman. And it is 
for this reason that the provisions of section 6(c) of the NAB 
Ordinance did not consider a Deputy Chairman good enough to C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 48 :- 
perform the functions of the office of the Chairman except in 
situations of dire emergency. The said provisions of section 6(c) of 
the said Ordinance are reproduced hereunder for ready reference: - 
“(c) Acting Chairman National 
Accountability Bureau:  
As and when the Chairman NAB is 
ABSENT OR UNABLE TO PERFORM THE 
FUNCTIONS OF HIS OFFICE  due to any 
reason whatsoever, the Deputy Chairman 
will act as the Chairman NAB, and in  
 
case the Deputy Chairman is absent or 
unable to perform the functions of the 
office, ANY OTHER PERSON DULY 
AUTHORIZED BY THE CHAIRMAN NAB , 
to act as Chairman NA B.” 
(emphasis and under -lining has been 
supplied)  
44.  As has been noticed above, Khawaja Haris Ahmed, the 
learned Sr. ASC representing the petitioner Bank had drawn our 
attention to the provisions of Article 180, Article 196 and Article 
217 of the Constit ution as also to the provisions of some other 
statutes which envisage appointment of an acting incumbent of the 
office not only when the actual incumbent was temporarily absent 
or was unable to perform his functions but also where such an 
office had become  vacant. And  to add that a similar situation is 
envisaged by clauses (1) and (2) of Article 49 of the Constitution 
where a specific provision has been made with respect to the office 
of the President of Pakistan and where the Chairman of the Senate 
or the Speaker of the National Assembly act as the President or 
perform the functions of the said office not only when the President 
is temporarily absent or is unable to perform the functions of his C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 49 :- 
office but also when the said office had fallen vacant. It had been 
highlighted by the learned counsel that it was because of the high 
degree of difference in the level of the persons occupying the office 
of the Chairman and that of the Deputy Chairman and also 
because a Deputy Chairman would not be possessed of 
quali fications prescribed for the Chairman that the law -giver had 
specifically and intentionally permitted the Deputy Chairman to act 
as the Chairman only when the Chairman was absent or was  
unable to perform the functions of his office and not when the said 
office had become vacant. The learned counsel had also drawn our 
attention to the words “ ANY OFFICER OF THE N AB DULY 
AUTHORIZED BY THE CH AIRMAN ” occurring in the above -quoted 
provisions of section 6(c) and had submitted that the said 
provisions of section 6 (c) pre -supposed the existence of the 
Chairman and did not cater for a situation where a permanent 
vacancy had occurred in the said office.  
45.  The reply of Mr. Irfan Qadir, the learned Prosecutor 
General Accountability to the above -noticed state of law was only 
his reliance on PIR SABIR SHAH’S  case supra and his submission 
was that the appointment of the holder of a public office could not 
be challenged in collateral proceedings. This submission has been 
examined by us in some detail in the preceding par t of this 
judgment and has been rejected. His further reliance was on the 
provisions of section 19 of the General Clauses Act which read as 
under: - C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 50 :- 
“19. Official chiefs and subordinates.  
(1) In any Central Act or Regulation made 
after the commencement of this Act, it shall be 
sufficient, for the purpose of expressing that a 
law relative to the chief or superior or an office 
shall apply to the deputies or subordinates 
LAWFULLY PERFORMING THE DUTIES OF 
THAT OFFICE IN THE PLACE OF THEIR 
SUPERIOR , to prescribe  the duty of the superior.  
(2) This section applies also to all Central 
Acts made after the third day of January, 
1868, and to all Regulations made on or after 
the fourteenth day of January, 1887. ” 
(emphasis and under -lining has been supplied)  
These provisions  of the said section 19 do not offer any help to the 
proposition being canvassed by the learned counsel as they 
authorize a subordinate to perform the functions reserved for a 
superior only if such functions were being ‘ LAWFULLY ’ performed 
by a subordinate  and would not come in aid of a subordinate who 
assumes performance of his superior’s functions in violation of law. 
Needless to say that the said provisions of section 19 have no 
relevance to the question in issue.  
46.  The only submission made in the mat ter in question by 
the learned Attorney General, who appeared to assist us on our 
call, was that the provisions of the said section 6(c) be read with 
the provisions of section 6(b)(ii) which provisions read as under: - 
“6(b) 
(ii) The Chairman NAB may, in w riting 
under his hand, addressed to the President, 
resign his office. ” C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 51 :- 
What the learned Attorney General perhaps wished us to consider 
was a situation where the Chairman resigned his office or where 
the office became ‘ VACANT ’ for some other un -foreseeable cause.  
47.  What then transpires from various provisions relating to 
the Chairman NAB and its Deputy Chairman noticed above, is 
that:- 
a) on account of the extra -ordinary, the  
delicate and the demanding duties cast on 
the Chairman, the law expects him to be a 
person of equally extraordinary qualities, a 
towering and an exalted person i.e. a 
person of the caliber and the level of the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan;  
b) for the same reason, even the mode 
of his selection and appointment has been 
made very competit ive i.e. to be chosen by 
the President in consultation with the 
Leader of the House and the Leader of the 
Opposition in the National Assembly; and  
c) because of the same rationale, he 
has been made irremovable from office 
except on the grounds on which a J udge of 
this Court could be removed.  
And when we look at the qualifications prescribed by law for a 
person to become a Deputy Chairman; the mode of his 
appointment i.e. to be appointed by the President in consultation 
only with the Chairman (section 7(a) o f the NAB Ordinance); the 
duties of his office i.e. to assist the Chairman and to carry out only 
such functions as may be directed by the Chairman (section 7(a) 
ibid) and his removability only on grounds of misconduct as C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 52 :- 
prescribed for the removal of an or dinary civil servant, the office of 
the Deputy Chairman and the holder thereof appears 
inconsequential as compared to the Chairman NAB..  
48.  Reverting once again to the qualifications enjoined for 
the holders of the said two offices and also keeping in vi ew the 
qualifications possessed by the respondent Deputy Chairman, the 
least that can be said is that if a person was disqualified in law to 
hold the office of the Chairman NAB in terms of section 6(ba) of the 
Ordinance of 1999 then how could he be allowed  to hold the said 
office in terms of section 6(c) of the said Ordinance. Such an 
interpretation given to the provisions of the said section 6(c) would 
amount to defeating the law and playing a fraud on it, to which 
illegality, this Court cannot become a pa rty. Such a view finds 
strength from various above -noticed constitutional and legal 
provisions which allow assumption of an office on acting charge 
basis not only where the incumbent was temporarily absent but 
also where such an office had become vacant. D espite knowledge of 
such -like provisions, the draftsman and the law -giver intentionally 
declined permission to a Deputy Chairman of NAB to assume the 
office of the Acting Chairman when this office had become vacant 
and allowed him to assume the said obliga tions only in situations 
of dire emergency when the Chairman was temporarily absent or 
was un -able to perform the functions of his office. Needless to say 
that inherent in the inability is the ability of someone to do 
something and there could be no concep t of inability where the 
ability was completely lacking as in the present case of non -C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 53 :- 
existence of the Chairman on account of his having quit the said 
office.  
49.  It is, therefore, held that the provisions of section 6(c) 
ibid permit a Deputy Chairman to act as the Chairman NAB only 
when the Chairman is available but is temporarily absent or is 
temporarily un -able to perform functions of his office e.g. on 
account of illness etc. and that the said provisions did not allow a 
Deputy Chairman to act as the Ch airman when the said office was 
vacant as in the present case.  
50.  We would also like to notice here the above -mentioned 
submission of the learned Attorney General with reference to the 
provisions of section 6(b)(ii) of the said Ordinance i.e. what happen s 
where the Chairman resigns.  
51.  The simple answer to this question is that every public 
functionary is required to act diligently in the discharge of his 
obligations without wasting any time. It had come to our notice 
while dealing with another case rel ating to the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance of 2007 and we take judicial notice of the 
said fact that it was in the month of February, 2010 i.e. about six 
months ago that the Chairman NAB had indicated, in writing, his 
intention to quit the office. Ordi narily, the competent authority 
would have been expected to start looking for a substitute which 
was perhaps not done. And then it was in the early part of the 
month of June i.e. more than TWO MONTHS  ago that he actually 
resigned. Where is then the justifi cation for not filling up the 
vacancy for such a long period of time? It will be futile to blame the C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 54 :- 
stars for the said fault. The defect or culpability does not lie with 
the law. Even in the case of a vacancy in the office of the President, 
a mention of w hich has been made in the earlier parts of this order, 
inspite of the fact that the said vacancy has to be filled through a 
fairly cumbersome process i.e. through an election for which the 
electoral college comprises two Houses of the Parliament and the 
four Provincial Assemblies, the Constitution permits only THIRTY 
DAYS  for the purpose. Here is a case of a much simpler exercise 
where the appointment has to be made by the President in 
consultation only with the Leader of the House and the Leader of 
the Opp osition in the National Assembly and more than TWO 
MONTHS  have gone by and there is still no sign of the appointment 
being made as required by the law.  
52.  It is a principle too well established by now that no one 
could be heard or allowed to reap the ben efits of his own omissions, 
mis-feasance or non -feasance. And more importantly, the 
provisions envisaging appointments of acting incumbents are a 
mere stopgap arrangement meant to cater for emergencies and 
such -like provisions can never be allowed to be us ed to circumvent 
the law relating to the making of a regular appointment to such an 
office or to be used as a substitute for a regular appointment or to 
be abused to put an un -qualified person to hold a post which the 
law does not permit him to hold. Refer ence may be made to AL-
JEHAD TRUST CASE  (PLD 1996 SC 324) .  
53.  Having thus looked at all aspects of this matter, we find 
that a Deputy Chairman could assume acting charge of the office of C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 55 :- 
the Chairman only when a Chairman existed but was absent or 
was fo r some reason unable to perform functions of his office and 
not when the office had become permanently vacant.  
54.  This brings us to the question of the appointment of Mr. 
Irfan Qadir, Advocate as the learned Prosecutor General 
Accountability under the N AB Ordinance of 1999.  
55.  A perusal of the provisions of section 8 of the said 
Ordinance of 1999 would reveal also the importance of the said 
office as it is only a person qualified to be appointed as a Judge of 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan who could be appointed as the 
Prosecutor General Accountability under the said Ordinance. And 
on account of the significance of the said office, its holder was also 
made irremovable from office except on the grounds prescribed by 
the Constitution for the removal of a J udge of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan. This according to the learned counsel for the petitioner 
shows the impeccable character required of a person who could 
legally hold the said office. According to the said learned counsel, 
Mr. Irfan Qadir, Advocate, fe ll a lot short of the said commanded 
requirements of character on account of his alleged involvement in 
the present case of Haris St eel Mills which was under process with 
the NAB authorities and more so when he had been representing 
the accused persons of the said case.  
56.  Be that as it may, we do not consider it appropriate or 
even necessary to go into the said aspect of the matter for the time 
being and would rather confine ourselves to the alleged illegality of 
the appointment of Mr. Irfan Qadir as the  said Prosecutor General.  C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 56 :- 
57.  It is a position admitted even by Mr. Irfan Qadir that he 
had once earlier been appointed as the Prosecutor General 
Accountability under section 8 of the said Ordinance of 1999 and 
that he had held the said office for a full term of three years i.e. 
from December, 2003 to December, 2006. The case of the petitioner 
Bank is that there was a legal bar on his re -appointment to the 
same office while the case of Mr. Irfan Qadir is that the bar was 
only on the extension of the tenure  and not on a fresh appointment 
of a person who had earlier held the office for a non -extendable 
term of three years. The relevant provision of section 8 of the NAB 
Ordinance read as under: - 
“8(a)(iii) The Prosecutor General 
Accountability shall hold offi ce for a NON -
EXTENDABLE PERIOD  of three years.”  
(emphasis and under -lining has been supplied)  
58.  The provisions of section 8(a) as they existed in the NAB 
Ordinance of 1999 as originally enacted, read as under: - 
“The Chairman NAB may appoint any person 
to act as the Prosecutor General 
Accountability, notwithstanding any other 
appointment or office the latter may 
concurrently hold, upon such terms and 
conditions as may be determined by the 
Chairman.”  
It was on August 10, 2001 that through the Amending Ord inance 
No.XXXV of 2001, amongst others, the original provisions of section 
8(a) were substituted as under: - 
“8(a) C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 57 :- 
(i) The President of Pakistan, in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan and Chairman NAB may 
appoint any person, who is qualified 
to be appointed as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court, as Prosecutor 
General Accountability.  
(ii) The Prosecutor General 
Accountability shall hold 
independent office on whole time 
basis and shall not hold any other 
office concurrently.  
(iii) The Prosecutor Genera l 
Accountability shall hold office for a 
period of three years.  
(iv) The Prosecutor General 
Accountability shall not be removed 
from office except on the grounds of 
removal of a Judge of Supreme Court 
of Pakistan.  
(v) The Prosecutor General 
Accountability may, by writing under 
his hand addressed to the President 
of Pakistan, resign his office.”  
It would be noticed that even through this amendment carried out 
in the year 2001, no specific provision was made either permitting 
or prohibiting the extension in t he tenure of the Prosecutor 
General’s term of office. It was, however, on November 23, 2002 
that through the Amending Ordinance No.CXXXVIII of 2002, the 
word of “ NON -EXTENDABLE " was added before the word “ PERIOD ” 
in clause (iii) of sub -section (a) of secti on 8 of the said Ordinance of 
1999.  
59.  It would thus be noticed that making the three years ’ 
term of the office of Prosecutor General “ NON -EXTENDABLE ” was a C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 58 :- 
specific and intentional insertion in the relevant provisions and 
meanings and effect was accord ingly required to be given to the 
said deliberate and designed inclusion of the said word “ NON -
EXTENDABLE ” in the said provision s. 
60.  It had been submitted by Khawaja Haris Ahmed, the 
learned Sr. ASC that the addition of the word “ NON -EXTENDABLE ” 
in the said provision was designed to emphasize the clear intention 
of the law giver that a person who had once held the said office for 
a term of three years would not be eligible to hold that office any 
further either by way of stretching of the said period thr ough 
extension of tenure or by manipulating the same through a fresh 
appointment. He had added that prefixing of word i.e. 
“EXTENDABLE ” with a negative word i.e. “ NON ”, was always 
indicative of the intensity of the command and the insistence on 
the mandato ry nature of the compulsion. In this connection the 
learned counsel drew our attention to the PRINCIPLES OF 
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION by Guru Prasanna Singh, Tenth 
Edition, 2006 (Extensively Revised & Enlarged) , where the author 
deals with the use of negati ve words in the following term: - 
“Another mode of showing a clear intention 
that the provision enacted is mandatory, is 
by clothing the command in a negative form. 
As stated by CRAWFORD: “Prohibitive or 
negative words can rarely, if ever, be 
directory. And  this is so even though the 
statute provides no penalty for disobedience”. 
As observed by SUBBARAO, J.: “Negative 
words are clearly prohibitory and are C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 59 :- 
ordinarily used as legislative device to make 
a statute imperative.”  
61.  The learned counsel had furthe r argued that it was an 
age-old principle too well established by now that what the law did 
not allow to be achieved directly could never be permitted to be 
achieved indirectly. Reliance in this connection had been placed on 
the judgment delivered by this Court in the case of MIAN 
MUHAMMAD NAWAZ SHARI F VS. PRESIDENT OF P AKISTAN  AND 
OTHERS  (PLD 1993 S.C. 473)  and on the case of HAJI MUHAMMAD 
BOOTA AND OTHERS VS.  MEMBER (REVENUE), B OARD OF REVENUE, 
PUNJAB AND OTHERS  (PLD 2003 S.C. 979) . 
62.  The word “ EXTEND ”, according to the Oxford English 
Dictionary means: - 
“to stretch out, to stretch forcibly, to lengthen, 
to prolong”  
and the word “ EXTENDABLE ” means: - 
“capable of being extended or stretched and 
capable of being enlarged in length or 
duration”  
“NON ” is a Latin word which, again according to the Oxford English 
Dictionary, crept into the English language around the 14 th 
century which is prefixed to nouns to indicate: - 
“a negation or prohibition”  
63.  The word “ NON -EXTENDABLE ” would thus mean , in the 
present context, a duration of time which was incapable of being 
enlarged or extended or lengthened or prolonged or stretched. And 
as has been mentioned above prefixing the word “ EXTENDABLE ” C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 60 :- 
with a negative command only indica tes the emphatic prohibition 
vis-a-vis the enlargement of the duration of the period in question. 
The intention of the law -giver by inserting the said word through an 
amendment in the relevant provision is obvious i.e. that since the 
Prosecutor General could be called upon to prosecute the hol ders of 
the highest of public offices in the country including the sitting 
Prime Minister, therefore, he should be a person who should be 
placed above all kinds of temptations and greed and should not at 
any time be looking for any favour from any quarter which could 
become a hindrance in his way of fearlessly discharging his said  
obligations. Needless to say that the competent authority in the 
matter of appointment of the Prosecutor General is the President 
which President is obliged by the provisions of Article 48 of the 
Constitution to act in the matter only on the advice of the Prime 
Minister which Prime Minister, as has been noticed above, fell 
within the purview of the NAB Ordinance and thus liable to be 
prosecuted by the Prosecutor General. This is a lso a principle too 
well established that where the intention of the legislature was 
clear and the object for which a law had been enacted was patent 
and evident then the Courts were not allowed to interpret such a 
law in a manner which could impede or def eat the object for which 
such a law had been enacted. Reference may be made to MEHRAM 
ALI’S case  (PLD 1998 S.C. 1445)  and to IMTIAZ AHMED LALI’S case  (PLD 
2007 S.C. 369) . If the interpretation canvassed by Mr. Irfan Qadir, 
ASC was to be accepted then the s ame would not only defeat the 
clear object of the provision in question but would also lead to a 
blatant absurdity. It would be preposterous and irrational to C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 61 :- 
declare that once an incumbent of the office of the Prosecutor 
General had completed his term of three years then no one had the 
competence to extend or enlarge the said term even by one day but 
the same competent authority could instead, grant him three years 
by appointing him afresh to the same office. In the recorded judicial 
history such a situati on attracted judicial notice in the year 1889 in 
the case of MADDEN VS. NELSON  (1889 A.C. 626)  and it was Lord 
Helsbury who declared for the first time that what was not 
permitted by law to be achieved directly could not be allowed to be 
achieved indirectl y. And the said principle has been repeatedly 
acknowledged and followed by the Courts ever since then and the 
Courts in Pakistan are no exception in the said connection. The 
cases of MIAN MUHAMMAD NAWAZ SHARIF AND HAJI MOHA MMAD 
BOOTA  (Supra) are evidence t o the said effect.  
64.  Having thus examined all aspects of this legal 
proposition, we find that in view of the meanings of the words 
“NON -EXTENDABLE ”; in view of an emphatic pre -fixation of a 
negative before the word “ EXTENDABLE ”; in view of the fact tha t the 
said word “ NON -EXTENDABLE ” was a considered and a specific 
insertion in the provision in question through an amendment; in 
view of the fact that no interpretation was permissible which could 
have effect of defeating the clear intention and object of legislature 
and finally in view of the fact that what could not be achieved 
directly could not be allowed to be accomplished indirectly, the 
fresh appointment of Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC as the Prosecutor 
General Accountability could not be sustained on accoun t of C.M.A.No.1703/2010 in  
Const.P.No.39/2009 . -: 62 :- 
section 8(a)(iii) of the NAB Ordinance because he had already held 
the said office for a “ NON -EXTENDABLE ” term of three years.  
65.  Consequently, it is held that the appointment in 
question of Mr. Irfan Qadir as the Prosecutor General 
Accountability w as not legally tenable.  
66.  Having so found, it is resultantly declared and directed 
as under: - 
a) that the assumption of the office of 
Acting Chairman NAB by Javed Qazi, 
Deputy Chairman is illegal and it is, 
therefore, directed that a regular 
appointment  to the vacant office of 
Chairman NAB be made in terms of 
section 6 of the NAB Ordinance, 1999. 
The competent authority is allowed 
thirty days’ time for the purpose; and  
b) that the appointment of Mr. Irfan 
Qadir, ASC as the Prosecutor General 
Accountabili ty is un -lawful and of no 
legal effect and he shall cease to hold 
the said office forthwith.  
67.  This matter is disposed of in the above terms.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
Announced in open Court  
On 1st  September, 2010  
By Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  
*Zulfiqar * 