IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
  Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
  Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
  Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO. 14 TO 17 OF 2023   
(Declaring Notification dated 19.05.2023 (Regarding constitution of an inquiry Commission to probe i nto 
the veracity of alleged Audio Leaks) as ultra vires to the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973)  
 
 
Abid Shahid Z uberi, Advocate Supreme 
Court of Pakistan  
(in Const. P. 14 of 2023)   
  
Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir  
(in Const. P. 15 of 2023)   
  
Imran Ahmad Khan  
(in Const. P. 16 of 2023)   
  
Riaz Hanif Rahi, Advocate Supreme Court 
of Pakistan  
(in Const. P. 17 of 2023)   
 …Petitioner(s)  
                 
Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, 
Cabinet Division, Islamabad and others  
(in Const. P. 14 & 15 of 2023)                 
  
  
Federation of Pakistan through its 
Secretary Cabinet, Pak Secretariat, 
Islamabad and others  
(in Const. P. 16 of 2023)   
  
Government of Pakistan through  
Secretary Cabinet Division, Islamabad 
and another  
(in Const. P. 17 of 2023)   
 
 
…Respondent(s)  
 
For the petitioner(s)  : Mr. M. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC  
Mr. Haseeb Jamali, ASC  
Mr. Umar Lakhani, ASC  
Mr. Ayan Memon, ASC  
Mr. Ma qsood Buttar, ASC  
 (in Const. P. 14/23)  
 Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  2
Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, ASC  
Mr. Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir, ASC  
(in Const. P. 15/23)  
 
Nemo  
(in Const. P. 16/23)  
 
In-person  
(in Const. P. 17/23)  
   
For the Federation  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, 
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Saad Javaid Satti, Adv.  
Ms. Maryam Rasheed, Adv.  
Ms. Maryam Ali Abbasi, Consultant .  
   
Date of hearing  : 26.05.2023  
 
O R D E R  
  UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ.  We have heard Mr. Shoaib 
Shaheen , ASC learned counsel for the petitioner at length and 
have also heard the brief submissions in response by  Mr. 
Mansoor Usman Awan, the learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan . The petitioner’s challenge is to Notification 
No.SRO.596(I)/2023  dated  19.05.2023 ( impugned notification ) 
issued by the Federal Government for appointment of an Inquiry 
Commission (Commission ) in exercise of its power under Section 
3 of the  Pakistan Commissions of the Inquiry Act, 2017 
comprising Justice  Qazi Faez Isa, Hon’ble S enior Puisne Judge 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, Mr. Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan, 
Chief Justice High Court of Balochistan and Mr. Justice Aam er 
Farooq , Chief Justice Islamabad High Court . The terms of 
reference ( TORs ) of the Commission, inter alia, are to determine 
whether certain alleged audio s leaked on 16.02.2023  and 
thereafter  subsequently broadcast on the electronic media, 
involving alleged conversation s between persons connected to or 
including Judges of the superior Cou rts, constitute material 
whereby public trust and confidence in the credibility, 
uprightness, impartial ity and independence of the superior 
judiciary is eroded .  Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  3
2.  The essence of the submissions made by Mr. Shoaib 
Shaheen, ASC, learned counsel for the petitioners are as follows:  
i) The impugned notification violates fundamental 
rights by breaching the principle of separation of 
powers on the basis of which the constitutional 
framework of our country is established. The 
Executive cannot transgress into the area of the 
judicial function . While Article 209 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973 ( Constitution ) enables the President of 
Pakistan (acting on advice i.e. the Executive 
branch) to present a Reference in respect of any 
alleged misconduct by a Judge of the superior 
Courts, the determination and all matters and 
aspects relating thereto whether directly or 
indirectly are exclusive ly vested in the judicial 
branch , as embodied in the co nstitutional body 
known as the Supreme Judicial Council ( SJC). 
Thus , the constitutional principl e of trichotomy of 
powers has placed these functions in mutually 
exclusive zones i.e. the two branches  of the 
Executive and the Judiciary . However, in 
appointin g senior sitting Judges as the 
Commission of Inquiry  to investigate and enquire 
upon the matters which are the subject matter of 
the T ORs of the Commission, prima facie , the 
principl e of separation of powe rs has been 
breached. The Federal Government , in what 
tentatively appears to be  a complete misdirection 
of law , has thus trenched upon a constitutional 
domain exclusive to the Judiciary and 
demarcated exclusively for the latter  under Article 
209 ibid.        
 Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  4
ii) The TORs for the Commission are specified in the 
impugned notification in sub -paras (iii) to (ix) of 
paragraph -6, being the questions upon which the 
Commission is to render its determination. These 
questions include in paragraph -6(v) the 
determination whether any disciplin ary 
proceedings are attracted  by virtue of the matters 
under inquiry . Keeping in view paragraph -6 (viii) 
which concerns the genuineness and the 
correctness of the alleged audio s leaked , it 
appears, prima facie, that paragraph -6(v) is 
addressing judicial mi sconduct in veiled terms. 
This function  is reserved by Article 209 of the 
Constitution to be performed sol ely by the 
Judicia ry through the SJC. In this way, the TORs 
of the Commission  appear to  extend its 
jurisdiction into an area falling within the domain 
of the SJC at the instance of the Executive which 
is an arrangement that is, prima facie , 
unconstitutional and void.  
 
iii) A perusal of paragraph -6(i) and (ii) of the TORs of 
the Commission setting out the subject matter of 
enquiry by the Commission , prima facie, overlaps 
or at the very least appears to fall within  the 
penumbra of the constitutional jurisdiction 
vesting in the SJC under Article 209 of the 
Constitution . This jurisdiction is an  integral 
component of the independence of the Judiciary 
enunciated, inter alia , in Article 175(3) of the 
Constitution which is not only a fundamental 
right but also a Salient Feature of the 
Constitution .    
 Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  5
3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner also emphasi sed on 
the apparent violation of Article 14 of the Constitution relating to 
dignity of man and the right s of privacy that are inherent therein. 
Learned counsel submitted that such rights extended not just to 
the person but also to the communications made by him . Illegal 
and u nlawful surveillance of such communication or the 
targeting of any person in this regard was clear cut violation of 
the said fundamental rights . In this regard reference was made 
to certain laws , including principally , the Investigation for Fair 
Trial Act,  2013 (Act) to show that it is the only law which permits 
surveillance under strictly limited circumstances in terms of the 
elaborate regime set  out in the Act and only in relation to the 
offences appearing in the Schedule thereof which relate to 
terrorism and such like offences. Learned counsel read out 
various sections of the said Act and in particular drew attention 
to Section 10(2)(b) where even if surveillance for such limited 
purposes could be lawfully carried out, rights of privacy and 
property were always to be respected. It was submitted that the 
subject matter of the present proposed inquiry could not 
conceivably fall within the ambit of the said Act. Learned counse l 
also placed reliance on the judgment of Justice Syed Mansoor Ali 
Shah (concurring in part) and reported as Justice Qazi Faez Isa 
and others vs . The President of Pakistan  (PLD 2021 SC 1) . 
Various paragraphs in relation to the  concept of privacy were read 
out from this judgment and in particular reliance was strongly 
place d on the following passage  from para -48: 
“48. … While the fundamental right to personal liberty 
and privacy guaranteed by Articles 9 and 14 of the 
Constitution are subject to law, there is  no law in our 
country that authorizes any law enforcement or 
intelligence agency to pry into the privacy of any person 
through surveillance and interception, except the IFTA. 
The scope of the IFTA, as discussed above, is also 
restricted to the surveillanc e and interception of a person 
who is suspected to be involved in any terrorist or anti -
state activity. Besides this limited scope under  the IFTA, 
no other law regulates the fundamental right of privacy of 
citizens and allows probe into their lives throug h 
surveillance and interception. Thus, in the remaining Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  6
sphere the right to privacy is absolute, until law is enacted 
to regulate it. The violation of this sphere of the absolute 
privacy right makes the inadmissibility of evidence 
collected in violation th ereof also absolute. Absolute right 
entails absolute prohibition on its violation.  …” 
      (emphasis supplied)  
4.   It was submitted that since there was , and could not 
possibly be, any law that allows for surveillance or hacking of any 
communication of Judges or their family members, the bar, as 
noted in the  extract above, was absolute and that therefore, at a 
very fundamental level there could hardly be any point in light of 
the forgoing observations to the inquiry envisaged by the 
impugned notification being held.  In addition, it was also 
submitted that in respect of the petitioner in Const. P. 14 of 2023, 
who is an Advocate, the alleged a udio (the veracity  of which was 
directly challenged) would amount to illegal disclosure of 
privileged communication which could not form the subject 
matter of any inquiry . Reliance was also placed in this regard on 
Ishtiaq Ahmed Mirza vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2019 SC 
675), which lays down detailed parameters as to admissibility of 
any audio or video material. Given that the alleged audios in the 
present case were all leaks made by a so called  “black hat hacker ” 
operating under the twitter handle  “indibell” , the first and 
primary question was the very veracity , credibility  and legality of, 
and authorization for the alleged audio s and so also the identity 
of the person or “hacker” engaged in or abett ing such acts.   
5.  On any view of the matter, therefore, learned counsel 
submitted , further proceedings by the Commission i n terms of 
the impugned notification would amount to a continued serious 
breach of fundamental constitutional principles and rights.  
6.  At the outset, learned Attorney General f or Pakistan 
had sought permission to make a preliminary submission which 
was to the effect that one of us (Umar Ata Bandial, CJ)  ought to 
consider recusing himself from the Bench. Reason given in this 
regard was that the constitution of the Commission and in Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  7
particular the appointment of its Chairman could not have been  
done by the Hon’ble Chief Justice , in view of the stated  subjec t 
matter of the reference . The contention was repelled , inter alia,  
for the reason that it was an accepted and settled constitutional 
principle, acted upon several times in the constitution  of 
Commission s whenever a sitting Judge was intended to be made 
a member thereof, that the permission of the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of Pakistan had first to be sought .  Since this power was 
peculiar to the said office, the incumbent for the time being of the 
same could n either divest himself nor be divested by the Federal 
Government from discharging the constitutional duty. Inasmuch 
as the Federal Government appeared to have acted unilaterally 
in this matter, a constitutional principle of the highest 
importance had been, prima facie , breached. We may note in this 
regard  that even though the other two members of the 
Commission are Chief Justices of respective High Courts  as noted 
above, the subject matter of the reference transcends any 
particular High Court and involves at the very least a sitting 
Judge of the Supreme Court and a Chief Justice of a third High 
Court. Therefore, k eeping in mind the settled principles of 
federalism , prima facie,  the aforementioned constitutional 
principle would apply even i n regard to the other two members of 
the Commission  and therefore, the permission of the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice of Pakistan was required for their appointment. 
Prima facie , therefore, the very constitution of the Commission is 
cast in doubt. In this regard relia nce is placed on:  
a) Federation of Pakistan vs. Muhammad 
Akram Sheikh  [PLD 1989 SC 689  @ para -28(ii) 
to (iv )] 
b) Gen.(R) Parvez Mush arraf  vs. Nadeem 
Ahmed (Advocate) & another  (PLD 2014 
SC 585 @ para -26) 
 
c) The President  vs. Justice Shaukat Ali  
(PLD 1971 SC 585 @ page 605)  
 
d) Malik Asad Ali  vs. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 1998 SC 161 @ para 66)  
 Const.P.14 of 2023, etc.  8
7.         In view of the above, let notice be issued to the respondents 
in all petitions.  Notice be also issued to the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan in terms of Order XXVII A of the Civil 
Procedure Code.   
8.  CMA NO.3663 OF 2023 IN CONST.P. 14 OF 2023.  
Learned counsel for the petitioner also prayed for interim relief 
since the Commissio n has already  started functioning and has 
made an order on 22.05.2023 and the next meeting of the 
Commission is scheduled for 27.05.2023. In the circumstances, 
till the next date of hearing, the operation of the impugned 
notification No.SRO.596(I)/2023 dated 19.05.2023 issued by the 
Federal Government  is suspended as is the order dated 
22.05.2023  made by the Commission and in consequence thereof 
proceedings of the Commission are stayed.  
  To come up on 31.05.2023 .   
 
      
         
 
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
 Sd/- 
Judge  
  
 
 
  
 
 Sd/- 
Judge   
 Sd/- 
Judge  
  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad  
26.05.2023   
 Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING . 
 
 