IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 Present:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.35 OF 2013.  
   (Multi -Billion Scam in the EOBI)  
 
 
Voluntary Appeared  : Mr. Huzaifa Rehman,  
Special Correspondent (Investigation),  
Capital TV  
   
On Court’s Notice  : Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG  
   
For EOBI  : Mr. M. Bilal, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Pervez Ahmed, Director General (Audit)  
Mr. Asif Azad, Director (Investm ent) 
Mr. Abdul Latif, Director (law)  
   
For FIA  : Mr. Saud Mirza, Director General  
Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Addl. D.G.  
   
For M/o Interior  : Nemo.  
   
For DHA, Islamabad  : Mr. Ahmar Bilal Soofi, ASC.  
   
Date of Hearing  : 17.07.2013.  
 
    O R D E R   
 
Mr. Azam Khan, Additional Director General, FIA, 
stated that in pursuance of the directions of this Court, inquires have 
been conducted and the preliminary report has already been 
submitted. In the meanwhile, the matter relating to the land 
purchased by t he EOBI was also examined thoroughly with the 
assistance of District Revenue Officer, Islamabad, and prima facie,  
it has been noted that a deal was entered in a highly un -transparent 
manner between the EOBI and DHA, Islamabad, inasmuch as, the 
Public Procu rement Rules, 2004, were not followed and low cost land was purchased on higher rate s, in pursuance whereof following 
amounts were deposited:  
  (i) 15.475 billion  
  (ii) 6.82 billion  
   Total: 22.295 billion  
According to him, the inspection of the site cl early indicates that no 
development had taken place.  
2.  Mr. Ahmar Bilal Soofi, learned ASC for DHA, 
controverted the stand and stated that title of plots have been 
conferred upon the owners by executing allotment letter s in their 
favour. It is to be note d that transfer/proprietary rights of the plots 
cannot be conferred merely on the basis of allotment letters, unless 
there is proper documentation as per Transfer of Property Act, 
Stamp Act and Registration Act.  Be that as it may, to watch the 
interest of the old age employees , who are the contributor ies to this 
fund and contribution is being deducted from their monthly salaries , 
we direct that pending decision of this Constitution Petition, the 
DHA shall deposit the amount noted above with the Registrar of  this 
Court  on or before 19th July, 2013, who shall invest the same in 
some profit bearing scheme.  
3.   It is further informed by the Additional Director 
General, FIA that in respect of the transaction, which took place at 
Lahore, the parties had agreed to  refund  the amount. Subject to all 
just exception s, as we have direct ed the  DHA, to deposit the amount with the Registrar of this Court and final determination about their 
liabilities both civil and criminal, shall be decided at the time of the 
final decis ion. 
4.  Mr. Huzaifa Rehman, Special Correspondent 
(Investigation), Capital TV, appeared and stated that he has broken 
an important news of the scandal of mis -appropriation of the public 
money  while being in the employment of Capital TV , he has been 
receiv ing threats, even the owners are being approached to dispense 
with his services but we are of the opinion that as he has brought an 
important information in front of the Court and general public, 
therefore, the owner of Capital TV shall not  take any drasti c action 
against him. He further stated that protection has been provided to 
him because since the time hearing had commenced, he is receiving 
threats from many persons. The Law Enforcing Agencies and the 
Inspector General of Police, Islamabad, and the Ins pector Generals 
of Police of other Provinces are directed to ensure that no body can 
cause any harm  to his person and property.  
5.  Adjourned to 19th July, 2013.  
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad  Judge  
 
 
 
17.7.2013  
Mahtab/*  Judge  
 
   
 