IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
        (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
  PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
 
 
C.M.As. NO.3685 & 3686 OF 2012  
IN H.R.C. NO.7734 -G OF 2009.  
 
(Fortnightly report s from NAB in 
compliance of judgment of this 
Court dated 30.3.2012 passed in 
HRC No.7734 -G of 2009, etc)  
 
 
For the NAB:  
 Rana Zahid Mehmood, Addl. PG  
 
Brig (R) Farooq Naser Awan,  
Principal Secretary to Chairman, 
NAB 
 
Col (R) Subeh Sadiq, DG NAB  
 
Mr. Asghar  Khan,  
Dy. Director, NAB, Rawalpindi  
 
Mr. Kamran Faisal,  
Asstt. Director, NAB, Rawalpindi  
 
 
For the NAB officers/IOs:  Raja Amir Abbas, ASC  
 
Date of hearing:  15.01.2013  
 
 
ORDER  
 
 
Col (R)  Subeh Sadiq, D.G. (under 
Suspension)/NAB, Rawalpindi appeared and states 
that the authorities by misusing the name of 
Supreme Court has suspended  him.  He states that to 
his credit he has 36 years of unblemished service and CMA No.3685 -2012 etc  - 2 - 
he has been malign ed and disgrace d on the pretext 
that the Supreme Court was not happy.  
2.  Raja A mir Abbas ,  learned counsel 
appearing for the IOs to whom the notices for 
contempt have been issued pointed out that on 
7.1.2013, Brig (R) Farooq Nas er Awan, Principal 
Secretary, NAB has issued a letter , relevant para 
there  from reads as under: - 
“b. IO’s u nder contempt be removed 
from these cases since Supreme Court 
of Pakistan also does not appear happy 
with their performance”  
 
whereas , we were led to believe  by the Principal 
Secretary that such action has been taken against 
the IOs, as it has been noted h ereinabove on the 
recommendations of the DG.  
3.  Col (R) Subeh Sadiq D .G NAB present  in 
Court  state s that on the same day he ha d sent a 
letter dated 7.1.2013 and he ha d not used the name 
of the Supreme Court. However, upon it, the 
Chairman  has passed an o rder, para 2 of the same as 
relied upon by him reads as under: - 
“2. IO’s under contempt must be 
removed from the cas es since S.C 
also does not appear happy with 
their performance.”  
 
4.  Brig(R) Farooq Nas er Awan has placed on 
record, a copy of the letter d ated 7.1.2013  noted 
above with handwritten notes by the Chairman in 
para No.2  referred t o hereinabove.  We have noted 
that by using the name of the Supreme Court both 
the IOs i.e. Asghar Ali and Kamran Faisal were 
removed from those cases, thus ; it is conc luded that 
none else except the Chairman , NAB  himself used the 
name of the Supreme Court to achieve his own 
motives and objects , as it is evident from the record 
referred to hereinabove .  
5.  We may clarif y here that the Chairman NAB 
is already under conte mpt notice for non compliance 
of the judgment in the RPP Cases and copy of the 
same ha d been delivered to him as back as in the 
month of March, 2012, therefore, he should have 
been careful, however, under the circumstances, we 
issue notice to the Chairman NAB to explain as to CMA No.3685 -2012 etc  - 3 - 
why he has falsely used the name of the Supreme 
Court with a view  to remove the IOs namely , Asghar 
Ali and Kamran Faisal. It is added that prima facie  
above said two IOs  remained associated with the 
Investigation Reports under the sup ervision of the 
Col (R) Subeh Sadiq , D.G against Raja Parvaiz Ashraf, 
Ex-Minister for Water and Power and 1 5 others in 
Case No.2(3 -RPP)/SOD/2012/NAB and Mr. Shahid 
Rafi and 21 others in case  No. 2(4-RPP) 
/SOD /2012/NAB .  
6.  It is made clear here to the Chai rman, NAB 
that if any one accused involved in these cases 
succeed in making good their escape out of the 
country, he will be responsible personally for the 
same.  
7.  It appears that prima facie  the Investigating 
Officers are not being allowed to ensure the 
implementation  of the judgment  of this Court in letter 
and spirit , therefore,  we direct the Additional 
Prosecutor General , NAB  that he should undertake 
all the necessary steps during the course of day  and 
submit  Investigation Reports to the concerned 
authorities  and  to get approve d the 
challan s/references  against the accused persons 
and to cause their arrest without any hesitation and 
put up report on 17.1.2013.  
8.  Adjourned to 17.1.2013. In the meanwhile, 
all the concerned officers and the Chairman sh all 
also remain in attendance.  
   
 
         Chief Justice   
  
 
 
        Judge  
 
 
 
        Judge  
 
 
Islamabad, the  
15th January, 2013.  
*M, Safdar Mahmood * 