IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
 
 
Civil Petition No. 3532/202 3 
(On appeal against the judgment dated  13.06.2023  
passed by the Islamab ad High Court, Islamabad  
in ICA No. 190/2023 ) 
 
Mukhtar Ahmad Ali.      … Petitioner  
     Versus  
The Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan,  
Islamabad and another.      … Respondent s 
 
 
Petitioner :    In-person  
 
For Respondent No. 1:   In-person  
 
On Court’s Call:    Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
     Attorney -General  
     Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
 
Date of Hearing:    27.09.2023  
 
JUDGMENT  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . A letter dated 10 April 2019 was addressed to the 
Registrar of the Supreme Court through which the petitioner soug ht the 
following information:  
‘a) Total sanctioned strength of staff members of 
Supreme Court of Pakistan (categories -wise) against 
different positions/pay -scales i.e. from pay scale 1 
to 22 (category -wise).  
 
b) Total vacancies in the Supreme Court of Paki stan 
against different pay -scales/positions (category -
wise); and dates since which these positions have 
been lying vacant.  
 
c) Number of staff members who are not regular but 
have been engaged on daily -wages basis or through 
short -term or long -term contrac ts against various 
positions/pay -scales (category -wise).  
 
d) Number and types of positions created a new since 
January 1, 2017.  CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 2
 
e) Total number of female staff members (category -
wise) against various positions/pay -scales. The 
response may distinguish betw een the short -
term/temporary staff members and regular ones.  
 
f) Total number of persons with disabilities working 
with Supreme Court of Pakistan against various 
positions/pay -scales (category -wise). The response 
may distinguish between the short -term/temp orary 
staff members and regular ones.  
 
g) Total number of transgender persons working with 
Supreme Court of Pakistan against various 
positions/pay -scales (category -wise). The response 
may distinguish between the short -term/temporary 
staff members and regul ar ones.  
 
h) A certified copy of the latest approved Service Rules 
of the Supreme Court of Pakistan.’  
 
2.  The petitioner stated that as a citizen of Pakistan it was his 
fundamental right bestowed by  Article 19A of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) to receive  the 
information  which he had sought . He also relied upon the Right of Access 
to Information Act, 2017 (‘ the Act ’). The petitioner stated that as his 
request remained unattended , he submitted a n appeal  to the Paki stan 
Information Commission (‘ the Commission ’) under section  17 of the Act  
on 6 May 2019 . The Commission wrote to the Registrar referring to  
section 9 of the Act stating that  the Supreme Court may designate a 
Public Information Officer  and having done so the information sought by  
the petitioner  be provided to him by the said officer . The Commission 
sent a reminder on  16 July 2019 and when that was not responded to, 
the Commission sent another reminder dated 26 July 2019 . By letter 
dated  8 August 2019  the Re gistrar of the Supreme Court refus ed to 
provide  the information and referred to an Office Order  dated 30 
September 2014  as the reason  for refusal.  Since t he petitioner was not 
satisfied with the Registrar’s response , he invoked section 17 of the Act , 
which  resulted in  Appeal No. 060 -06/19  before the Commission . On 12 
July 2021, t he Commission , comprising of the Chief Information 
Commissioner and two Information Commissioners , allowed  the 
petitioner’s appeal  and direct ed that the information be provided to him.  
 CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 3
3.  Mr. Jawad Paul , who was the Registrar of the Supreme Court  at 
the relevant time , submitted an application calling upon  the Commission 
to withdr aw its order  dated 12 July 2021 . Notice was issued  by the 
Commission ; the petitioner submitted his response and the Registrar 
submitted his written submissions through ‘ Ch. Aamir Rehman, 
Additional Attorney -General /counsel for the applicant/respondent ’. The 
Commission vide order dated 17 November 2021 decided that the 
request  to withdraw the Commission ’s order ‘falls outside the scope of the 
powers vested in this Commission under the Right of Access to Information 
Act, 2017 .’  
 
4.  On 22 November 2021 , the Chief Justice of Pakistan1 directed that 
the Additional Attorney -General  (‘AAG’) should challenge the o rders of 
the Commission and file a writ petition before the Islamabad High Court . 
Resultantly , Writ Petition  No. 4284  of 2021 was filed by the Registrar, 
Supreme Court of Pakistan  wherein the Commission and the petitioner 
were arrayed as respondents , praying that, ‘ the impugned Orders dated 
12.07.2021 and 17.11.2021 ’ passed by the Commission be declared 
‘illegal, unlawful and without jurisdiction ’. The writ petition was allowed 
vide judgment dated 3 April 2023 and the impugned orders were set 
aside on the g round that the Supreme Court ‘ is not a public body for the 
purposes of the Act and it does not fall within the jurisdiction of Pakistan 
Information Commission ’.  
 
5.  Since t he writ petition was decided by a learned Single Judge , the 
petitioner  preferred a n intra -court appeal (ICA No. 190/2023) under 
section 3 of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972  against the judgment 
before a Division Bench . But since the appeal was belatedly filed , 
therefore, the Division Bench of the Islamabad High Court , without 
attending to the merits of the case,  held that since sufficient reason to 
condone  delay had not been given , the application seeking the delay to be 
condoned was dismissed and consequently the intra -court appeal was 
dismissed , as being time-barred.  
 
6. The petitione r who represents himself commenced his submissions 
by referring to Article 19A of the Constitution, which reads as under:  
                                                
1 Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed.  CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 4
‘Every citizen shall have the right to have access to 
information in all matters of public importance subject to 
regulation and reason able restrictions imposed by law. ’ 
 
He submitted that Article 19A does not exclude the Supreme Court . He 
further submitted  that neither the information which was sought was 
sensitive nor was of a nature that required it to be kept secret . As 
regards the im pugned judgment of the learned Single Judge , the 
petitioner stated that the orders of the Commission were set aside on a 
technicality  without considering Article 19A of the Constitution . And, as 
regards the dismissal of the intra-court appeal  on the ground  that it was 
belatedly filed , the petitioner submitted that the learned Single Judge 
had heard the case on 3 April 2023 , but the petitioner  was not informed 
about the announcement of the judgment and he learn t of it from social 
media . He stated that he is not an advocate and represent ed himself 
before the High Court , therefore, a notice informing him of the 
announcement of the judgment  should have been sent. The petitioner 
stated that the Act sets out how request s for information are submitted 
and that there is no reason to exclude the Supreme Court  from the Act’s 
applicability , particularly when disclosure of the required information 
was not proscribed . He also relied upon the order of the Commission 
which had directed the Registrar to provide the said info rmation.  
 
7. Ch. Aamir Rehman, learned AAG, informed us that he was directed 
by the then Attorney -General  for Pakistan2 (‘AG’) who had been 
instructed by the Registrar of the Supreme Court to file  a represent ation 
before  the Commission and to assail the or ders of the Commission before 
the High Court , and this was done without receiving any remuneration.  
 
8.  We have observed that litigation was initiated in the name of the 
Supreme Court by the Registrar. The Supreme Court Rules, 1980 (‘ the 
Rules ’) provide that t he Registrar is the ‘executive head of the office  and 
shall exercise such powers as assigned to him ’.3 The Rules do not grant to 
the Registrar the specific power to initiate litigation  and though t he Chief 
Justice may assign ‘ any function required by  the Rules to be performed by 
the Registrar ’, the Rules do not require , nor envisage , initiating litigatio n. 
Therefore, the Registrar could not be given th is responsibility nor could 
                                                
2 Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan,  
3 Supreme Court Rules, 1980, Order III, rule 1.  CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 5
he undertake it . The Constitution defines the Supreme Court as the 
Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court .4 However,  litigation was 
initiated by the Registrar without the approval of the Supreme Court (as 
defined in the Constitution ). At the relevant time  a bureaucrat5 was 
serving as  Registrar  who may not have been aware  of the Rules and 
constitution al stipulations . The l earned AAG , who represented the 
Supreme Court , is employed  by the office of the AG. The AG attend s to 
the matters of the Federal Government ,6 which is part of the Executive 
and mandated to be separate fro m the Judiciary.7 The instant matter 
concerned the Supreme Court , and had no concern with the Federal 
Government.  
 
9.  The question of maintainability of the writ petition , filed by the 
Registrar of the Supreme Court before the High Court , was raised befor e 
the learned Single Judge who held the petition to be maintainable by 
referring to the cases of  Registrar Supreme Court of Pakistan v Hassan 
Akbar8 and Registrar Supreme Court of Pakistan v Qazi Wali Muhammad .9 
The Hassan Akbar  case was with regard to a c omplaint against an 
Assistant Advocate -General who had appear ed before the Supreme Court 
when he was not enrolled as an Advocate of the Supreme Court ; the 
matter arose out of the recommendation s of the Disciplinary Committee, 
therefore, it cannot be cited as a precedent entitling the Supreme Court 
to initiate litigation . In the other case , Qazi Wali Muhammad  was 
terminated from the service of the Supreme Court and had filed an 
appeal before the Federal Service Tribunal, whose order reinstating him 
was chall enged by the Registrar before the Supreme Court under Article 
212 (3) of the Constitution. This Court held that Qazi Wali Muhammad 
was not a civil servant as defined in the Civil Servants Act, 1973, 
therefore, the Tribunal did not have jurisdiction. The Re gistrar had not 
initiate d litigation  in the Qazi Wali Muhammad  case; he had not filed the 
appeal before the Tribunal. The particular facts and the very limited 
scope of these two cases cannot be treated as precedents enabling the 
                                                
4 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 17 6. 
5 Mr. Jawad Paul.  
6 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 100(3).  
7 Ibid, Article 17 5(3).  
8 1987 PCrLJ 1321 . 
9 1997 SCMR 141 . CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 6
Registrar to initiate liti gation on behalf of the Supreme Court , 
particularly when judgments in neither case had discussed this aspect . 
 
10.  The learned AG, Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan , stated that  the Act 
applies only to public bodies  as defined in its section 2(ix) and th is 
definitio n does not include the Supreme Court. And, t hough t he Act is 
applicable to  ‘court, tribunal, commission or board under the Federal law ’, 
the Supreme Court is established under the Constitution, and not under 
a Federal law , nor is the Supreme Court a public  body of the Federal 
Government to which the Act does apply.  Therefore , the Act was not 
applicable and the Commission did not have jurisdiction wi th regard to 
the Supreme Court.  The learned AG , however, did suggest  self-regulation 
and that the Supreme Cour t may make the envisaged regulations 
stipulating how applications seeking information should be submitted 
and who and how information should be provide d under Article 19A . He 
further suggested that if the person authorized to provide information 
refus ed to provide it, there should be a chamber appeal  against such 
refusal before a Judge . 
 
11. We have heard the petitioner and the learned AG and have 
examined  the provisions of the Act and the Constitution . We are in 
agreement with the learned AG that t he Act c learly does not apply to the 
Supreme Court  of Pakistan . Therefore, the appeal preferred by the 
petitioner before the Commission was not maintainable and to such 
extent the learned Single Judge of the High Court had correctly 
determined the matter. However,  the matter does not end there .  
 
12. The question of whether the petitioner can seek  information under 
Article 19A of the Constitution  still needs consideration.  The Supreme 
Court is not excluded from the purview of Article 19A of the Constitution, 
and information of ‘public importance ’ can be sought there under . It now 
needs consideration as to what constitutes public importance . The phrase 
‘public importance ’ is mentioned in a number of places in the 
Constitution ,10 but it does not define it. The phrase  however has been  
                                                
10 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Articles 184(3), 186(1) and 212(3).  CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 7
interpreted by this Court . In the case of Manzoor Elahi v Federation of 
Pakistan ,11 it was held that : 
‘The term “public” is invariably employed in 
contradistinction to the terms private or individual, and 
connotes, as an adjective, something pertaining to, or 
belonging to, the people; relating to a nation, state, or 
community. In other words, it refers to something which is 
to be shared or participated in or enjoyed by the public at 
large, and is not limited or restricted to any particular 
class of the community. As observed by the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council in Hamabai Framjee Petit 
v. Secretary of State for In dia-in-Council I LR 39 Bom. 279 
while construing the words public purpose such a phrase, 
“whatever else it may mean must inc lude a purpose, that 
is an object or aim, in which the general interest of the 
community, as opposed to the particular interest of 
individuals, is directly and vitally concerned”. This 
definition appears to me to be equally applicable t o the 
phrase “public  importance ”.’  
 
The phrase  public importance  with particular reference to Fundamental 
Rights  was dilated upon in the case of Benazir Bhutto v Federation of 
Pakistan ,12 as under:  
‘Lastly is the consideration of the connotation of the 
expression “public impo rtance” which is tagged to the 
enforcement of the Fundamental Rights as a pre -condition 
of the exercise of the power. This should not be 
understood in a limited sense, but in the gamut of the 
constitutional rights of freedoms and liberties, their 
protectio n and invasion of such freedoms in a manner 
which raises a serious question regarding their 
enforcement. Such matters can be viewed as of public 
importance, whether they arise from an individual’s case 
touching his human rights of liberty and freedom, or o f a 
class or a group of persons as they would also be 
legitimately covered by this expression .’ 
 
13.  What previously may have been on a need -to-know  basis Article 
19A of the Constitution has transf ormed it to a right-to-know . The burden 
has shifted from t hose seeking information to those who want to conceal 
it. Access to information is no longer a discretion granted through 
occasional benevolence, but is now13 a fundamental right available with 
every Pakistani which right may be invoked under Article 19A of the 
Constitution.  
                                                
11 PLD 1975 Suprem e Court 66, p. 144.  
12 PLD 1988 Supreme Court 416, p 491. 
13 Article 19A was inserted into the Constitution through section 7 of the Constitution (Eighteenth 
Amendment) Act, 2010.  CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 8
 
14. We may observe that it is only when citizens have access to the 
requisite information can they meaningfully question those paid from the 
public exchequer , and who are meant to serve their interests. The 
importance of the peoples’ r ight to information was articulated 200 years 
ago:  
‘A popular Government, without popular 
information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a 
prologue to a farce or a tragedy; or, perhaps both. 
Knowledge will forever govern ignorance: And a 
people who mea n to be their own governors, must 
arm themselves with the power which knowledge 
gives. ’14 
 
By now o ver 100 countries have some form of freedom of information 
legislation.15 The U nited States Supreme Court  has held it to be 
concomitant with democracy, account ability and safeguarding against 
corruption:   
‘The basic purpose of (The Freedom of Information 
Act) is to ensure an informed citizenry, vital to the 
functioning of a democratic society, needed to 
check against corruption and to hold the governors 
account able to the governed. ’16 
 
15. Access  to information laws are also taking  on a new meaning  - of 
efficient administration of government, as a contributor to economic 
growth and a catalyst for  the development of information industries .17 
And restricting informa tion has an  immense cost , as observed by the 
World Bank:  
‘Lack of transparency can be costly both politically 
and economically. It is politically debilitating 
because it dilutes the ability of the democratic 
system to judge and correct government policy by  
cloaking the activities of special interests and 
because it creates rents by giving those with 
information something to trade. The economic 
costs of secrecy are staggering, affecting not only 
aggregate output but also the distribution of 
benefits and risk s. The most significant cost is 
that of corruption, which adversely affects 
investment and economic growth .’18 
 
                                                
14 James Madison’s l etter to W. T. Barry, August 4, 1822, cited in Environmenta l Protection Agency v. 
Mink , 410 U.S. 73, 110 -111 (1973) , as quoted in the dissenting note of Douglas, J.  
15 ‘Encyclopedia of Privacy’ William G. Staples, Bloomsbury Academic, 2006.  
16 NLRB v. Robbins Tire & Rubber Co ., 437 U.S. 214, 242 (1978).  
17 ‘The Wor ld’s Right to Know’ Thomas Blanton, Foreign Policy No. 131 (Jul -Aug 2002), pp. 50 -58. 
18 Tara Vishwanath, Daniel Kaufman, The World Bank Research Observer, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 41 –57. CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 9
Access to information thus secures  the well-being of the people , which is 
what the nation aspires towards as stated in the Principles of Policy s et 
out in the Constitution.19 
 
16.  High standards were set in early Islam and those govern ing had to 
provide information . The second  caliph  Hazrat Um ar bin Al -Khattab  (may 
Allah be pleased with him ) was questioned about the quantity of material 
used in the making of his shirt ; he did not object to being questioned  and 
told hi s son , Abdullah bin Umar , to explain , who said that in view of his 
father’s large size , extra material  which was used to make his shirt  was 
given by him .20 
 
17.  Transparency bring s with it the added benefit of introspection , 
which ben efits institutions by promoting self -accountability . Article 19A 
stipulates that information be provided subject to regulation  and 
reasonable restrictions imposed by law . However, t here is no law which 
atten ds to the Supreme Court in this regard nor has the Supreme Court 
itself made any regulations. Needless to state that if a law is enacted 
and/or regulations made , requests for information would be attended to 
in accordance there with and in accordance with Article 19A.  
 
18.  Article 19A envisages the placing of reasonable restrictions  on the 
provision of information , but r efusing to provide information is to be 
justified by the person , authority  or institution withholding it. In the 
present case , there is no reason why  the information sought by the 
petitioner should not be provided , nor can the provision of such 
information be categorized as being contrary to the public interest. 
Consequently , the information sought by the petitioner should have been 
provided  to him. 
 
19.  Therefore, for the reasons mentioned above , this petition is 
converted into an appeal and is allowed by directing the Registrar of the 
Supreme Court to provide the said information to the petitioner within 
seven days. The office is also direc ted to refund to the petitioner the 
court fee paid by him on this petition and on the intra -court appeal filed 
in the High Court.  
                                                
19 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 38(a).  
20 Ibn Qayyim al -Jawziyah, I‘lam al -Muwaqqi‘in ‘an Rabb al -‘Alamin  (Beirut: Dar al -Kutub al -‘Ilmiyyah, 
1991), vol. 2, p. 133.  CP No. 3532/2023  
 
 
 10
 
20.  In view of the public importance of this matter , and as this is the 
first case of its kind decided by the Supreme Court,  this judgment is to 
be translated into Urdu . The English version shall be treated as th is 
Court’s  decision in terms of Article 189 of the Constitution.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
I have added additional reasoning  
Judge 
 
Islamabad  
(Farrukh)  
 
 Announced in o pen Court at Islamabad on 16 October 2023.  
 
 
 
       Chief Justice  
 
Approved for Reporting  
 