IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal Appeal No. 97-L of 2016  & Criminal Petition No.465 -L 
of 2014  
(On appeal fr om the judgment dated  27.03.2014  passed by the Lahore High Court, 
Multan Bench  in M.R. No.46 of 2009,  Crl.A No. 305 of 200 8, Crl. Rev. No.95 of 
2009 & Crl. PSLA No.20 of 2009 ). 
 
Bashir Ahma d  
Mst. Kaneez Fatima  …Appellant(s)  
…Petitioner(s)  
VERSUS  
The State, etc.  
(In both cases)   
…Respondent(s)  
  
For the Appellant(s)  : Malik Muhammad Saleem , ASC  
   
For the Petitioner(s)  : Malik Muhammad Munsif Awan, ASC  
   
For the State  : Mr. Mazhar Sher Awan,  
Additional Prosecutor General  
   
Date of Hearing  : 07.05.2019  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Criminal Appeal  
by Bashir Ahma d, convict  and Criminal Petition for leave to appeal  
by Mst. Kaneez Fatima , sister of Talib Hussain deceased, arisen 
out of incident dated 29.5.2003 , with a common thread ar e being 
decided through this singe judgment.  
2.  Prosecution case is structured upon statement of 
Ghulam Hussain, PW -2. According to him, on the fateful da y his 
daughter Mst. Kaneez Mai was on her way to fetch grocery items 
when Naseer Bakhsh accused held her by hair , while his brother 
Ahmed dealt her club blow; upon receipt of information, the 
complainant with a pistol rushed to the spot ; Naseer Bakhsh hit 
him with the club; the pistol fell ed, picked by Naseer  Bakhsh 
accused. I n the meantime, Talib Hussai n deceased  with.12 caliber  
gun is attracted to the spot. Rehmat Ali accused engaged the 
deceased with a hatchet blow on his right ear , later fell on the 
ground when Naseer Bakhsh, Ahmed Khan, Rehmat Ali, Bashir Crl.A.97 -L of 2016 & Crl.P.465 -L of 2014 .      2 
 
Ahmad and Muhammad Zaman  caused injuries ; the deceased 
succumbed to the injuries at the spot . Manhandling of Mst. Kaneez  
Mai, PW by Naseer Bakhsh is cited as motive for the crime.  
 Dissatisfied with police inve stigation, the complainant 
preferred to prosecute the accused through a private complaint ; he 
blamed that crime report was not faithfully recorded  by the 
investigating officer , otherwise biased in favour of the accused . 
Indictment resulted into conviction vide judgment dated 
18.12.2008. For homicide, the appellant was sentenced to death 
besides being held in the community of intention  qua the injuries 
suffered by the witnesses. Naseer Bakhsh, Muhammad Zaman and 
Ahmed Khan were convicted and sentenced for injuries to the 
witnesses . Appeal filed by the convict met with no better fate. A 
learned div ision bench of the Lahore High Court at Multan vide 
impugned judgment dated 27.3.2014 upheld the conviction s albeit 
with alteration of death penalty into imprisonment for life ; 
sentences awarded to the co -accused were reduced to already 
undergone by them. Petition for Special Leave to Appeal by the 
complainant was dismissed vide the same judgment ; they are in 
contest once again before us.  
3.  Well orchestrated  narrative by the witnesses that  
include s the injured, notwithstanding, we have noticed inherent 
shortcoming s casting their shadow on the prosecution case.  Naseer 
Bakhsh  and Bashir Ahm ad are real brothers, Ahmed Khan 
accused is former’s son . Muhammad Zaman and Rehmat Ali also 
hail from  the same clan; the entire  household is in the array  and in 
this ba ckdrop  argument that it is a case of wider net  is not entirely 
beside the mark. Similarly, a pistol and shotgun, admittedly with 
the deceased and the complainant , lend creden ce to hypothesis of 
aggression; renunciation of crime report  by the complainant go es a 
long way to tremor the very basis of his case . Suppression of 
injuries of an opponent is yet another intriguing circum stance . 
While the complainant was well within the remit of law to pursue 
his case through a private complaint , nonetheless, non-
exami nation of investigating officer alongside some other witnesses  
cannot be countenanced  without exposing the accused  to a 
grievous prejudice . Prosecution case is not free from doubt and Crl.A.97 -L of 2016 & Crl.P.465 -L of 2014 .      3 
 
thus it would be unsafe to maintain the conviction. Resultantly, 
Crimina l Appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment is set aside. 
The appellant shall be at set at liberty forthwith, if not required in 
any other case. As a natural corollary criminal petition for leave to 
appeal is dismissed. These are the reasons of our short or der of 
even date  which is reproduced as under :- 
 
“For reasons to be recorded later, the instant criminal appeal is 
allowed. The conviction and sentence of the appellant Bashir 
Ahmad is set aside. He is acquitted of the charge framed 
against him. The appell ant is present in person  as he is on bail 
after suspension of his sentence by the learned High Court. 
Therefore , his sureties are ordered to be discharged. Criminal 
Petition No.465 -L of 2014 filed for enhancement of sentence of 
respondents No.2 -5 is dismis sed.”  
 
     
 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
Lahore , the 
07th of May, 2019  
Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
 