 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:   
 
MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR  
MR. JUSTICE ATHAR MINALLAH  
 
 
C.Ps. No.2314, 2317, 2318 of 2022   
(Against judgment dated 10.05.2022 passed 
by the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in 
W.P. No.712 -P/2022, 370 -P/2022 and 377 -
P/2022.)  
 
AND 
 
C.M.A.863 -P, 866-P & 869-P/2022  
IN C.Ps.  NIL OF 2022  
(Permission to file and argue) 
 
 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary , 
Ministry of Law and Justice Islamabad   
 
 ...Petitione r 
(in all C .Ps.)  
Muhammad Hamid Mughal   …Applicant  
(in all CMAs)  
 
vs  
 
Mr. Fazal -e-Subhan & other  : C.P. No.2314/ 22 
Mr. Naeem Ahmad Khattak and another  : C.P. No.2317/ 22 
Dr. Khurshid Iqbal and others  : C.P. No.2318/ 22 
Fazal Subhan and another  : C.M.A. No.863-P/22 
Naeem Ahmad Khattak and others  : C.M.A.  No.866 -P/22  
Dr. Khurshid Iqbal and others  :  C.M.A.  No.869 -P/22  
   
…Respondents  
 
   
For the Petitioner    Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
(in all C .Ps.) 
   
 
For the Applicant  : Mr. M. Siddique H aider Qureshi, ASC  
(in C.M.A . Nos. 863-P, 866 -P and 869 -P/2022 ) 
   
For Respondents 
No.1-2  : Syed Mudassar Ameer, ASC  
(in C.P. No.2314/2022 ) 
   
For the Respondent  : N.R. 
(in C.P. No.2317/2022 ) 
   
For Respondent No.1  : Dr. Adnan Khan, ASC  
(in C.P. No.2318/2022 ) 
   
For Respondent No.1  : Syed Mudassar Ameer, ASC  
(in C.M.A. No.863 -P/2022 ) 
   
Other Respondents  : N.R. 
(all C .Ps. and C .M.As.) 
   
Date of Hearing  : 30.05.2023  C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  2
   
JUDGMENT  
 
MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR, J - These Civil Petitions for leave to ap peal 
are directed against the judgment dated 10.05.2022 , passed by the 
Peshawar High Court in W.P. No s.712-P/2022, 370 -P/2022 and 377 -
P/2022, whereby the writ petitions were allowed and the decision of 
the Parliamentary Committee (the “ Committee ”) dated 19 .01.2022 
was set aside with the directions to the Federal Government to 
implement the recommendations of the Judicial Commission of 
Pakistan  (the “ Commission ”)  dated 05.01.2022 and issue the 
Notification for the appointment of Additional Judges of the Peshawar 
High Court .  
  
 
 
2.  The compendious facts of the case are as follows:  
 
 
On 05.01.2022, the Commission convened a meeting at Islamabad 
to consider the nominations of the following learned persons for 
elevation as Additional Judges of the Peshawar Hi gh Court:  
 
 
1) Mr. Fazal Subhan  District & Sessions Judge  
 
2) Mr. Shahid Khan  District and Sessions Judge  
 
3) Dr. Khushid Iqbal  District and Sessions Judge  
 
4) Mr. Kamran Hayat 
Miankhel  Additional Advocate General, KPK  
 
 
5) Mr. Muhammad 
Ijaz Khan  Advoc ate Supreme Court  
 
 
6) Mr. Muhammad 
Faheem Wali  Advocate Supreme Court  
  
Decision of the Commission   
 
After in -depth discussion, the hon’ble  Members of the Commission 
recommended  the n ominees mentioned at Serial No. 1 to 3 for 
appointment as Additional J udges of the Peshawar High Court  for 
a period of one year  by the majority of ten members , with two 
members  dissenting and one-member  abstaining . While n ominees 
at Serial No. 4 to 6 were also recommended for appointment as 
Additional Judges of the Peshawar High Court  for a period of one 
year, by the majority of twelve members with one-member  
abstaining . The recommendations  were forwarded by the 
Commission to the Committee for confirmation of the aforesaid 
names for appointment as additional judges of Peshawa r High 
Court.  
 
 
The meeting of the Committee was convened on 19th January, 
2022 and decided as under:  
 
 
 
Decision of the Committee  
 
 
The Committee is therefore of the unanimous opinion that three 
positions for which three District and Session Judges have  been 
nominated for appointment as Additional Judges of the Peshawar 
High Court be kept vacant and the names of all the five District 
and Session Judges namely ( i) Mr. Fazal Subhan, (ii) Mr. Shahid 
Khan, (iii) Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, (iv) Mr. Kaleem Arshad and  (v) Mr. C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  3
Asim Imam may be re -considered keeping into view their seniority 
and competence. Accordingly the names of three District and 
Session Judges namely (i) Mr. Fazal Subhan, D&S, (ii) Mr. Shahid 
Khan, D&SJ and (iii) Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, D&SJ are not con firmed 
and the matter is referred back for re -consideration as stated 
herein above.  
 
 
 
Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the decision of the 
Committee, the recommendees at Serial No.1 to 3  and one Naeem 
Ahmad Khattak  (Advocate ) filed three writ petitio ns in the 
Peshawar High Court for setting aside the decision of the 
Committee . The learned High Court set aside the decision of the 
Committee and directed the Federation of Pakistan to implement 
the recommendations of the Commission and issue Notification of 
appointment.  
 
 
 
3. The learned Additional Att orney General for Pakistan (“ Addl. AGP ”) 
argued that the impugned judgment is not sustainable for the reason 
that the principle s laid down in the case of Munir Hussain Bhatti 
(infra) were followed by the Comm ittee in letter and spirit and they did 
not discuss the professional caliber, competency and /or judicial skills  
of the nominees,  but only referred the matter back to the Commission 
to consider the seniority, suitability and merit. The seven members of 
the Committee unanimously decided not to confirm the nominations in 
question and the matter was sent back for reconsideration of seniority 
which in fact was in true adherence to the principles laid down in the 
of Munir Hussain Bhatti ( infra). It was further av erred that the District 
and Session Judges senior to the nominees were ignored and 
superseded without an y opportunity of being heard . He further argued 
that while interpreting a constitutional provision , the approach taken 
must be dynamic, progressive, and  oriented with the desire to meet the 
situation , and since the Constitution is a living document , therefore it 
must be  liberally interpreted with proper checks and balances. In 
support of this contention, he referred to the case of Al-Jehad Trust 
and other s v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 1996 SC 324) . 
He next argued that the role of the Committee on judges has been 
dilated on in the case  of District Bar Association, Rawalpindi and 
others v . Federation of Pakistan  and others  (PLD 2015 SC 401) in 
which it was held that Article 175A of the Constitution  of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“ Constitution ”) marginalized the roles of 
the President, the Prime Minister and the ruling party in the 
appointment of judges of the superior courts to avoid any undue 
influence in appointments. Involvement of the Parliament through a 
Committee in the process of appointment of Judges o f the superior 
courts was thus  not likely to impinge upon the independence of the C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  4
judiciary and it also did not offend the conce pt of separation of powers 
between the Judiciary and Executive. It was further avowed that this 
Court in the aforesaid case also held that where the Committee 
provided a valid objection against a nominee of the Commission, the 
Committee had to give its rea sons and the Commission , upon receipt 
thereof , had to  reconsider the nominee's suitability to hold judicial 
office. It was further contended that the purpose of the Committee is to 
make the process of appointment of Judges in the Superior Courts 
more trans parent and fair , and if its role is reduced then it might 
defeat the very purpose of making of such Committee. It was further 
averred that the learned High Court while rendering the impugned 
judgment failed to appreciate the true spirit of Article 175A of the 
Constitution in which it is the collective power of the Commission to 
nominate the candidates for appointment and not the Chief Justice ’s 
alone.  
 
 
4. The l earned counsel for the private respondents  argued that the 
Committee is not an appellate forum for the  Commission. They had no 
right to reject the recommendations  of the Commission and remand 
the matter back to reconsider the nominations . He further argued that 
the issue of senior ity was properly dealt with prior to the Commission 
sending  the recomme ndations to the Committee. It was further 
contended that the Committee had exceeded its authority and travelled 
beyond its jurisdiction , and made an attempt to re -examine and review 
the recommendations of the Commission with regard to the three 
recommendee s and unnecessarily raised the issue of seniority instead 
of evaluating the antecedents of the candidates. The learned counsel 
further argued that the issue of seniority with other District & 
Sessions Judge s was discussed by the Commission and , being a 
highest constitutional body , it made an objective evaluation regarding 
the suitability of the nominee s which could not be re vised  by the 
Committee in any manner.  
 
 
5. Heard the arguments. To begin with, we would like to accentuate 
that the Federation of Pakis tan in both the Civil P etitions has taken a 
common ground of challenge “A” which is reproduced as under:  
 
“That the impugned judgment of the Peshawar High Court 
could not be sustained since the principle of this August 
Court as laid down in the case of Munir Hussain Bhatti 
(PLD 2011 SC 407)  were followed by the Committee in letter 
and spirit , for the Committee did not discuss the 
professional caliber, competency and judicial skills rather C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  5
than it by following constitutional criteria referred the matter 
back to the Commission to further deliberate upon the 
seniority, suitability and merit .” 
 
 
 
6. The impugned decision of the learned High Court is predominantly 
rooted in  the dictum laid down in the case of Munir Hussain Bhatti  
(infra). The exactitudes of Article 189 of the Constitution  command  
that any decision  of the Supreme  Court  shall, to the extent  that it 
decides a question of law or is based upon or enunciates a principle of 
law, be binding on all other courts in Pakistan.  Reference to the case 
of Justice  Khurshid Anwar Bhinder  and others  v. Federation of 
Pakistan  and another  (PLD 2010 SC 483)  is somewhat pertinent in 
which it was concluded by this Court that where the Supreme Court 
deliberately , and with the intention of settling the law, pronounces 
upon a question of law, such pronouncement is the law declared by 
the Supreme Court within the meaning of Article 189 and is binding 
on all the Courts of Pakistan. It cannot be treated as mere obiter 
dictum . It was further held that even obiter dictum  enjoys  a highly 
respected position as if “it contains a definite expression of the court’s 
view on a legal principle or the meaning of law ”. Being sanguine and 
mindful of  the binding effect, the learned Add l. AGP  himself asserted 
that the  Committee’s  action of non -confirming the name of nominees 
and remanding the nominations for reconsideration is not against the 
dictum laid down in the Munir Hussain Bhatti case ( infra); in fact,  it 
was in consonance with the said decision in letter and spirit  which 
needs to be expl ored and resolved by dint of this judgment.  
 
 
7. The procedure for appointment of Judges is provided under Article 
175A of the Constitution by means of  the Commission. In pith and 
substance, the aforesaid Article articulates a collegium for the 
appointmen t of Judges of the Supreme Court, appointment of the 
Chief Justice  and Judges of a High Court , and the Chief Justice and 
judges of Federal Shariat Court. According to the niceties of sub -article 
(8), the Commission by majority of its total membership nomin ates to 
the Committee  the person for each vacancy of a judge . Whereas sub -
article (9) establishes  the collegium referred to as t he Committee and, 
in view of sub -article (12), the Committee on receipt of a nomination 
from the Commission may confirm the nomi nee by majority of its total 
membership within fourteen days, failing which the nomination shall 
be deemed to have been confirmed. It is further enumerated  that the 
Committee, for reasons to be recorded, may not confirm the C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  6
nomination by a three -fourth maj ority of its total membership , and, if 
a nomination is not confirmed by the Committee , it shall forward its 
decision with reasons so recorded to the Commission through the 
Prime Minister  and, thereafter, the Commission shall send another 
nomination.  
 
 
8. In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-article (4) of Article 175A 
of the Constitution , the Commission vide S.R.O.122(KE)/2010,  framed 
the Judicial Commission of Pakistan Rules, 2010  (“JCP Rules ”). 
According to Rule 3 , for each anticipated or actual vac ancy of a Judge 
in the Supreme Court , or the Chief Justice of the Federal Shariat 
Court , or the Chief Justice of a High Court, the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan  shall initiate nominations in the Commission for 
appointment against such vacancy and , according to  sub-rule (2) , for 
each anticipated or actual vacancy of a Judge in the Federal Shariat 
Court or Judge in the High Court, the Chief Justice of the respective 
Court shall initiat e and send the nomination for appointment against 
such vacancy to the Chairman for convening a meeting of the 
Commission . Compliant with Rule 4, the proceedings of the 
Commission are to be regulated by the Chairman  and the proceedings 
of the Commission shall be conducted under Rule 5  and w henever  a 
nomination is received under Rule 3 , the Chairman shall call a 
meeting of the Commission  on the date, time and place determined by 
him and notified by the Secretary to each member . While in sub -rule 2  
of Rule 5 , the Commission may call for any information or record 
required by it from any p erson or authority for the purposes of 
carrying out its functions and , under Sub-rule 3, the nominations 
made by the Commission are forwarded to the Committee . Under Rule 
6, the Chairman may constitute one or more committees of members 
for such purpose as may be deemed necessary.  
 
9. Pursuant to the powers conferred by sub-article (17) of Article 
175A of the Constitution, the Committee vide S.R.O.11(1)/2011, 
dated 06.01.2011, also framed the Parliamentary Committee on 
Judges Appointment in the Superior Cour ts Rules 2010  (“PC 
Rules ”). Consistent with  Rule 3, the Committee has the powers to 
summon or invite any person or call for any information or record 
required by it from any person or authority for the purpose of 
carrying out its functions and may also cal l the person nominated 
for a judicial vacancy for an interview. According to the f unctions of C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  7
the Committee  enumerated  under Rule 4, the nomination received by 
the Secretary from the Commission shall be placed before the 
Chairman for calling a meeting of t he Committee and , as per sub -rule 
(2) of Rule 4 , the Committee , after considering the nomination , may 
confirm the nominee by a majority of its total membership within 
fourteen days of the receipt of the nomination, failing which the 
nomination shall be dee med to have been confirmed . However,  under 
sub-rule (3)  of Rule 4,  it is further explicate d that the Committee , for 
reasons to be recorded, may not confirm the nomination by a three -
fourth majority of its total membership within the said period and , 
accord ing to sub -rule (4), the Committee in case of non -confirmation 
shall forward its decision with reasons to the Commission through the 
Prime Minister for sending another nomination.  
 
10. The learned Addl.  AGP raised an argument that the hon’ble Chief 
Justice  of Pakistan (“ HCJP”), acting as the Chairman of the 
Commission,  cannot initiate  the nomination , rather  it is the power of 
the Commission  as a whole;  and initiating  the process of appointment 
at the  sole discretion  of the HCJP is violative of  the principle s of 
natural justice. The Rules framed by the Commission and the 
Committee pursuant to Article 175A of the Constitution (the 
“Rules ”) are both very much in field and have never been challenged 
before any forum. In exercise of the powers delegated under the  
aforesaid Rules, the HCJP has the authority to initiate nominations in 
the Commission for the appointment for each anticipated or actual 
vacancy of a Judge in the Supreme Court , or the Chief Justice of  the 
Federal Shariat Court , or the Chief Justice of a High Court ; and for 
each anticipated or actual vacancy of a Judge in the Federal Shariat 
Court or Judge in the High Court, the Chief Justice of the respective 
Court shall initiate and send nomination s for appointment against 
such vacancy to the Chairman  of the Commission, the HCJP, for 
convening a meeting of the Commission. The argument is 
misconceived  in view of the existing Rules framed under Article 175A 
of the Constitution . Though under the Rules  the nomination is to be 
made by the Chief Justice of the respective High Court for the 
appointment of judges but the minutes of meeting reflect  that the 
hon’ble  Chief Justice of the Peshawar High Court  (“Chief Justice 
(PHC) ”) avowed  that the names proposed for elevation as additional 
judges were also supported b y all the judges of the Peshawar High 
Court. A similar statement of the senior pu isne Judge  (PHC),  Mr. C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  8
Justice Rooh -ul-Amin Khan , is recorded in the minutes that the 
nominations have been initiated after consultation with each  hon’ble  
Judge of the High Cou rt.  
 
11. The nitty -gritties of the judgment rendered by a four member 
bench of this Court in the case of  Munir  Hussa in Bhatti, Advocate 
and others v . Federation of Pakistan and another  (PLD 2011 SC 407) , 
divulge that two Constitutional Petitions under Ar ticle 184(3) of the 
Constitution were filed to challenge t he decisions of the Committee 
whereby it refused to confirm the nominations made by the 
Commission for extension in the tenure of four additional judges of the 
Lahore High Court and two additional j udges of the Sindh High Court. 
The petitioners entreated to quash the recommendations of the 
Committee with the direction  to implement the recommendations of 
the Commission and issue a Notification . For the ease of convenience, 
some of the most important a nd relevant excerpts from the aforesaid 
judgment are replicated as under:  
  
24. Given this discussio n, we do not understand how the  Committee could 
consider that its function was to redo the entire exercise conducted by the 
Commission while determining the  professional caliber, judicial skill, legal 
acumen and personal conduct, required as a judge, of the nominees. More so, 
how could they arrive at a conclusion, that the entire exercise of the 
Commission was flawed, based on the piecemeal views of one membe r of the 
Commission? And it might be added here that even these views did not last the 
Commission passed the nominations unanimously. Let us assume, however, 
that the unanimity present in these decisions of the Commission was not 
there. Let us further assu me, for the sake of argument, that the Attorney -
General of Pakistan objected to a particular nomination and the Judicial 
Commission still, by a majority of its total membership, as mandated by clause 
(8) of Article 175A, decided to nominate that person to the Parliamentary 
Committee. Could the Parliamentary Committee reject this nomination simply 
on the reason that they trust the evaluation of the Attorney General of 
Pakistan and not of the other judges? We strongly believe that such is neither 
the function  of the Parliamentary Committee, nor its mandate under Article 
175A, and would amount to an incorrect and unconstitutional decision.  
  
25. The technical evaluation of a person's caliber as judge has to be made by 
the Commission, and once evaluated the reco mmendations of the Commission 
are to be looked as one. The views of the individual members of the 
Commission thus no more exist before the Committee. What the Commission 
has already assessed and held cannot be overturned on the basis of a 
dissenting view, note or discussion of any individual member. If this was 
allowed, it would render the whole working of the Judicial Commission as 
futile and make it nugatory under the Constitution. Doing so would be akin to 
refusing to recognize a resolution of the Parlia ment, or any law passed by it, on 
the basis of the minority view in the House. Such reasoning will lead to a 
deliberate breakdown of our Constitutional mechanisms and procedures.  
  
26. Therefore, the Parliamentary Committee, on receipt of a nomination from  
the Commission, can either confirm the nominee by a majority of its total 
membership within fourteen days, failing which the nomination shall be 
deemed to have been confirmed, or reject the nomination on grounds falling 
within its domain for very strong r easons which shall be justiciable. This is the 
clear direction of clause (12) of Article 175A.  
 
27. Since in the present case, as already discussed above, the Committee has 
tried to assume the jurisdiction of the Commission, there is no option but to C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  9
come to the conclusion that the Committee failed to perform its functions in 
terms of clause (12) of Article 175A. The consequence of this failure has been 
prescribed by the Constitution itself. The Committee must act within a period 
of fourteen days of receivi ng the nominations, "failing which the nomination 
shall be deemed to have been confirmed". So, while in any other case of failure 
to exercise jurisdiction, we might have been required to send the issue ba ck to 
the authority for consideration in accordance with law, here the Constitution 
leaves us with no such option because of a deeming provision.  
   
32. The recommendations of the Judicial Commission are now on greater 
footing than the recommendations of the Chief Justice alone in the earlier 
system. These cannot be superseded for any extraneous considerations as 
already discussed above. Therefore, the Parliamentary Committee cannot 
simply brush aside the recommendations of the  Commission without its own 
sound reasons. The Committee is to confine  itself to t he purpose for which it 
has been constituted, which is evidently the thrashing out of issues not related 
to the domain of the Commission. The Committee can, based on factual data 
and reasons, for instance, declare that a nominee is corrupt or is 
affiliated /partial making him a controversial choice, but judging the caliber of 
a nominee as a judge rests with the Commission.  
 
 
 
52. In brief, it was held that the judicial consultees are best suited to 
determine the caliber, competence, legal acumen and over -all suitability of a 
person for appointment to a tenured judicial office under the Constitution. The 
executive functionaries on the other hand were considered more suitable, for 
ascertaining the antecedents of judicial appointees. A reasonably clear 
demarcati on between the different roles, respectively, of the judicial consultees 
and the executive functionaries of the State was thus drawn. And with the 
passage of time this demarcation was further refined. In the latest pre -
amendment judicial pronouncement on t he question of appointment of Judges, 
made in the case of Sindh High Court Bar Association and another v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 2009 SC 879), for instance, it was held 
that the opinion of the Chief Justice of Pakistan in respect of the sui tability of 
a person to be appointed to constitutional judicial office had primacy and that 
this opinion was subjective and not open to challenge through judicial review.  
 
 
 
12. To revisit the judgment rendered by this Court in the Munir Bhatti 
case (supra ), a Review Petition was also filed by the Federation of 
Pakistan which was dismissed vide judgment  titled  Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Law Vs Munir Hussain 
Bhatti and others  (PLD 2011 SC 752). The operative portion is  
reproduced  as under : 
 
 
18.  Regardless of the above discussion, it must be stressed here that 
though the Commission and the Committee perform essentially the same 
functions as the Chief Justice and the Prime Minister in the previous 
dispensation, it would be a mistake to imagine these constitutional bodies 
as simply substitutes for the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the Prime 
Minister respectively. The base of decision -making has been substantially 
broadened. Thus we now have in the Commission, members of the Bar and 
the governing Executive involved in the decision -making process along with 
seven members of the Judiciary who did not have a Constitutional role in 
the previous dispensation. This provides capacity to the Commission which 
enables it to have information about,  and consider what in our 
jurisprudence are referred to as 'antecedents', of a potential nominee for 
judicial office. This should not be taken to mean that the Committee's role 
in considering the antecedents of such nominee  stands eliminated. The 
Committee  may also examine the antecedents of a nominee and form an 
opinion as to his suitability  for judicial office. Such opinion, however, must 
conform to standards which pass judicial scrutiny because the decisions of 
the Committee are subject to judicial revie w. 
 
 
19.  There may, therefore, be an overlap of functions of the Commission and 
the Committee in, for instance, assessing and evaluating the antecedents of C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  10
a nominee for judicial office. But this overlap does not eliminate the role of 
the Committee or mak e it redundant. It simply requires the Committee to 
engage in a conscious and rigorous exercise of its own which will ensure 
that a person who has dubious antecedents is filtered out in the selection 
and appointment process. It is precisely this function w hich has been 
emphasized on behalf of the Federation in the synopsis of arguments 
referred to above, wherein it has been said, inter alia, that the Committee 
may "be concerned in calling for intelligence reports which was the function 
of the Governor under  the old system ...". 
 
 
21.  It is clear that the observations which form the sole basis of the 
Committee's decision represent at best the pre -deliberation views of the 
Chief Justices of the two High Courts. These views may or may not have an 
empirical basi s. It would be for the Commission, assembled as a collegium 
to examine the same and to decide whether or not these views adhere to the 
objective standards considered appropriate or  relevant by  the collegium.  
This is the essential function of a collegium responsible for making a 
collective decision. Our jurisprudence is familiar with instances of collective 
decision making, be these in University Syndicates, Boards of 
Trustees/directors or statutory authorities etc. The hallmark of such 
decision -making is th at each member of the collegium brings his own views 
- informed or uninformed, subjective or reasoned - to the collegiate body. It 
is there that all views are either synthesized into an objective decision, or a 
member of the collegiate body, who disagrees with the collective view, 
records his dissent.  
 
 
22.  In the facts of this case, the relevant collegiate body, the Commission, 
unanimously agreed to recommend the contentious names after discussion. 
The Committee, therefore, could not rely on the pre -discu ssion views of the 
one member of the Commission respectively in each case, without providing 
any independent reasoning. The Committee did not have any information 
before it for treating the tentative views of the two Hon'ble Chief Justices as 
empirical fac t nor did it consider the objective standards which informed 
the unanimous opinion of the Commission. It is this aspect of the petitions 
which has been of concern to us and has justifiably been given importance. 
The Committee could still have disagreed wit h the Commission within the 
ambit previously reserved for the Prime Minister, if it had any reasons of its 
own to justify a different opinion. This process, if adhered to, would have 
been consistent with the role which was earlier envisaged for the Prime 
Minister … 
 
 
23.  Therefore, if in future the Committee decides to subordinate itself to 
the opinion of one member of the Commission, it must, under accepted 
norms of judicial scrutiny, give its own reasons for making this choice. 
Without such reasons which are capable of withstanding judicial scrutiny, 
the opinion of the Committee can only be termed as unreasoned and 
arbitrary. Our jurisprudence as a rule strikes down arbitrary and 
unreasoned exercise of discretionary power, particularly when the law 
require s that reasons be given by the decision maker for such exercise of 
power. Reference can be made to the case titled  Chief Justice of Pakistan 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan through Secretary 
and others  (PLD 2010 SC 61) if authority is r equired for this established 
principle of law. Thus, if at all , a legal principle is to be deduced from our 
judgment in the light of Article 189, it would be that the Committee does 
not have untrammeled powers to choose, without sound reasons, the 
unconsid ered views of one member of the Commission out of thirteen, while 
discarding the considered views of all thirteen members together or of the 
remaining twelve members. The decisions of the Committee must meet the 
usual and well recognized standards of objec tivity and application of mind, 
amongst other standards.  
 
 
13. A similar controversy arose  in the case of Sindh High Court Bar 
Association, Sukkur v. Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Law 
Parliamentary Affairs and Justice, Islamabad and another  (PLD 2 012 
Sindh 531) , where  two constitution petitions were filed by the Sindh 
High Court Bar Association, Sukkur and the Sindh High Court Bar 
Association, Karachi, in the Sindh High Court against the decision C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  11
of the Committee whereby it refused to confirm the n omination s 
made by the Commission for two learned Sindh High Court judges. 
The constitution petitions were heard by a full bench  (three -
members)  of the Sindh High Court whereby it was held that the 
decision of the Committee not only suffers from illegality , 
irrationality and procedural improp riety, but in a large part has 
purportedly been made for considerations which are clearly beyond 
the well prescribed domain of the Committee and , as a consequence 
thereof, the impugned decision of the Committee was set aside. The 
judgment was authored by Justice Maqbool Baqar  (as he then was). 
His lordship , while relying on the dictums rendered in the case of 
Munir  Hussain Bhatti, Advocate and others v. Federation of Pakistan 
and another  (PLD 2011 SC 407) , Al-Jehad Trust  and others v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 1996 SC 324) , Sharaf Faridi 
and others v. Federation of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  and 
another  (PLD 1989 Karachi 404) , Syed Zafar Ali Shah and others v. 
General Pervez Musharraf,   Chief Executive of Pakistan  and others  
(PLD 2000 SC 869) , Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhary v. President of Pakistan  and others  (PLD 2010 SC 61) , 
Mehram Ali and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 
1998 SC 1445) and Sindh High Court Bar Ass ociation and another 
v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2009 SC 879) , held in 
paragraph 10 of the judgment that in our jurisprudence, it is now 
well settled (i) that the independence of the judiciary and the 
concept of separation of powers are the c ardinal principles of our 
Constitutional scheme; (ii) that the independence of the judiciary is 
inextricably linked and connected with the process of appointments 
of the Judges of the Constitutional Courts; (iii) that the evaluation 
of the calibre, compete nce, legal acumen, and the overall suitability 
of a nominee for appointment as  a Judge of a Constitutional Court 
falls exclusively within the domain of the judicial consultees ; 
(iv) that the decision of the Commission is not justiciable ; (v) that 
the scope  of the Committee's function and competence is limited to 
consider the antecedents, to be examined on the basis of material 
obtained by the Committee/executive; (vi) that the Committee can 
refuse to accept the nomination of the  Commission only on the basis  
of antecedents, such as character, moral and/or financial integrity ; 
(vii) the Committee's refusal to accept the nomination by the 
Commission should be based on very strong reasons pertaining to C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  12
the criteria falling within the former ’s domain ; and (viii) that the 
reasons, as above, are justifiable and are amenable to judicial 
scrutiny/review.  
 
14. The aforesaid judgment rendered by the Sindh High Court was 
also challenged in this Court which was decided by a four-member  
bench  in the case of Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, 
Ministry of Law and Parliamentary Affairs and Justice, Islamabad v . 
Sindh High Court Bar Association through President and another  (PLD 
2012 SC 1067). The Court while relying on the dictum laid down in 
the case of Munir Hussain Bhatti  (supra) , dismissed the petition  and 
held that the essential function of a collegium is its responsibility  to 
make  a collective decision  by examining any observations made and 
deciding whether or not those views adhere to the objective standards 
considered appropriate or relevant by the collegium . Our 
jurisprudence is familiar with instances of collective decision making, 
be th ey in University Syndicates, Boards of Trustees/directors or 
statutory authorities etc. The hallmark of such decision -making i s that 
each member of the  collegium brings his own views , informed or 
uninformed, subjective or reasoned , to the collegiate body. It is there 
that all views are either synthesized into an objective decision, or a 
member of the collegiate body, who disagree s with the collective view, 
records his dissent. Th is Court reiterated that the ratio of the Munir 
Hussain Bhatti  case (supra) is fully applicable and was rightly relied 
upon by the three -member b ench of the Sindh High Court . 
 
 
15.  A reading of Article 175A of the Constitution makes it abundantly 
clear that two different limbs have been created to examine and 
scrutinize the nominations of judges for appointment in the superior 
Courts , but it is apparent  that the Committee is neither vested with 
any role to act as an appellate forum for the Commission , nor does the 
Committee have  any right or authority to remand the nomination for 
reconsideration to the Commission . The role of the Committee is 
confined to the confirm ation , or non -confirmation,  of the name  
nominated  and, in case  the nomination is not confirmed, the reasons 
thereof shall be sent to the Commission  for sending another 
nomination. Here the Committee remanded the matter to the 
Commission for fresh consideration due to the alleged  seniority issue , 
which exercise of powers by the Committee is alien to Article 175A of 
the Constitution. The independence of the Judici ary is a basic C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  13
principle of constitutional governance in Pakistan . It is a well settled 
exposition of law that a written constitution is , in essence , a form of 
statute which needs to be interpreted liberally. It is also a well settled 
principle of interpretation that the Constitution has to be read 
holistically as an organic document  which contemplate s the 
trichotomy of power s between the thr ee organs of the State, namely, 
the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary . The doctrine of p ith 
and substance lays much  emphasi s on comprehend ing and figuring  
out the exact characteristics  of constitutional provisions . The concept 
of purposive inte rpretation places  an obligation upon the Court s to 
interpre t the statute or the Constitution keeping in mind  the 
purposefulness for which the provision in question was legislated with 
a dynamic and result oriented approach rather than con struing it in a 
restrictive or stringent sense. According to Salmond ’s Jurisprudence , 
interpretation or construction is the process by which the courts seek 
to ascertain the meaning  or intention  of the legislature through the 
medium of the authoritative forms in which it is  expressed. The 
interpretation of the Constitution becomes more important when there 
is a need to harmonize it with the democratic principles of the State. 
The role and powers assigned to the Commission and Committee in 
the Constitution as two of the most important limbs of the judicial  
appointment process is also to be vetted under t he doctrine of 
harmonious interpretation which is akin to the notion of an extensive 
approach within the basic structure and constitutional  scheme.  
 
 
16. Seemingly, the bone of  contention was with regard to the breach of 
seniority  due to which the Committee did not confirm the names of the 
District Judges as recommended by the Commission . We have also 
scanned  the minutes of meeting  of the Commission . The gist of the 
minutes reflects that the Chairman of the Commission  invited  the 
Chief Justice  (PHC)  to brief the Commission about the nominations. 
He briefed that 586 Judicial officers are working in the judiciary of 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , from whom three have been nominated to be 
considered; he also cited the reasons for superseding the three senior 
District Judges. He also brought to the  notice of the Commission that 
after sending the nominations, the Service Tribunal for Subordinate 
Judiciary , vide judgment dated 18.12.2021, allowed the appeal of Mr. 
Kaleem Arshad, District and Sessions Judge, and the implementation 
of the judgment will give an edge to Mr. Kaleem Arshad over the three 
judges whose names have been recommended. It is further highlighted C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  14
from the discussion that Mr. Just ice Rooh -ul-Amin Khan ( senior 
puisne J udge, PHC ) added that the case of Mr. Kaleem Arshad will be 
placed before the Administrative Committee for re-fixing his seniority 
in accordance with the said judgment. He further added that the 
judgment is also subjec t to challenge before the Supreme Court by the 
High Court or by those who are affected . The Chief Justice  (PHC)  
observed that , due to this judgment, his order of recommendations 
from the cadre would change placing M r. Kaleem Arshad at Serial No. 
1. In resp onse, the Chairman  of the Commission  asked the Chief 
Justice  (PHC)  whether  he would  like to include the name of Mr. 
Kaleem Arshad in the list of recommendees , or whether he desires to 
withdraw the nominations. It is also evident from the discussion that 
the Chief Justice  (PHC),  though  he affirmed that the judgment is in the 
field, but on the query of the Chairman, the Chief Justice (PHC)  stated 
that he would stand by the nominations. So far as the matter of Mr.  
Asim Imam is concerned, due deliberation  was m ade on his service 
record and it is also mentioned in the minutes that he was superseded 
twice before, in the year 2020, when two lists for appointment came up 
before the Commission which were initiated by the then Chief Justice 
Mr. Justice Waqar Ahmed Set h, and there appeared to be a 
consensus . Similarly, the service record of Mr. Hamid Mughal  was also 
considered but he was not recommended and it is pertinent to point 
out that even the Committee has not sent his name for 
reconsideration , whereas the dossie r of Mr. Kaleem Arshad was not 
before the Commission for the reason that his name was not 
recommended by the Chief Justice (PHC)  and the decision in his 
service appeal was rendered after the nomination s had been sent  to 
the Commission. Though no right of a ppeal is provided to an aggrieved 
person under the Constitution  or the Rules against a decision of the 
Commission and Committee , nor can the proceedings before the 
Commission be considered a ‘trial’ within the meaning of Article 10 A of 
the Constitution , but in all fairness , it is clear that the nominations 
were finalized by the Chief Justice (PHC) in  consultation with his 
fellow  judges at the High Court and then proposed for 
recommendation  to the Commission , and it is reflected from the 
minutes of meeting o f the Commission that , after due diligence of the 
service record , and deliberation on the issue of seniority, the  
recommendati ons were made by a majority of the members with their 
collective wisdom.  
 C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  15
17. In view of the fact that the elevation of District Judges corresponds  
with and reckons from the service cadre, therefore for all practical 
purposes, the guiding principle as accentuated and envisioned in the 
civil servant structure may be contemplated to apprecia te the 
phraseology of seniority -cum-fitness and/ or seniority -cum-merit. In 
fact, the seniority system is fundamentally an arrangement which 
acknowledges and corroborates the length of service for consideration 
of the dossier by the Departmental Promotion Committee or Selection 
Board under Civil Serv ice for promotion or any other progression . 
However,  while considering the eligibility for promotion or progression, 
the predominant factor is not solely  seniority , instead it is always 
coupled with fitness and/or merit. S eniority or length of service is not 
considered a solitary  benchmark or standard , in fact  competence , 
antecedents and credentials are also predominant components for 
progressi on to the particular post.  In the normal course of things, 
fitness comes first and seniority is given weightage whe n merit and 
ability are more or less equivalent among the contenders. One view is 
that meritocracy  is a system in which talented and hardworking 
personnel are chosen for promotions based on achievements and not 
because of their seniority  or length of servi ce. In the case of 
Muhammad Amjad versus Director General, Quetta De velopment 
Authority and another  (2022 SCMR 797  = 2022 PLC (CS) 594 ), it was 
held that the promotion is not a vested right, but it depends on the 
eligibility as well as fitness of the candid ate. The concept of eligibility 
implies a qualification to be appointed or promoted, whereas 
determination of fitness encompasses a person's competence to be 
chosen or selected for appointment or promotion subject to the 
availability of post on which the c redentials and antecedents of person 
could be examined for examining his merits and worthiness for 
promotion. In the case of State of Mysore versus Syed Mahamood  and 
others (AIR 1968 SC 1113) , it was held that where the promotion is 
based on seniority -cum-merit the officer cannot claim promotion as a 
matter of right by virtue of his seniority alone and if he is found unfit 
to discharge the duties of the higher post, he may be passed over and 
an officer junior to him may be promoted. But these are not the on ly 
modes for deciding whether promotion is to be granted or not.  
 
 
18. The minutes of the Commission’s meeting further expressed that 
the hon’ble Chairman of the Commission constituted a four-member  
committee under Rule -6 of the JCP Rules to verify the an tecedents of C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  16
the nominees , and a two-member  Committee to verify the ir 
professional competence and caliber . It is also revealed from the 
minutes of meeting that the Chairman of the Commission , after 
receiving the names, consulted two brother judges from Khy ber 
Pakhtunkhwa in the Supreme Court and the nominations were also 
supported by hon’ble  Judges from Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  and members 
of the bar. The minutes of meeting of the Commission reflect that , 
after effectual and lengthy discussion and deliberation , including  on 
the issue of seniority , and considering the pros and cons of the views 
expressed by the learned members, the Commission , according to the 
mandate of Article 175A  of the Constitution , recommended the 
nominees (District Judges ) for appointment as  Additional Judges of 
the Peshawar High Court by a majority of ten members and forwarded 
the recommendations to the Committee  
 
 
19. It is indisputable that  the Committee can  neither  travel beyond its 
bounds or limits , nor can it  undertake or embark on the role and 
functions of the Commission. The raison d'être  of enacting  Article 175A 
in the Constitution for the appointment of judges to the  superior 
Courts through the Commission is to make recommendations  by 
majority without according any primacy  or suprem acy to any 
individual  member.  Absolute discretion is not  given to any one , not 
even to the Chairman of the Commission , rather the  decision is to be 
made by m ajority without any provision for a  casting vote  where there 
is a tie among the members . The colleg ium of the Commission is not a 
one man show but consists of, amongst others, the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, the four senior most judges of this Court, the Chief Justice 
of the concerned High Courts, the Federal Minister for Law, Justice 
and Parliamentary A ffairs, the Attorney General for Pakistan and 
representatives of the Bar . The majority decision or recommendation  
rendered by this Commission cannot be made subject to review by the 
Committee whose dominion and province of expertise is entirel y 
different. The Commission and Committee are both obligated and 
duty-bound to act within the spheres of their dominions and 
command. The realm of powers and jurisdiction of the Commission 
within the framework of the collegium is to evaluate the professional 
caliber, j udicial skill, legal acumen , personal conduct  and suitability of 
the nominees, which terminus cannot be trespassed or encroached on 
by the Committee under the region of its powers. In this case to o, 
while remanding the matter to the Commission, the Committ ee failed C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  17
to render any independent evaluation or reasoning even with regard to 
the seniority issue , and  instead,  on the basis of a discussion among  
some hon’ble  members of the Commission on the issue of seniority , 
jotted down in the minutes of the meeting , decided to remand the 
matter for reconsideration without proper application of mind. The 
Committee cannot make their decision on the basis of minority 
views expressed du ring discussion but in totality;  the majority 
discussion must be considered and in ca se of a variance  of opinion, 
the Committee  should provide independent reasoning and the 
decision should not be based on guesswork or picking and choosing 
the points from the gist of discussion recorded in the minutes of 
meeting of the Commission.  Under the  mandate  of Article 175A of the 
Constitution, the Committee may confirm or may not confirm the 
candidat e with reasons , but there is no power  vested in  the Committee  
to call upon the Commission to reconsider  the nominations.  
 
20. Though in the memo of peti tions it is alleged that the decision of 
the Committee is in compliance with  the dictum laid down in the case 
of Munir  Bhatti (supra), but in our considered opinion , not only  the 
decision of the Committee is in excess of jurisdiction and powers  but 
also ag ainst the law laid down in the case of Munir Bhatti  (supra) . The 
Committee also failed to realize a crucial factor , that whatever issues  
were articulated during the discussion by the hon’ble members of the 
Commission evincing  diversified views , including t he issue of seniority , 
were at the end of the day culminated and merged into the majority 
decision of the Commission and transmitted to the Committee in the 
shape of recommendations . The threshold of professional skills, 
calibre, competence, legal acumen, antecedents and over -all suitability  
of the nominees were considered by the Commission through a 
collegium of experts in the discipline of law which could not be 
overturned by the Committee in a perfunct ory and unreasonable 
manner which would frustrate  the very purpose of the Commission 
and render it redundan t. At the same time, we are sanguine and 
mindful that the Committee  cannot be considered an ineffectual  or 
superfluous  corpus , rather it has the capability  and competence to 
complement  value  added role in bringing forth  judicial appointments 
by taking into consideration  material  which is different from and may 
not have been available to the Commission . The Committee may 
examin e and gauge the antecedents, such as character, moral and  or 
financial integrit y and can reach an independent decision  on the basis C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  18
of factual data , if any , collected by them and which was not before the 
Commission , and communicate its independent reasoning in order to 
avoid any controversial  appointment . A rational  demarcation of roles of 
two constitutional bodies cannot be considered adversari al or on the 
warpath. Quite the opposite, the object  of both bodies is to ensur e the 
appointment of the most suitable and deserving persons as Judges  of 
superior Courts . In the Munir Hussain Bh atti c ase (supra),  this 
Court laid out the  basic elements  and fundamentals  required  to be 
considered for the appointment of judges , namely  acumen, 
antecedents, caliber, competence, conduct, integrity  and suitab ility. 
The aforesaid connotations are delineat ed in the various lexicons as 
under:  
 
1. Collins Concise Dictionary of the English Language  
 
(i) acumen (n.) keenness and quickness of mind  
 
(ii) antecedent (n.) 3. [pl.] one’s ancestry, past life, etc.  
 
(iii) calibre (n.) 4. quality or ability  
 
(iv) competence (adj.) 1. well q ualified; capable; fit 2. sufficient, adequate  
 
(v) conduct (n.) 1. management; handling 2. the way that one acts; behavior   
 
(vi) integrity (n.) 3. uprightness, honesty, and sincerity  
 
(vii) suitable (adj.) right for the purpose, occasion, etc.; fitting; appropriate  
 
2. Concise Oxford English Dictionary (Twelfth Edition)  
 
(i) acumen (n.) the ability to make good judgments  and take quick decisions.  
 
(ii) antecedent (n.) 2. (antecedents ) a person’s ancestors and social 
background.  
 
(iii) calibre (n.) 1. quality of character or level of ability.  
 
(iv) competence (n.) 1. the quality or extent of being competent.  
 
 
(v) conduct (n.) 1. the manner in which a person behaves.  
  
(vi) integrity (n.) 1. the quality of having strong moral principles.   
 
(vii) suitable (adj.) right or appropriate for a particular per son, purpose, or 
situation.  
 
3. Chambers 21st Century Dictionary  
 
(i) acumen (n.) the ability to judge quickly and well; keen insight.   
 
(ii) antecedent (n.) 4. (usually antecedents ) a. someone’s past history b. 
someone’s ancestry.  
 
(iii) calibre (n.) 3. quality; standar d; ability.  
 
(iv) competence (n.) 1. capability; efficiency.   
 
(v) conduct (n.) 1. behavior . C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  19
  
(vi) integrity (n.) 1. strict adherence to moral values and principles; uprightness.  
 
(vii) suitable (adj.) appropriate, fitting, proper, agreeable, etc.  
 
 
21. The Munir Bhatti case was decided by a four-member  bench of 
this Court and the same four-member  bench heard and dismissed the 
review petition. The full bench (three -members) of the Sindh High 
Court decided the constitution petitions based on the ratio decidendi  of 
Munir Hussain Bhatti c ase (supra)  and was challenged again in this 
Court , but again the four -member  bench of this Court reiterated the 
principle s laid down in Munir Hussain Bhatti c ase which is intact and 
in field. The doctrine of Stare Decisis  is a Latin term tha t connotes “let 
the decision stand” or “to stand by things decided” . Similarly, the Latin 
maxim Stare decisis et non quieta  movere  means ‘t o stand by things 
decided and not to disturb settled points ’. This represents  an 
elementary canon of law that Courts and judges should honor the 
decisions of prior cases on the subject matter which maintains 
harmony, uniformity and renders the task of interpretation more 
practicable and reasonable while adher ing to it for resolving a lis based 
on analogous facts. The ter minology “vertical  stare decisis ” explicates 
that the decisions of higher courts should take precedence over the 
decisions of  lower courts which is intensely embedded in the American 
legal system . Whereas the concept of “horizontal  stare 
decisis ” provides  that prior decisions made by courts at a particular 
appellate level should provide some precedent for cases heard by 
courts of the same appellate level , however  horizontal  stare decisis  is 
generally seen to be less forceful as  compared to vertical  stare de cisis. 
The doctrine of binding precedent has the excellence  of fostering  and 
disseminating  firmness  and uniformity  and also supports  the 
development of law . The doctrine  of stare  decisis  is to be adhered to as 
long as an authoritative pronouncement holds t he field , until and 
unless  the dictates of compelling circumstances f ortified by rationale 
justify  the exigency of a fresh look for judicial review  which has not 
been done so far for revisiting  the dicta laid down in the case of Munir 
Hussain Bhatti c ase (supra) which has binding effect under the 
doctrine of binding precedent.  No doubt according to the hierarchical 
façade and veneer  of our judicial system, the dominant  consideration 
is that the law declared by this Court should be certain, translucent  
and rational , as most of the decisions not only constitute a 
determination  of rights of the parties , but also set down a declaration C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  20
of law in service  being a binding principle in future cases  as a valuable 
tool of development in the jurisprudence of law.   At this point, it would 
be appropriate to refer to the relevant excerpts appearing  at page 47 
and 50 of the Treatise on the Constitutional Limitation  authored  by 
Thomas M.  Cooley  who expounded as under: - 
  
And as to the first, we understand the rule to be, tha t a decision once 
made in a case, by the highest Court empowered to pass upon it, is 
conclusive upon the parties to the controversy and their privies, who 
are not allowed afterwards to revive it in a new proceeding for the 
purpose of raising the same or an y other questions. The matter in 
controversy has become  res judicata, a  thing definitely settled by 
judicial decision;  and the judgment of the Court imports absolute 
verity. Whatever the question involved, whether the interpretation of a 
private contract, the legality of a n individual act, or the validity of a 
legislative enactment, the rule of finality is the same. The controversy 
has been adjudged, and once finally pass ed upon is never to be 
renewed.  
  
The rule of conclusiveness to this extent is one of t he most inflexible 
principles of the law; in so much th at even if it were subsequently  held 
by the Courts that the decision in the particular case was erroneous, 
such holding would not authorize the reopening of the old controversy 
in order that the final conclusion mi ght be applied thereto.  
 
A solemn decision upon a point of law arising in any given case 
becomes an authority in a like case, because it is the highest evidence 
which we can have of the law applicable to the subject, and the Judges 
are bound t o follow that decision so long as it stands unreversed, 
unless it can be shown that the law was misunderstood or misapplied 
in that particular case. If a decision has been made  upon solemn 
argument and mature deliberation, the presumption in favour of its 
correctness, and the community have a right to regard it as a just 
declaration or exposition of the law, and to regulate their actions and 
contracts by it. It would , therefore, be extremely inconvenient to the 
public if precedents were not duly regarded, a nd implicitly followed. It is 
by the notoriety and stability of such rules that professional men can 
give safe advice to those who consult them, and people in general can 
venture to buy and trust, and to deal with each other. If judicial 
decisions were to be lightly disregarded, we should disturb and unsettle 
the great  landmarks of property. When a rule has once been 
deliberately adopted and declared, it ought not to be disturbed unless 
by a Court of appeal or review, and never by the same Court, except for  
very urgent reasons, and upon a clear manifestation of error;  and if the 
practice were otherwise, it would be leaving us in a per plexing 
uncertainty as to the law.  
 
 
22. At this juncture, we cannot ignore the doctrine of precedents vis-à-
vis stare decisi s, since both have fundamental values engrained  in our 
judicial system to ensure an objective of certitude and firmness. 
Judicial consistency advocates and encourages the confidence in the 
judicial system and to achieve this  consistency, the Courts have 
evolved the aforesaid  rules and principles which are grounded in 
public policy. The aforesaid doctrine has been expressed in  various law 
lexicons as under:  
 C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  21
 
1. Black’s Law Dictionary (Tenth Edition)  (at pages 1626 to 1627)  
 
The rule of adherence to judicial  precedents finds it expression in the 
doctrine of stare decisis. This doctrine is simply that, when a point or 
principle of law has been once officially decided or settled by the ruling of 
a competent court in a case in which it is directly and necessaril y 
involved, it will no longer be considered as open to examination or to a 
new ruling by the same tribunal, or by those which are bound to follow 
its adjudications, unless it be for urgent reasons and in exceptional 
cases.” William M. Lile et al., Brief Ma king and the Use of Law Books 321 
(Roger W. Cooley & Charles Lesley Ames eds., 3d ed. 1914). The general 
orthodox interpretation of stare decisis … is stare rationibus decidendis 
(‘keep to the rationes decidendi  of past cases’), but a narrower and more 
literal interpretation is sometimes employed. To appreciate this narrower 
interpretation,  it is necessary to refer … to Lord Halsbury’s assertion that 
a case is only authority for what it actually decides. We saw that 
situations can arise in which all that is  binding is the decision. According 
to Lord Reid, such a situation arises when the ratio decidendi  of a 
previous case is obscure, out of accord with authority or established 
principle, or too broadly expressed.” Rupert Cross & J.W. Harris, 
Precedent in Eng lish Law 100-01 (4th ed. 1991).  
 
 
2. Words and Phrases (Permanent Edition), Volume 39A  (at page 602)  
 
The doctrine of “stare decisis” requires that rules of law when clearly 
announced and established by a court of last resort should not be lightly 
disrega rded and set aside but should be adhered to and followed. Walker 
v. Bumiller, Ohio, 27 O.C.D. 366, 25 Cir.Ct.R., N.S., 385. The doctrine of 
“stare decisis”, meaning to stand by decided cases, rests upon the 
principle that law by which men are governed shou ld be fixed, definite, 
and known, and that, when the law is declared by court of competent 
jurisdiction authorized to construe it, such declaration, in absence of 
palpable mistake or error, is itself evidence of the law until changed by 
competent authority . In re Proposal to Incorporate Town of Chesapeake, 
Kanawha County, 45 S.E.2d 113, 118, 130 W.Va. 527.  
 
 
3. American Jurisprudence  (Second Edition) , Volume 20  (at page 521 )  
 
"While  res judicata  applies only when the same parties, or their privies, 
are in volved in the subsequent ease as were involved in the prior case, 
the applicability of  stare decisis  is not affected by the fact that different 
parties are involved in the case where the precedent was established.  Res 
judicata  applies to decisions of both law and fact.  Stare decisis,  on the 
other hand, is applicable only on questions of law.  Res judicata  is a rule 
of law that must be applied  even where the decision binding as  res 
judicata  was erroneous, whereas  stare decisis is  a judicial policy in which 
a certain flexibility is inherent, and which, therefore, does not prevent a 
Court from overruling its prior decision if, upon re -examination thereof, 
it is convinced that the decision was erroneous. It has also been pointed 
out, as a difference between  res j udicata  and stare decisis,  that stare 
decisis is  based upon the legal principle or rule involved in a prior case 
and not upon the adjudication which resulted therefrom, whereas  res 
judicata  is based upon the adjudication." . [Ref: Pir Bakhsh v. Chairman, 
Allotment Committee  (PLD 1987  SC 145 )] 
 
 
4. Understanding Statutes: Canons of Construction (Fourth Edition), 
S. M. Zafar,  External Aids to Interpretation  (at pages 752 to 756)  
 
The principle of stare decisis  relates to decisions followed for a long time 
if a statutory provision of some ambiguity or doubtful meaning is 
interpreted by higher courts and same has been followed by long period 
of time and has been acted upon by persons in formation of contracts or 
in disposition of property or in legal procedures s hall not be ordinarily 
overruled thus the court adopts a policy to st and with the previous 
judgment…  
 
The principle of stare decisis  is a greatly valuable doctrine of common 
law and court should stand by precedents and should not disturb them C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  22
but this rule  is not so inflexible which precludes a departure therefrom in 
any case ... 
 
However, a rider has been added that previous decisions should not be 
followed to the extent that grievous wrong may result and accordingly the 
courts ordinarily will not adhere to  a rule of principle established by 
previous decision which they are convinced is erroneous … 
 
Lord Eldon said 'it is better the law should be certain' that every judge 
should speculate upon and ‘than that every judge improvement  in it’. 
Lord Ellenborough o bserved ‘it is extremely dangerous to shake the 
authority of decided cases’.  
 
In 1919 Lord Buckmaster, enunciated the principle on which the rule of 
stare decisis  is based. “Firstly, the construction of a statute of doubtful 
meaning once laid down and acce pted for a long period of time ought not 
to be altered ….  Secondly, that the decision upon which title to property 
depends or which by establishing principles of construction otherwise 
form the basis of contracts ought to receive the same protection. Third ly, 
decisions affecting the general conduct of affairs, so that their alteration 
would mean that taxes had been unlawfully imposed or exemption 
unlawfully obtained, payments needlessly made or the position of the 
public materially affected, ough t in the sa me way to continue.”  
 
5. Pir Bakhsh thr. L.R.s and others v. The Chairman, Allotment 
Committee and others  (PLD 1987 SC 145 ). “Elaborating further, it is 
the policy of the Courts to stand by the ratio decidendi, that is, the rule of 
law and not to disturb a  settled point. This policy of the Courts is 
conveniently termed as the doctrine of rule of stare decisis. This rationale 
behind this policy is the need to promote certainty, stability, and 
predictability of the law. This, however, does not mean that this rule is 
inflexible. 17. This Court's jurisprudence has shown that usually the 
courts do not overrule the established precedents unless there is a 
social, constitutional or economic change mandating such a 
development. The numbers themselves speak of restra int and the value 
this Court attaches to the doctrine of precedent. This Court regards the 
use of precedent as indispensable bedrock upon which this Court 
renders justice. The use of such precedents, to some extent, creates 
certainty upon which individuals  can rely and conduct their affairs. It 
also creates a basis for the development of the Rule of law. As the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, John Roberts 
observed during his Senate confirmation hearing, "It is a jolt to the legal 
system when you overrule a precedent. Precedent plays an important role 
in promoting stability and even -handedness". [Congressional Record --
Senate, Vol. 156, Pt. 7, 10018 (7 -6-2010).]  
 
 
 
 
23. To conclude , we have no hesitation in our mind while holding  that 
the judgment in the case of Munir Bhatti (supra) is very much  in field 
which was also reiterated  and reaffirmed by a bench of equal strength 
in the case of Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of 
Law and Parliamentary Affairs and Justice, Isl amabad versus Sindh 
High Court Bar Association through President and another  (PLD 2012 
SC 1067) . The foregoing  situation  also resonated that the judgment of 
a bench of larger strength is binding on a bench of smaller strength . 
We have also noted in the cas e in hand, the entire decision of the 
Committee of remanding the nominations of District and Sessions 
Judges for reconsideration is based solely on the views expressed by 
two hon’ble  members of the Commission on the issue of seniority but 
in the end, the n ominations were made by majority. There is no C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  23
indication in  the decision of Committee that any independent vetting 
was done by the C ommittee with regard to the antecedent s, character, 
and integrity , instead the Committee has relied entirely  on the pre-
discussion and deliberation of the members of the Commission made 
prior finalizing the recommendations. The Committee’s act of 
remanding the matter to the Commission for reconsideration was not 
only against the command and mandate of Article 175A of the 
Consti tution , but also transgression of the enabling Rules  and the 
hierarchy identified and demarcated for the functioning of the 
Commission and Committee , hence , in our view , the learned High 
Court rightly set aside the decision of the Committee .  
 
24. So far a s aforementioned C .M.As. filed by Mr.  Muhammad Hamid 
Mughal are concerned, he has sought permission of this Court for 
filing his C.P.L.As. and also allowing him to pr oceed and argue the  
accompanying petitions in his personal capacity on the ground that he 
was not impleaded in writ pe titions filed in the High Court  due to 
which his constitutional, legal and vested rights have been adversely 
affected and he was condemned unheard and deprived from his 
nomination, consideration, and recommendation as an Additio nal 
Judge of the Peshawar High Court. The minutes of meeting of the 
Commission  divulge  that, though the name of Mr.  Hamid Mughal was 
not nominated by the Chief Justice  (PHC) , the Committee constituted 
by the Chairman of the Commission considered the reason s for his 
supersession and also examined his service record. In the majority 
decision of the Commission, his name was not recommended  for 
confirmation by the Committee. Even the minutes of the Committee 
meeting exhibit that the candidature of Mr.  Hamid Mug hal was never 
discussed , and according to the decision of the Committee they only 
remanded the names of (i) Mr. Fazal Subhan, (ii) Mr. Shahid Khan, (iii) 
Dr. Khurshid Iqbal, (iv) Mr. Kaleem Arshad , and (v) Mr. Asim Imam for 
reconsideration based on seniori ty and competence.  If the applicant of 
the C.M.As. was aggrieved, he should have filed an independent writ 
petition in the High Court and should not have waited to be impleaded 
by the writ petitioners . Even keeping aside the recommendations  of the 
Commissi on for a short while;  the moot question is that the name of 
the applicant was also not considered by the Committee. Neither he 
was recommended by the Commission after due deliberation and 
consideration by majority , nor his credential s or antecedents were 
discussed by the Committee for sending back his name for C.Ps.No.2314,2317,2318/2022  24
reconsideration with  the other  contenders, therefore, he is neither a 
proper nor necessary party and the challenge to the impugned 
judgment will also not help out the applicant who is neither part of 
recommendations of the Commission , nor the Committee and both the 
decision s, at least to the applicant’s extent,  cannot be upset under the 
doctrine of past and closed transactions with the regard to the 
consideration and recommendation by the Commission an d 
Committee at least fo r the present batch of nominees. Consequently,  
the aforesaid C .M.As. are not maintainable , however  the rejection  of 
the C.M.As. will not constitute any stigma against the applicant .  
 
 
25. The aforesaid Civil Petitions al ong with  the C.M.As. were decided 
vide short order of the Court on 30.5.2023  as under:  
 
1) CPs No.2314, 2317 and 2318/2022 by majority of two to 
one (Mr. Justice Athar Minallah dissenting) are dismissed. 
Leave to appeal is refused.  
 
2) CMAS. No.863 -P, 866 -P and 869 -P/2022 are unanimously 
held not to be maintainable and dismissed.  
 
 
26. Above are the reasons assigned to the judgment in majority in 
support of paragraph No .1 of the short order dated 30.5.2023 together 
with the unanimous order for dismissing the CMAs menti oned in 
paragraph No.2 of the short order.  
 
          
        
          Judge  
       
          
 
 
          Judge  
 
My reasons for allowing the 
petitions pursuant to granting 
leave are appended separately . 
(Athar Minallah -j) 
 
          Judge  
Islamabad:  
Dated: 30.5.2023   
Approved for reporting  