 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
   (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
   Present  
 
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
   Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
 
CIVIL PETITION NO. 357 OF 2012 AND  
CONST. PETITION NO.32 OF 2012 AND  
CIVIL MISC. A. NO. 2911 OF 2012, 
CMA -3338/12, ETC.  
 
Regional Director ANF  vs.  Rizwan Ahmed & others.  
Sh. Rasheed Ahmed  vs.  Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
 
 
For the petitioners  : Raja Shahid Abbasi, ASC.  
    Brig. Fahim Ahmed, Force Commander, ANF  
    Lt. Col. Akhtar Abbas, Joint Director.  
    Mr. Bashir Hussain, Special Prosecutor  
    Abid Zulfiqar, Dy. Director./IO ANF.  
    Nemo.(in Const.P.32/12)  
 
For the applicants  :  Mr. Muhammad Tanvir (in -person).  
(in CMA. 3338/2012)  
 
For M/o NRS   : Nemo.  
 
For M/o Interior  : Khawaja Siddique Akbar, Secretary.  
 
For DRAP   : Qazi Abdul Saboor, CEO/DG Health  
  
 
For M/s Barlex Lab  : Nemo.  
 
For respondent No.13:  Nemo.  
 
For respondent No.15:  Nemo.  
 
For Danas Pharma  : Nemo.  
 
For FIA   : Nemo.  
 
For NAB   : Nemo.  
 
Date of hearing  : 09.08.2012.  
 
    * * * * * * *  
 
 CP-357/12 etc.  2 
    O R D E R  
 
 Civil Misc. Application No. 3 338 of 2012. –. Khawaja 
Siddiuqe Akbar has filed a statement wherein he had denied the 
allegations of Muhammad Tanvir, Dy. DG, DRAP. The statement be 
kept on rec ord. However, in the meanwhile, Secretary M/o Services & 
Regulations Division informed about the issue  of the transfer of 
Muhammad Tanvir to Gilgit -Baltistan  on the last date of hearing. On 
having gone through the relevant rules and regulations he was of t he 
opinion that the transfer order of Mr. Muhammad Tanvir, Dy. DG. 
DRAP was not proper, as such the same has been withdrawn and his 
salaries have also been paid. The grievance of the applicant apparently 
seems to have been redressed. We may, however, obser ve in 
categorical terms that the concerned authorities of the Division which 
also include Directorate of Health a re not required to pressurize any of 
the employee s persuading them so they may not cooperate in 
ephedrine case which is under investigation with ANF  as being an 
important case in its nature . ANF needs  cooperation from all 
concerned to unearth a crime in a transparent manner as it is against 
this country and society.  
2 Qazi Abdul Saboor, DG Health and CEO, DRAP stated that as 
he has given proposa l for transfer of Mr. Muhammad Tanvir from 
Gilgit -Baltistan to Islamabad and due to this reason he has also been 
transferred but uptil now no notification has been issued . He stated 
that the concerned authority wants to  appoint a person of their own CP-357/12 etc.  3 
choice  against this post. We have noted the anticipated grievance of 
the DG but as there is still no notification on record showing his 
transfer,  therefore, no action is required for the time being. However, 
in future if so happened at the cost of his cooperatio n in the 
investigation in the ephedrine matter, the DG may move an 
application which shall be decided after having taken into 
consideration the relevant rules on the subject. The application filed 
by Mr. Muhammad Tanvir stands disposed of.  
 
         CJ. 
 
       J. 
 
       J. 
Islamabad,  
09.08.2012.  
 