IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ather Saeed  
 
 
Criminal Miscellaneous Applicati on No. 486 of 2010 in 
Criminal Appeal No. 22 of 2002 AND  
 
 
Adnan A. Khawaja       … Appellant  
 
versus  
 
The State              … Respondent  
 
 
 
Suo Moto Case No. 4 of 2010 and Civil Miscellaneous 
Application No. 1080 of 2010 AND Civil Miscellaneous 
Applicati ons No. 1238 and 1239 of 2010  
(Suo Moto action regarding appointment of convicted person 
namely Ahmed Riaz Sheikh (NRO Beneficiary), as Additional 
Director General, Federal Investigation Agency  
 
 
Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1253 of 2010 in Suo Moto  
Case No. 4 of 2010  
(Report  submitted in Court by Attorney -General regarding Facts 
Finding Inquiry in the case of Missing Letter No. PS/DG/FIA/ 
2009/5047 -49 dated 17.11.2009 ) 
 
 
 
Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1254 of 2010 in Suo Moto 
Case No. 4 of 201 0 AND  
(Additional Documents comprising of Interim Report filed by 
Secretary Law dated 04.04.2010, pointes formulated by Secretary 
for Hon’ble Court, Advice of Former Attorney -General and 
Authorization letter in favour of Mr. Hassan Wasim Afzal, Joint 
Secre tary of Ehtisab Bureau dated 20.05.1998)  
 
Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1082 of 2010  
(Report/Minutes of Hon’ble Chief Justice of Lahore High Court, 
Lahore)  
 
For Federation:    Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, Attorney  
General for Pakistan  
 Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  2 
On behalf of National   Mr. K.K. Agha, Prosecutor -General  
Accountability Bureau:   National Accountability Bureau  
Mr. Fasih A. Bokhari, Chairman 
National Accountability Bureau  
     Mr. Akbar Tarar, Addl. PG. NAB  
Mr. Fauzi Zafar, Addl. PG. NAB  
Sheikh Muhammad Shoaib, 
Assistant D irector, NAB  
Mr. Mohsin Ali Khan, Assistant 
Director, NAB  
 
In attendance:  Mr. Ahsan Raja, Ex. Additional 
Secretary Ministry of Interior along 
with his counsel Raja Zulqarnain, 
ASC 
 
 
For Ahmad Riaz Sheikh:   Dr. A. Basit, Sr. ASC  
 
 
On behalf of Secretary La w: Nemo  
 
 
Date of hearing:    10.01.2012  
 
 
ORDER  
 
 
Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, J. : This order may be read in 
continuation of the order passed by this Court on the last date of 
hearing, i.e. 03.01.2012.  
 
2. We have heard the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan , 
the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau and the learned 
Prosecutor -General Accountability and have been dismayed by the 
fact no progress worth any mention has been made by all 
concerned in the matters mentioned in the order dated 
03.01.2012. The lea rned Prosecutor -General Accountability has 
submitted and read out two reports dated 09.01.2012 wherein it 
has categorically been concluded that the National Accountability 
Bureau has decided not to proceed in the matters of Mr. Adnan 
Khawaja and Mr. Ahmad Riaz Sheikh despite clear directions 
issued by this Court in those regards earlier on. The said reports 
have been found by us to be utterly unsatisfactory and we find that 
an attempt has been made through the said reports to screen, 
shield and protect all those in public offices who were involved in Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  3 
appointments/promotion of the said convicted persons. Upon our 
query the learned Prosecutor -General Accountability has confirmed 
the fact that in the reports mentioned above a clear conclusion 
about lack of crim inal intent of all concerned and involved has 
been recorded without even holding a formal inquiry or 
investigation, which we have found to be strange and unusual. The 
learned Prosecutor -General Accountability has gone on to submit 
that even in the matter o f proceeding against Malik Muhammad 
Qayyum, a former Attorney -General for Pakistan, a decision has 
been taken by the National Accountability Bureau not to initiate or 
take any proceeding despite a clear direction having been issued by 
this Court in that re spect. The Chairman, National Accountability 
Bureau has not only owned the above mentioned reports but has 
adopted a defiant attitude by stating before us that the decision 
whether to proceed against any person under the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 or not is a decision which falls 
within his exclusive jurisdiction and he has decided not to proceed 
against any person in the matters of Mr. Adnan Khawaja, Mr. 
Ahmad Riaz Sheikh and Malik Muhammad Qayyum. He has stated 
before us in most categorical t erms that no inquiry or investigation 
is warranted in those matters and he has stated so in 
contemptuous disregard of the fact that this Court has already 
passed an order for taking proceedings in those matters. We have 
particularly noticed the defiant pos ture and position adopted by 
the Chairman and have been struck by his willful disobedience to 
the earlier directions issued by this Court. It appears that instead 
of obeying the directions of this Court he has decided to take this 
Court head on, which atti tude we find to be contumacious, to say 
the least. The Federal Secretary Law, Justice and Human Rights 
Division was absent from this Court on the last date of hearing on 
account of being abroad and even today he has failed to appear 
and we have been inform ed that he is unwell and is receiving 
medical treatment but nothing has been produced before us to 
substantiate the same. It appears that he prefers foreign sojourns 
upon his commitments before the highest Court of the country. 
The learned Attorney -General  for Pakistan has stated that there is 
no change in the situation since the last date of hearing and no Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  4 
step in furtherance of this Court’s earlier directions has been taken 
by anybody during the interregnum. We have also heard Mr. Ahsan 
Raja who has tried  to convince us that he had no malicious intent 
in the matter of promotion of Mr. Ahmad Riaz Sheikh.     
 
3. The judgment in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan  v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265) had been passed by this 
Court way back on 16.12.2009 an d in that judgment this Court 
had issued some very clear and specific directions to the Federal 
Government and others which were required by the Court to be 
implemented and executed immediately. Later on a review petition 
filed against that judgment was di smissed by this Court and orders 
were again issued to the Federal Government and others to carry 
out the directions of this Court without any further loss of time. 
However, various interim orders passed by this Court in the 
present and other proceedings be ar ample testimony to the 
unfortunate fact that over the last about two years the Federal 
Government has demonstrated no interest in carrying out some of 
the directions of this Court. It is quite clear to us by now that the 
Federal Government and the Natio nal Accountability Bureau are 
not serious in the matter at all and those concerned are only 
interested in delaying and prolonging the matter on one pretext or 
the other. On the last date of hearing it had been made clear to all 
concerned that they were bei ng given the last and final opportunity 
till today and it appears that they have consciously decided to defy 
and disobey this Court. This Court has already shown a lot of 
grace and magnanimity in the matter and has demonstrated a lot 
of patience and restra int in this regard over the last about two 
years but in the present dismal and most unfortunate state of 
affairs the Court is left with no other option but to, as warned in 
categorical terms on the last date of hearing, take appropriate 
actions in order to  uphold and maintain the dignity of this Court 
and to salvage and restore the delicately poised constitutional 
balance in accord with the norms of constitutional democracy. We 
are conscious that the actions we propose to take are quite 
unpleasant but maint aining the necessary constitutional poise and 
balance is a part of our duties, particularly when we have made an Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  5 
oath before Allah Almighty to “preserve, protect and defend the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan” and to “in all 
circumstances -------  do right to all manner of people, according to 
law, without fear or favour, affection or ill -will”.     
 
4. When the Objectives Resolution of 1949, made a substantive 
part of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
by Article 2A thereof, mandates that “the independence of the 
Judiciary shall be fully secured” and when Article 37(d) of the 
Constitution stipulates it as a Principle of Policy that the State 
shall “ensure inexpensive and expeditious justice” the Constitution 
does not contemplate an “independent” judiciary whose decisions 
may be flouted with impunity or implementation of whose 
judgments may be left to the whims or caprice of an indifferent 
Executive. Likewise, when Article 189 of the Constitution gives the 
decisions of the Supreme Court “binding” effect and when Article 
190 of the Constitution commands in no uncertain terms that “All 
executive and judicial authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in 
aid of the Supreme Court” the Constitution does not envision an 
Executi ve professing only “respect” towards the decisions of the 
Supreme Court but at the same time derisively or disdainfully 
paying little or no heed to implementation or execution of such 
decisions. Obedience to the command of a court, and that too of 
the Apex  Court of the country, is not a game of chess or a game of 
hide and seek. It is, of course, a serious business and governance 
of the State and maintaining the constitutional balance and 
equilibrium cannot be allowed to be held hostage to political 
tomfoole ry or shenanigans. Article 5 of the Constitution declares in 
most unambiguous terms that  
 
“(1) Loyalty to the State is the basic duty of every 
citizen.  
(2) Obedience to the Constitution and law is the 
inviolable obligation of every citizen -------  “ 
 
In a rece nt interview with Mr. Hamid Mir on Geo Television the Co -
Chairperson of the major political party in the ruling coalition at 
the federal level, who also happens to be the President of Pakistan, 
has categorically stated that under his Co -Chairpersonship his  Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  6 
political party has taken a political decision not to obey some part 
of the judgment handed down by this Court in the case of Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan (supra ). Even the Prime Minister of Pakistan and 
the Federal Minister for Law, Justice and Human Rights Divis ion 
have been harping on the same theme for quite some time on 
different occasions through speeches made on the floors of the 
National Assembly and the Senate and also through print and 
electronic media. Their conduct in the matter also goes a long way 
in confirming what they have been proclaiming. Such an attitude, 
approach and conduct prima facie shows that the Co -Chairperson 
of the said political party, the Prime Minister and the Federal 
Minister for Law, Justice and Human Rights Division have allowed 
loyalty to a political party and its decisions to outweigh and outrun 
their loyalty to the State and their “inviolable obligation” to obey 
the Constitution and all its commands. We may unhesitatingly 
observe that in our country governed by a Constitution pol itical 
loyalty cannot be accepted as stronger than loyalty to the State 
and dictates of a political master or party cannot be allowed to be 
put up as a defence to failure to obey the Constitution. The old 
sage Aristotle had once observed that “When laws do  not rule, 
there is no Constitution”. Justice Louis Brandeis of the United 
States Supreme Court had observed  in the case of Olmstead  v. 
United States  (227 U.S. 438, 485) that  
 
“In a government of laws, existence of the government 
will be imperiled if it f ails to observe the law 
scrupulously.  Our Government is the potent, the 
omnipresent teacher.  For good or for ill, it teaches the 
whole people by its example.  Crime is contagious.  If 
the Government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds 
contempt for law; it invite s every man to become a law 
unto himself; it invites anarchy.”              
 
As already observed above, we the Judges of the Supreme Court 
have made an oath before Allah Almighty to “preserve, protect and 
defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of P akistan” and, 
thus, it is our bounden duty to take appropriate action whenever 
we find that the Constitution is not being obeyed or its express 
commands are, wittingly or otherwise, being disregarded. Let 
nobody forget that in the not too distant past we s tuck to our Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  7 
commitment to the Constitution and constitutionalism and were 
not shy of giving personal sacrifices for fulfillment of that 
commitment.  
 
5. This brings us to the actions we may take against willful 
disobedience to and non -compliance of some par ts of the judgment 
rendered and some of the directions issued by this Court in the 
case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (supra ). This Court has inter alia the 
following options available with it in this regard:  
 
Option No. 1 : In such a case of a brazen and blatant failure or 
refusal of the Federal Government to obey and execute the relevant 
judgment and directions of this Court the buck stops at the office 
of the Chief Executive of the Federation, i.e. the Prime Minister. At 
the time of entering upon his exalted off ice the Prime Minister had 
made an oath that “ -------  I am a Muslim and believe in the Unity 
and Oneness of Almighty Allah, the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran 
being the last of them, -------  the Day of Judgment, and all the 
requirements and teachings of t he Holy Quran and Sunnah”. He 
had further sworn before Allah Almighty that “as Prime Minister of 
Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, 
honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the 
Constitution of the Isla mic Republic of Pakistan and the law” and 
that “I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official 
conduct or my official decisions”. While invoking the name of Allah, 
the most Beneficent, the most Merciful, and also seeking His help 
and guidan ce, the Prime Minister had also made an oath that “I 
will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan”. It is evident that in his oath the Prime 
Minister had made an unambiguous commitment with Allah 
Almighty not only to conduct himself completely in accord with the 
commands and requirements of the Constitution, including those 
of Articles 2A, 37(d), 189 and 190 thereof, but also totally in sync 
with the requirements and teachings of the Holy Quran. In the 
matter of mak ing of oaths the Holy Quran has inter alia ordained 
as follows:  
 Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  8 
“And make not Allah’s name an excuse in your oaths 
against doing good, or acting rightly, or making peace 
between persons; For Allah is One who heareth and 
knoweth all things. Allah will not call you to account 
for thoughtlessness in your oaths, but for the intention 
in your heart; And He is oft -forgiving, most forbearing.”  
(S. II: 224 -225) 
 
“Allah will not call you to account for what is futile in 
your oaths, but He will call you to account for your 
deliberate oaths: -------  But keep to your oaths. Thus 
Allah makes clear to you His signs, that ye may be 
grateful.”  
 
“And take not your oaths, to practise deception 
between yourselves, with the result that somebody’s 
foot may slip after it was fi rmly planted, and ye may 
have to taste the evil consequences of having hindered 
men from the path of Allah, and a mighty wrath 
descend on you.”  
(S. XVI: 94)  
 
“They swear their strongest oaths by Allah that, if only 
thou wouldst command them, they would lea ve their 
homes. Say: Swear ye not; Obedience is more 
reasonable; Verily Allah is well acquainted with all ye 
do.” 
(S. XXIV: 53)  
 
“God has already ordained for you, (O men), the 
dissolution of your oaths (in some cases): and God is 
your protector, and He is  full of knowledge and 
wisdom.”  
(S. LXVI: 2)  
 
“Heed not the type of despicable man, --ready with 
oaths”  
(S. LXVIII: 10)  
 
According to clause (f) of Article 62(1) of the Constitution “A person 
shall not be qualified to be elected or chosen as a member of 
Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) unless -------  he is sagacious, 
righteous, non -profligate, honest and ameen, there being no 
declaration to the contrary by a court of law ” (underlining has been 
supplied for emphasis ). By virtue of Article 113 of the Constitution  
the same qualifications are also required for election to or being 
chosen as a member of a Provincial Assembly. In the above 
mentioned backdrop the apparent persistent, obstinate and 
contumacious resistance, failure or refusal of the Chief Executive 
of the Federation, i.e. the Prime Minister to completely obey, carry Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  9 
out or execute the directions issued by this Court in the case of Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan (supra ) reflects, at least prima facie , that he may 
not be an “honest” person on account of his not being honest to 
the oath of his office and seemingly he may not be an “ameen” due 
to his persistent betrayal of the trust reposed in him as a person 
responsible for preserving, protecting and defending the 
Constitution and also on account of allowing his persona l political 
interest to influence his official conduct and decisions. According 
to the Preamble to the Constitution “sovereignty over the entire 
Universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and the authority to be 
exercised by the people of Pakistan within th e limits prescribed by 
Him is a sacred trust” and “the State shall exercise its powers and 
authority through the chosen representatives of the people”. A 
chosen representative of the people deliberately violating such a 
sacred trust and disregarding his co mmitment in that regard with 
Allah Almighty may hardly qualify to be accepted as “ameen”. In 
the circumstances of this case mentioned above this Court has an 
option to record a finding in the above mentioned regards and it 
may hand down a declaration to th at effect in terms of clause (f) of 
Article 62(1) of the Constitution which finding or declaration may 
have the effect of a permanent clog on the Prime Minister’s 
qualification for election to or being chosen as a member of Majlis -
e-Shoora (Parliament) or a Provincial Assembly. Somewhat similar 
oaths had also been made by the Co -Chairperson of the relevant 
political party before entering upon the office of the President of 
Pakistan and by the Federal Minister for Law, Justice and Human 
Rights Division befor e entering upon the office of a Federal 
Minister and apparent breaches of their oaths may also entail the 
same consequences.    
 
Option No. 2 : Proceedings may be initiated against the Chief 
Executive of the Federation, i.e. the Prime Minister, the Federal 
Minister for Law, Justice and Human Rights Division and the 
Federal Secretary Law, Justice and Human Rights Division for 
committing contempt of this Court by persistently, obstinately and 
contumaciously resisting, failing or refusing to implement or 
execut e in full the directions issued by this Court in its judgment Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  10 
delivered in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (supra ). It may not be 
lost sight of that, apart from the other consequences, by virtue of 
the provisions of clauses (g) and (h) of Article 63(1) rea d with 
Article 113 of the Constitution a possible conviction on such a 
charge may entail a disqualification from being elected or chosen 
as, and from being, a member of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) or a 
Provincial Assembly for at least a period of five yea rs.  
 
Option No. 3 : In exercise of its powers under Article 187 of the 
Constitution read with Rules 1 and 2 of Order XXXII of the 
Supreme Court Rules, 1980 and all other enabling provisions this 
Court may appoint a Commission to execute the relevant parts of 
the judgment passed and directions issued in the case of Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan (supra ). 
 
Option No. 4 : Although in the present proceedings nobody has 
so far raised the issue pertaining to the protections contemplated 
by Article 248 of the Constitution yet  if anybody likely to be 
affected by exercise of these options by this Court wishes to be 
heard on that question then an opportunity may be afforded to him 
in that respect before exercise of any of these options.  
 
Option No. 5 : It is a statutory duty of t he Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau under the National Accountability 
Ordinance, 1999 to proceed against any person prima facie 
involved in misuse of authority while holding a public office. On 
the last date of hearing, i.e. 03.01.2012 this Court h ad directed the 
Chairman to attend to the matters of appointment of Mr. Adnan 
Khawaja as Managing Director of the Oil and Gas Development 
Company Limited (OGDCL) against merit and 
appointment/promotion of Mr. Ahmed Riaz Sheikh as Additional 
Director, Feder al Investigation Agency (FIA) at a time when both of 
them were convicted persons and to proceed against all those who 
were responsible for such appointments/promotion. The Chairman 
has also failed so far to initiate any action against Malik 
Muhammad Qayyum , former Attorney -General for Pakistan, in 
view of the direction issued in that regard in the judgment passed Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  11 
in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (supra ), as modified in review to 
his extent. Today the Chairman has appeared before this Court in 
person and h e has not only failed to advance any satisfactory 
explanation for his inaction in the above mentioned regards but 
has also manifested defiance towards this Court by categorically 
refusing to carry out the earlier directions issued by this Court qua 
proceed ing in the matter of the above mentioned persons. Such 
inaction on his part in derogation of his statutory duty prima facie 
amounts to misconduct attracting the last part of section 6(b)(i) of 
the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 dealing with remova l 
of the Chairman from his office. Apart from that we have gathered 
an impression that he has attempted to screen, shield and protect 
the relevant persons from criminal charges which may attract 
consequences in some criminal and other laws. In these 
circum stances appropriate recommendations or directions may be 
made or issued by this Court in such regards.  
 
Option No. 6 : The constitutional balance vis-à-vis trichotomy 
and separation of powers between the Legislature, the Judiciary 
and the Executive is very delicately poised and if in a given 
situation the Executive is bent upon defying a final judicial verdict 
and is ready to go to any limit in such defiance then instead of 
insisting upon the Executive to implement the judicial verdict and 
thereby running th e risk of bringing down the constitutional 
structure itself this Court may exercise judicial restraint and leave 
the matter to the better judgment of the people of the country or 
their representatives in the Parliament to appropriately deal with 
the delinq uent. After all the ultimate ownership of the Constitution 
and of its organs, institutions, mechanisms and processes rests 
with the people of the country and there may be situations where 
the people themselves may be better suited to force a recalcitrant 
to obey the Constitution. It may be advantageous to reproduce 
here the relevant words of the Preamble to the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973:  
 
“we, the people of Pakistan -------  Do hereby, through 
our representatives in the National  Assembly, adopt, 
enact and give to ourselves, this Constitution”.  Crl. M.  A. 486 of 2010 in  
Criminal Appeal  No. 22 of 2002 , etc.  12 
 
6. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan is hereby put on 
notice to address arguments before this Court on the next date of 
hearing, after obtaining instructions from those concerned,  as to 
why any of the above mentioned options may not be exercised by 
us in these matters. It goes without saying that any person likely 
to be affected by exercise of the above mentioned options may 
appear before this Court on the next date of hearing and address 
this Court in the relevant regard so that he may not be able to 
complain in future that he had been condemned by this Court 
unheard. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan is directed to 
inform all such persons mentioned above about the passage of this 
order and also about the next date of hearing.    
 
7. On account of constitutional importance of these matters the 
Honourable Chief Justice is requested to consider the desirability 
of hearing of these matters on the next date of hearing by a Large r 
Bench of this Court.   
 
8. Adjourned to 16.01.2012  on which date the learned 
Attorney -General for Pakistan, the Federal Secretary Law, Justice 
and Human Rights Division, the Chairman National Accountability 
Bureau and the learned Prosecutor -General Accou ntability shall 
appear before this Court in person.                            
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge     Judge  
 
 
Judge     Judge  
 
Islamabad  
10.01.2012  
Not a pproved for reporting.  
 
M. Yasin  