Const.P -21/2022   1 
 
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J. - I have read the judgment 
authored by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan to which my  learned 
brother Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan has concurred (“ majority judgment ”) 
provided to me last night. With great respect, I could not make myself 
agree to it. Due to the paucity of time, I cannot fully record  reasons for 
my dissent and leave it for my detailed opinion to be recorded later. 
However, in view of the respect that I have for my learned colleagu es 
and for their opinion, I want to explain , though briefly , why I am 
unable to agree with them.  
2.   In my humble opinion , the primary question in this case is 
not about the alleged lopsided amendments introduced in the NAB law 
by the Parliament  but about  the paramountcy  of the Parliament, a 
house of the chosen representatives of about 240 million people  of 
Pakistan. I t is about the constitutional importance of parliamentary 
democracy  and separation of powers  between three organs of the 
State . It is about the limits of the jurisdiction of the Court comprising 
unelected judges , second judg ing the purpose and  policy  of an 
enactment p assed  by the Parliament , without any clear violation  
beyond reasonable doubt,  of any of the fundamental rights gua ranteed 
under the Constitution  or of any other constitutional provision .  
3.  The majority judgment  has fallen short , in my humble 
opinion,  to recognize  the constitutional command that 'the State shall 
exercise its power and authority through the chosen representatives of 
the people'  and to recognize the principle of trichotomy of powers, 
which is the foundation of parliamentary democracy . The majority ha s 
fallen prey to  the unconstitutional objective of a parliamentarian, of 
transferring a political debate on the purpose and policy of an 
enactment from the Houses of the Parliament to the courthouse of the 
Supreme Court. Without setting out a clear and obj ective test for 
determining how the claimed right to have accountability of the 
parliamentarians is an integral part of any of the fundamental rights 
guaranteed under t he Constitution, the majority judgment through a 
long winding conjectural path of far-fetched “in turn” effects has tried 
hard to  “ultimately” reach an apprehended violation of the 
fundamental right s. The majority judgment  has also fallen short  to 
appreciate that what Parliament has done, Parliament can undo; the 
legislative power of the Parliament is never exhausted. If the Const.P -21/2022   2 
 
Parliament can enact the NAB law, it can also repeal the entire law or 
amend the same.  
4.    For these and  further reason s to be recorded in my 
detailed opinion later, with great respect, I disagree with my learned 
brothers and dismiss this petition.  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad,  
15th September, 2023.  
Approved for reporting.  
 
  