IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
CONSTITUTION  PETITION NO.77 OF 2010  
(President Balochistan High Court Bar A ssociation  
vs. 
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
AND 
HRC NO.16405 -B OF  2010  
(Application by Muhammad Saleh)  
AND 
H.R.C. NO.13124 -P/2011  
(Application by Altaf Hassan Qureshi)  
AND 
H.R.C. No. 40403 -P/2011  
(Application by Syed Majeed Zaidi ) 
AND 
H.R.C. No. 40220 -G/20 11 
(News clipping)  
AND 
H. R. C. No. 43103 -B/2011  
(Application by Haji Abdul Qayyum)  
AND 
H. R. C. No. 17712 -B/2012  
(Application by Misbah Batool)  
AND 
H.R.C. 27045 -K & 27619 -G/12  
(Abduction by  Dr. Ghulam Rasool)  
AND 
H. R. C. No. 30044 -B/2012  
(Anonymous Application Against Police Officers)  
AND 
H. R. C. No. 30047 -G/2012  
(Application by Ms Zuhra Yousif,  Chairperson HRCP)  
AND 
H. R. C. No. 30711 -B/2012  
(Application for recovery of Habibullah Mujahid)  
AND 
H. R. C. No. 30713 -B/2012  
(Application of Syed Mumtaz Ahmed Shah,  
Chief Editor, Daily Mashriq)  
AND 
C.M.A. No. 42 -43 OF 2012.  
(Enquiry report of Kharootabad Incident)  Const.P.77/2010 etc  2 
AND 
C.M.A. NO.178 -Q OF 2012  
(Appeal for missing persons cases of Balochistan)  
AND 
C.M.A. NO. 219 -Q OF 2012.  
(Application by Maj. (R) Nadir Ali)  
AND 
C.M.A. NO. 431 -Q OF 2012.  
(Target Killing of Mr. Zulfiqar Naqvi, ASJ)  
AND 
CMA 516 -Q OF 2012  
(Appl ication by Mr. Nasrullah Baloch)  
AND 
CMA NO.228 -Q OF 2013  
(Application by  Mst. Bibi Sakina)  
AND 
CMA NO.229 -Q OF 2013  
(Application by Bibi Nigar)  
AND 
CMA NO.230 -Q OF 2013  
              (Application by Mst. Gang Bibi ) 
           AND   
    CMA NO.234 -Q OF 2013  
           (Application by Mst. Hina Bibi)  
AND   
    CMA NO.244 -Q OF 2013  
          (Application by Mst. Khadija Dad Bugti ) 
AND   
    CMA NO. 245-Q OF 2013  
          (Application by Muhammad Aalam ) 
AND   
    CMA NO. 246-Q OF 2013  
         (Application by Khair Bakhsh ) 
-------  
For the petitioner(s)  Mr. Hadi Shakeel Ahmed, ASC  
    Mr. M. Qahir Shah, ASC  
    Mr. Sajid Tareen, A SC 
Syed Nazir Agha, ASC  
Mr. Bashir Ahma d Zahri, Adv.  
 
For SCBAP:   Nemo  
 
For the Applicants/ : Mr. Nasr ullah Baloch,  
Complainants:   (In CMA 178 & 516 Q/12)  
 Mir Nussrat Hussain Anqa, Samillah Khan, 
Bilal Malik, Ghulam Farooq, Dr. Ghulam 
Sarwar, Ghulam Ali, Bansra, Gohar Ali , 
Khadija Dad Bugti  and Mothers of Rashid, 
Rab Nawaz, Sanaullah, Zafarullah, Shabbir 
Ahmed Sumlani, Muhammad Hussain, 
Manzoor Ahmed Mengal and Farmanullah 
(Missing Persons)  Const.P.77/2010 etc  3 
  
For Fed. of Pakistan:  Mr. Shah Khawar, Addl. A.G.P  
    Mr. Shair Shah Kasi, DAG  
    Mr. Rauf Atta, St anding Counsel for  
Federal Government  
     
For M/o Interior:  Mr. Athar Sial, Addl. Secretary  
 
For M/o Defence:  Nemo  
 
For Govt. of   Mr. Tariq Ali Tahir, Addl. A.G.  
Balochistan:   Mr. Babar Yaqoob  Fateh Muhammad,  
Chief Sec retary , Balochistan  
Mr. Mushtaq A hmed Sukhera , IGP,  
Mr. Saqib  Javed , Addl. Secretary, Home  
Mr. Zahid Saleem, Addl. Secretary,  
Mir Zubair Mehmood, CCPO, Quetta.  
Mr. Muhammad  Akbar  Harifal , 
Commissioner, Qalat  
Qazi Hussain Ahmed, DIG, Sibbi  
Mr. Shahid Nizam Durrani, Ex -CCPO,  
Mr. Abid Not kani, Ex -DIG  
Mr. Ghulam Rasool Domki, Ex DIG  
Mr. Rehmatullah Niazi, DIG, (CID)  
Mr. Saleem Lehri, SSP (Traffic)  
Ch. Mushtaq Ahmed, SP (Operation, CID)  
Mr. Naushad Younas, AIG, Legal  
 
For Govt. of Punjab:  Mr. Muhammad Hanif Khatana, Addl. A.G  
 
For IG FC:    Hafiz Muhammad Nadeem, DA, JAG  
     
For FBR:    Mr. Amanullah Tareen,  
Assistant Collector Customs  
Haji Muhammad Azam, Law Officer  
For Mobile Operators:  Nemo.  
 
For PTA :   Nemo.  
 
For PEMRA:   Ch.  Abdur Rasheed, Chairman  
 
For CEO ARY News:  Mr. Baz Muhammad K akar, ASC  
 
Dates of hearing:  27.8.2013 
 
    O R D E R   
  Iftikhar  Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — Mr. Shah 
Khawar,  learned Additional Attorney General for Pakistan Const.P.77/2010 etc  4 
informed about the deliberations between the Law Enforcing 
Agencies including the police , FC and ot her stak eholders  
arranged by the Chief Secretary, Government of Balochistan, 
which was attended by him and others for the purpose of 
making concrete/positive efforts to effect the recovery of 
forcibly  disappeared persons and it has been decided that 
two w eeks time would be required for achieving the desired 
results and submitting the report before the Court.  
2.  We have enquired from him the number of missing 
persons . He calculated the same with the assistance of 
Nasrullah Baloch and stated that about 60 persons have been 
allegedly picked up by FC and about 8 to 9 persons are in the 
Ferrari Camps as well as 5 to 7 missing persons in respect 
whereof , fresh applications have been submitted and in this 
manner , approximately more than 70 persons are not 
availa ble. It is to be noted that it is not for the first time  that 
we have granted  adjournments/time to effect the recovery of 
missing persons , as in the past as well , for the same reasons 
from time to time, the case has been postponed. However, 
according to t he learned Addl . Attorney General  now the 
command of FC has been changed . I.G. FC and IG Police both 
have been newly appointed  in the Province of Balochistan 
who are committed for resolv ing of this burning issue in a 
befitting manner, therefore, we expect  that the needful shall Const.P.77/2010 etc  5 
be done without any  further delay within  two weeks, as has 
been desired.  
3.  It has also been informed that I.G. FC has agreed 
to hand over those  personnel to the DIG, (CID), who were   
allegedly involved in the forced disappearanc es and were 
required to be interrogated in the criminal cases which have 
already been lodged  and the investigation is being carried 
out particularly a FC Official  (Abdul Waheed S/o Multani 
Khan) is required to be investigated in the case of Mehrullah 
Khilji and similarly Major  Saif, who is required in another 
case for interrogat ion by the police , shall also be made 
available to the police , as according to the learned Addl. 
Attorney General , he had contacted in this behalf the Ministry 
of Defence and assu rance has been obtained for 
production/appearance of Major Saif before the police in the 
case of abduction of Abdul Wahab . Yet another important 
case of Mr. Sami Hussain Anqa s/o Nusrat Hussain Anqa 
reportedly missing from the year 2009 is required to be 
investigated as there are allegation s against the agencies . It 
seems that no effective progress has been made so far in this 
behalf. The learned Addl . Attorney General shall prepare the 
report within the stipulated period which shall be filed at least 
a day before the next date of hearing. It has also been 
pointed out by the learned Addl. Attorney General that in Const.P.77/2010 etc  6 
view of the observations made  in our order passed on 
26.8.2013 , an exercise had already been under taken  in the 
matters through judicial forums l ike in the case s of Abdul 
Maalik and Kahu. The statements and cross examinations 
have been recorded  as also , in the case s of Bibi Shakir a and 
others  (CMA No.228 -Q, 229 -Q & 230-Q of 2013) for recovery 
of Rashid s/o Manzoor Ahmed, Rab Nawaz s/o Mir Baig and 
Sanaullah S/o Muhammad Azeem and others, therefore, he 
should apprise the concerned quarters about the 
consequences of the same because it is now for them to do 
the needful for effecting the recovery or producing the 
missing persons . If the police or any j udicial forum appointed 
by this Court concludes on the basis of material available on 
record , the involvement of  uniform ed personnel either of the 
FC or other forces , there would be a situation  likely to cause 
embarrassment  and adversely  affect the positi on not only of 
the FC but other forces  as well . Effecting the recovery and 
production of the missing persons , as it has already been 
observed time and again , at present , it is one of the most 
important and burning issue .  
4.  All the law enforcing agencies  are under an 
obligation to disclose if the missing persons are in their 
custody, h owever, they should be dealt with in accordance 
with law because all and sundry must know that such like Const.P.77/2010 etc  7 
detention is violation of the fundamental rights of the citizens 
in terms of Article 9 as well as Article 10 of the Constitution 
of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, which guarantees 
the life , liberty , property and security as w ell as against 
illegal detention.  
5.  Above all, FC and other law enforcing agencies, 
which are working in the Province of Balochistan can by 
extending cooperation to the Court for recover y and produc tion 
of the missing  persons , which   would  also establish their 
credibility as there is sufficient material available on the record 
including th e report from the Police Department that the 
missing persons have been picked up by their personnel.  
6.  However, on the assurance of the learned  Addl. 
Attorney General , we allow two weeks time to FC , other 
authorities and the stakeholders to effect the recovery and 
production of the disappeared persons and if they are 
involved in any case or crime , they should be dealt with 
accordingly. The learned Addl. Attorney General stated that a  
report has also been prepared , which is in the process of 
completion a nd it shall be submitted during course of day  in 
the office .  
7.  The l earned Addl. Advocate General , Balochistan  
has submitted a comprehensive report (CMA .249-Q/13), Const.P.77/2010 etc  8 
signed by the Chief Secretary Balochistan wherein detail s of 
the steps which have been ta ken under the following heads 
has been furnished  as under :- 
1.  LAW AND ORDER SITUATION.  
The Provincial Government has taken following measures to 
improve law and order situation:  
i. The Provincial Government has prepared a road map and 
has decided to convert  Makran Division into Police Area. 
This step will help the Provincial Government to improve the 
law and order situation in Makran Division.  
ii. Pakistan Army has started Commando Training of first batch 
of two hundred Police officials of Balochistan Police.  
iii. Pakistan Army has handed over 1000SMG with ammunition 
to the Balochistan Police.  
iv. The Chief Secretary Balochistan has written letter to the 
Secretary Defense for requisitioning service of Army Officers 
for ATF Training School and CID Police Balochistan. (Copy  
Annexed)  
v. As a result measures taken by the Provincial Government, 
there is substantial improvement in law and order situation 
in Quetta  District particular and in Province general.  
 
2.  ACHIEVEMENT OF LAW ENFORCING AGENCIES.  
i. On 30 -07-2013 Police and FC co nducted joint raid on a hide 
out of terrorists at Eastern By -Pass, Quetta. During 
encounter with Police & FC following four terrorists of 
Lashkar -e-Jhangvi  were killed: - 
1) Aurangzaib s/o Ali Ahmed caste Shahwani r/o Killi 
Kamalo, Quetta.  
2) Khalid Javed s/o Muh ammad Rafiq caste Bangulzai r/o 
WAPDA Grid Sariab, Quetta.  
3) Wali-ur-Rehman s/o Abdul Rehman caste Ababaki r/o 
Mastung.  
4) Nisar Ahmed s/o Muhammad Zaman caste Ababaki 
r/o Mastung.  
 Const.P.77/2010 etc  9 
Following were also recovered from their 
possession/house: -  
 
1. 01 K/Kove, 51 liv e & 68 empty cartridges of SMG  
2. 02 Pistols 9MM, 18 live & 05 empty cartridges of 9MM  
3. 01 TT Pistol,10 live & 09 empty cartridges of TT Pistol  
4. 04 Walkie -Talkie Sets  
5. 01 Broken Telescope  
6. 05 Kgs Explosive Material  
7. 01 Suicide  Jacket fitted with ball bearings & ex plosives  
8. 01 Box nut bolts  
9. 02 Russian defused hand grenades  
10. 01 Dagger  
11. 01 Box nut bolts  
12. 06 Relay switches  
13. 05 Pressure switches  
14. 01 Damaged camera with flash  
15. 04 Remote control systems with remote controls  
16. 01 Live detonator alongwith electric fuse  
17. 04 Bundle pri ma cords  
18. 17 Electric switches  
19. 07 Batteries of 09 -volt 
20. 22 Battery Clips  
21. Electric wire  
22. 01 Damaged digital weighting scale  
23. 01 Laptop  
24. 01 Impair meter  
25. 08 Yellow tapes  
26. 01 Grinding machine  
27. Islamic literature & CDs  
28. 01 Flag of Lashkar -e-Jhangvi  
29. 04 CNG kits  
30. 01 Ricks haw bearing No.RA -5101 yellow color.  
 
Spokesperson of the Banned Organization Lashkar -e-
Jhangvi (LeJ)  Abu Bakar Siddique has claimed through 
media that the abovementioned killed persons belonged to 
their organization.  Const.P.77/2010 etc  10
 
ii. On 20 -08-2013, LEAs arrested accused Truck driver Abdula 
Salam & on his information FC & Police party raided at the 
plaza of accused Maqbool Lehri (Former City Nazim Quetta) 
situated at Link Sariab Road, Quetta & following were 
recovered from their possession/plaza: - 
1. 10500 Kgs local made E xplosive Materials  
2. 8750 Kgs Potassium Chloride  
3. 21250 Kgs Aluminum  Choloride  
4. 15000 Kgs Aluminum Powder  
5. 28000 Kgs Sulfur  
6. 03 Bundle High Explosive Cord  
7. 60 Bundle Connection Wire  
8. 05 Remote Control Systems with Receivers  
9. 02 Mixture Mach ines 
10. 04 Sacks Urea Fertilizer  
 
During further investigations of the case, Truck driver 
Abdul Salam  s/o Abdul Sattar r/o Chaghi and accused 
Noor Muhammad s/o Muhammad Alam have been 
arrested.  Further, the owner of the truck No.JV -2818 
Muhammad Naseem  was also arrested. On            24-08-
2013 Police party raided at the house of arrested accused 
Muhammad Naseem and recovered 17 Kgs Heroin from the 
possession of accused women Mst: Gul Bibi & Maryam 
Bibi. Case FIR No.227/20 13 u/s 9/(C)  CNS  Act has been  
registered at PS Satellite Town and bot h accused women 
have been arres ted During house search one pistol 
alongwith 06 cartridges were also recovered for which 
separate Case FIR No.228/2013 u/s 13/(E)  Arms Ord: has 
also been registered at PS Satellite Town,  Quetta.  
 
iii. During the reporting period three kidnapees were recovered 
who were kidnapped for ransom and 15 accused persons 
involved in kidnapping for ransom have been arrested.  
3.  ISSUE OF MISSING PERSONS  Const.P.77/2010 etc  11
i. The Provincial Government has taken up the issue wi th 
Federal Government at all levels to assist the Provincial 
Government in resolving the issue of missing persons.  
ii. The Provincial law enforcing agencies including Criminal 
Investigation Department is actively investigating the cases 
of missing persons. Rep ort has already been filed by the 
DIG CID.  
iii. The Chief Secretary Balochistan has taken up the issue of 
recovery of dead bodies of missing persons from Karachi 
with the Chief Secretary Sindh for taking action against the 
responsible.  
 
4. OPERATION AGAINST ILL EGAL IMMIGRANTS/  
FOREIGNERS.  
 
During the period from 10th July, 2013 on 22nd August, 
2013 (54) cases have been registered in different police 
stations of Quetta whereby (657) illegal Afghan immigrants 
have been arrested and deported to Afghanistan. During 
the year (upto  22nd August, 2013) total 134 cases have 
been registered whereby (1213) illegal immigrants have 
been arrested and deported to Afghanistan.  
 
8.  It is to be noted that in the Province of Balochistan 
there is a good number of refugees, who hav e entered from 
Afghanistan. Initially , way back in the year 1980 , they 
ordinarily used to reside within Refugee Camps but by the 
passage of time they have shifted into urban areas. It is also 
reported that most of them have succeeded in obtaining 
National Identity Cards from NADRA, which essentially was 
not possible without the connivance of officials of the said 
Authority and on the basis of such Cards they have also not Const.P.77/2010 etc  12
only got passports but also purchased properties and their 
names have also been entere d into the Electoral Lists . The 
Chief Secretary explained that as the matter relates to 
Afghan Refugees, which is an international issue and also to 
be dealt with by the Federal Government, therefore , the 
newly elected Provincial Government has taken up th is issue 
seriously with the Federal Government and has shown its 
concern. However, efforts shall be made to persuade the 
Federal Government to provide a policy, as according to him 
task force has been constituted comprising of representatives 
of all the fo ur Provinces and no sooner a policy is given to the 
Government for the purpose of implementation, it shall be 
adhered to strictly. It has been  pointed out to him that the 
Provincial Government may also take steps on the 
administrative side to ensure that A fghan Refugees are 
confine d only to the extent of their Camps, which have been 
established in different areas of the Province and similarly a 
mechanism should be adopted in order to ensure that except 
a person who is indigenous resident or citizen of Pakis tan 
having CNIC no one else who is outsider succeeds in getting 
such Card for showing him self to be a citizen  of Pakistan . 
There are complaints of the involvement of such persons in 
the crimes.  Const.P.77/2010 etc  13
9.   It is to be noted that the population of Balochistan, 
particularly, in Quetta has increased on account of the 
Refugees, therefore, notwithstanding whatever the policy 
shall be given, the Provincial Government must adhere to law 
for the purpose of confining them to the extent of Refugee 
Camps and it should also be ensured that the concerned 
quarters may not extend any concession to such like persons 
by allowing them to get passports, purchase of properties or 
get their names entered in the Electoral Lists etc. We are 
conscious of the fact that in view of the situ ation, which is 
prevailing in the Province of Balochistan, if these steps are 
taken, the Provincial Government can succeed in maintaining 
the law and order situation as well as ensuring the protection 
of life and the properties of the citizens, who enjoy t he right 
of protection in terms of Articles 9, 14 as well as 18 of the 
Constitution.  
5. SURVEY OF PROPERTIES IN QUETTA DISTRICT:  
The Government of Balochistan Home & Tribal Affairs 
Department Vide letter No.SO (Judl:)8(31)/2009 dated 
16.11.2009 has alread y issued instructions to Property 
Dealers and Motor Show Rooms Owners for regulating their 
business. However, the same are not being followed by the 
dealers and they do not undertake their legal obligations 
and responsibilities. The District Administration  has 
launched campaign against the violators and has already 
started survey in Quetta District for taking action against 
them.   Const.P.77/2010 etc  14
10.   It is to be noted that business of properties has to 
be controlled by allowing licenses through some legislation. 
The learned Addl. Advocate General , Balochistan  may look 
into the matter and , if need be, give suggestions in this 
behalf.  
6. POSTING AND TRANSFERS OF OFFICERS IN POLICE 
DEPARTMENT AND ADMINISTRATION  
 The Provincial Government has already taken up the issue 
with Establishment Division, Government of Pakistan for 
posting of PSP Officers and officers of Pakistan 
Administrative Service in Province of Balochistan. The 
Federal Government has suspended the services of 5 PSP 
officers who have yet not reported in the Pr ovince of 
Balochistan.  
 
11.   It has been reported that there is an acute 
shortage of the police officers as well as the officers  of PAS 
(Pakistan Administrative Service)  and on having realized that 
it is impossible to maintain the law and order unless th e force 
is not available, this Court on 5th April, 2012 passed the 
following  direction s:- 
“8.   I.G.P has informed that due to shortage of police 
officers, it is not possible to take action against culprits as 
presently poli ce force is running by the short age of 26 officers, 
but despite issuance of notification by the Federal Government no 
one has come forward to serve in Balochista n. Under the 
circumstances w e direct the Secretary Ministry of Interior as well 
as Secretary Establishment, Government of Pakis tan that 
according to rules/regulations, issue notifications of such officers 
and depute them in Balochistan so that law and order situation is 
brought under control and send copy of such notificatio ns to 
Registrar of this Court and the I.G.P would inform that as to  Const.P.77/2010 etc  15
whether notification has been acted upon  or not, enabling us to 
pass appropriate order in Co urt for such officers, who are 
reluctant to join duty despite the fact that under the provisions of 
Civil Servants Act they should have no hesitation to serve in the 
Province of Balochistan. This order be communicated to the 
Attorney General during course of the day, who will take up the 
matter with the Federal Secretaries and ensure that notification is 
issued as early as possible and report in this behal f be submitted 
tomorrow positively. ”  
In pursuance of above direction s, police officers and officers 
of PAS reported to Balochistan but there is still deficiency of 
such like officers. However, in the meanwhile a few officers 
instead of joining their dutie s in the Province, approached the 
learned High C ourt of Sindh , Karachi by filing CP No.D -
2905/2013 and got stay order on  25.07.2013 .  
12.   It is to be noted that these officers were 
transferred to Balochistan under the directions of this Court 
and perhaps  this fact has not been brought in the notice of 
the learned High Court, therefore, the Registrar of this Court 
is directed to take up this matter with the Registrar of the 
learned High Court of Sindh enabling him to place the matter 
before the learned Chi ef Justice, with the observations of this 
Court that let their cases be decided expeditiously in the 
interest of justice. However, above reproduced para should 
also be brought in the notice of the learned High Court.  
13.   It has also been reported that tw o PAS officers 
namely Kazim  Niaz and Khalid Sherdil have been repatriated Const.P.77/2010 etc  16
to Punjab and Prime Minister Secretariat , Islamabad . We feel 
that their transfer has taken place against the policy and the 
direction s of this Court. The Registrar shall take up this  
matter with the Chief Secretary, Punjab and the Principal 
Secretary to the Prime Minister and shall bring into their 
notice the above order with further observations that these 
officers should be relieved immediately so that they may 
report to Balochistan  for the purpose of performing their 
duties in compliance of the directions, which we have already 
made.  
14.   A report  (CMA 250 -Q/2013)  in respect of incident 
which took place on 05.08.2013 has also been placed on 
record signed by the Additional Secretar y, Home Department  
Government of Balochistan . After having gone through the 
same , we have pointed out in clear terms to the learned 
Additional Advocate General that this Court is only interested 
to the extent of enforcement of fundamental rights of citizen s 
because whosoever may be, if requires to travel from Quetta 
towards any other destination, he should be given protection 
of life and property and if someone kills him then later on 
killed by the law enforcing agencies would not be sufficient to 
meet the requirement of Article 9 of the Constitution. This 
Article provides  that life and property of the citizens shall be 
secured fully. He stated that with the intervention of the Const.P.77/2010 etc  17
Federal Government , law and order  situation  is being 
improved and within a few da ys there would be a remarkable 
change in this behalf. However, we have also pointed out to 
him that all the Law Enforcing Agencies working in 
Balochistan should adhere to the provisions of the 
Constitution strictly for the purpose of protecting li ves and 
properties of the citizens and the culprits are required to be 
dealt with under the law and the Constitution. We will feel 
satisfied if such like incident s do not take place and the 
persons feel secure while traveling within the Province or 
outside towards any destination. He assured that steps are 
being taken to protect the li ves and propert y of the citizens.  
15.   In respect of law and order situation prevailing in 
Khuzdar and Wadh a report (CMA 251 -Q/2013) has been 
submitted by the Commissioner Qalat Division, who stated 
that there was shortage of food but after adopting 
extraordinary measures, food has been supplied and as far as 
normalcy is concerned, there is no problem however with 
regard to general law and order  different strategies have 
already been  adopted including reconciliation between the 
tribes etc. to ensure the protection  of lives and properties of 
the citizens of the Province.  
16.   Mr. Rehmatullah Khan Niaz i DIG (CID) stated that 
in pursuance of the directions of this Court, Mr. Saleem Leh ri Const.P.77/2010 etc  18
presently posted as SSP (Traffic) has been asked by the 
Inspector General of Police to remain associated with the CID 
to assist him in the investigation of t he murder of Mir Ha kmal 
Raeesani. He has also submitted a report (CMA No. 252 -Q of 
2013), wherei n progress so far made by the police to cause 
arrest of accused persons has been pointed out. The report 
also suggest s that perhaps one of the persons allegedly 
claimed to be involved on behalf of banned organization s had 
been killed in an encounter but re ference in this behalf may 
be made to the report to find out his name. However, we 
direct both the officers that they take all necessary steps to 
complete the investigation of the case.  
17.    Learned Additional Attorney General stated 
that as far as the c ases of Munir Ahmed Mirwani Advocate 
and few other missing persons are concerned, th ese may be 
postponed till the next date of hearing as he has already 
taken up this matter with the concerned authorities as 
pointed out by him while discussing the matters of missing 
persons. In pursuance of the commitment, learned Addl . 
Attorney General has filed written statements on behalf of FC 
as well as the Federation separately.   
18.    Mr. Baz Muhammad Kakar, ASC stated that 
CEO ARY could not reach as there was no f light available 
today from Islamabad to Quetta. He further stated that in the  Const.P.77/2010 etc  19
meanwhile, an FIR No.163/2013, P.S City Quetta,  has also 
been registered  against CEO and others , copy of which has 
been placed on record. It seems that in pursuance of some 
letter issued by the Information Department, Government of 
Balochistan, the case has been registered. We have pointed 
out to the learned counsel that as to why a wrong impression 
is being given in some of the newspapers that the said FIR 
has b een registered on the direction  of this Court, he stated 
that there is absolutely no such order and the impression so 
being given by the newspaper s is unwarranted. We have 
inquired from the Addl. Advocate General and the Chief 
Secretary  about it, who stated that there are n o directions. 
We may point out that , while hearing the cases , this Court is 
very careful about the rights of the people, therefore, without 
providing an opportunity  of hearing , no adverse order  is 
passed  against any party. In this behalf it may be noted th at 
vide order dated 1 5.8.2013, notices were issued to the CEO , 
ARY without mentioning his name to explain as to why action 
could not be taken against him on account of airing a 
program on 13.8.2013 relating to  the  incident of  Ziarat 
residency. He n either  appeared on 15.8.2013, 16.8.2013 nor 
yesterday i.e. 26.8.2013. We direct the Secretary 
Information, Government of Balochistan that he should clarify 
the position and the newspaper in which baseless and Const.P.77/2010 etc  20
frivolous news has been published, should issue a 
clarification/corrigendum.  
19.  In pursuance of our directions,  a report has been 
filed by the Additional Secretary Interior which is in a sealed 
envelope and seems to be a secret document, therefore, we 
would not like to comment upon the same at this stage 
particularly in absence of the CEO ARY. It should be kept in a 
safe custody. We have observed that no one has filed 
Wakalatnama on behalf of the CEO. However, at the repeated 
request s of Mr. Baz Muhammad Kakar, ASC, we grant the 
CEO another opportunity to a ppear before this Court on the 
next date of hearing.  
20.   PEMRA has filed a report (CMA 248 -Q/13) 
indicating the action so far taken by it.   
21.   Mr. No ushad Younas, AIG Legal has submitted a 
report with regard to application of Mst. Khadija Dad Bugti. 
He is directed to hand over a copy of the same to her.  
  Adjourned to a date in office after two weeks.    
 Chief Justice  
 
 Judge 
 
Quetta, the  
27th August, 2013  
NAS/* Judge 
 