IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Appellate Jurisdiction)
PRESENT;
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL
MR. JUSTICE MALI IAR ALAM KHAN MIANKIII3L
MR. JUSTICE JAMAL KHAN MANDOKRAIL
4c2.
CIVIL APPEAL N0.1602 OF 1014
(On appeal against thejudgnient dated 13.08.2014
passed b y Peshawar High Court, Abbottabad
Bench in C.R.No.21 7 0f2009)
Pervez Khan & others	
	 ... Appellant(s)
VERSUS
AU Asghar Khan & others 	 .. Respondent(s)
For the Appellant(s) 	 Mr. Zulflqar All Abbasi, ASC
For Respondents No.! &2 	 Mian Muhammad A yuh, ASC
For LRs oJRespondent No.3 	 Ex-parte
For Respondent No.4 	 : Nemo.
Date of Hearing 	 26.10.2021
JUDGMENT
JAMAL KHAN MANDOKIIAIL, J.
C.M.A.No.6672 of 2014: For the reasons mentioned in the misc.
application, the delay in filing the instant civil appeal is condoned.
2. Facts in brief are that the appellants filed a suit for declaration
and injuncUon regarding a house, described in the plaint. (the house in
dispute). [he contention of the appellants/plaintiffs in their suit is that the
house in dispute was owned by their father, which alter his death, devolved
upon his legal heirs i.e. the plaintifts. the respondents No.3 and 4. The
respondents No.2 and 3 contested the suit, alleging there that the respondent
'." Pp .. h bU 2U	2
No.2 is the wife of the respondent No.3 and his father given the house in
dispute to the respondent No.2 as dower through an agreement (wasiqa) dated
0307.1972. It is stated that after becoming owner of the house in dispute. the
respondent No.2 sold it out to the respondent No.] through a sale agreement
dated 14.03.2005. The respondent No.1 also riled a suit for specific
performance of the said sale agreement, consequently, both the suits were
consolidated. On conclusion of the trial, the suit of the appellants was
dismissed, whereas, suit ofthe respondent No.1 was decreed by the trial Court
vide judgment and decree dated 09.10.2007. The appeal filed by the appellants
was allowed by the appellate Court vide judgment and decree dated
06.05.2009, pursuant to which, the suit of the appellants was decreed, while
dismissed that or the respondent No.!. The respondents No.1 2 and 3 filed a
revision petition before the learned High Court which was allowed vide
judgment dated 13.08.2014, resultantly. the judgment and decree of the
Appellate Court were set aside and restored that of the trial Court. hence this
appeal.
3. Heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the
record. The admitted fact of the case is that the house in dispute initially
belonged to the father of the appellants, the defendants/respondents No.3 and
4.The respondents No.2 claimed that at the time of her marriage with the
respondent No.3. the house in dispute was given to her as dower by her father
in law through the referred agreement dated 03.07.1972. The learned High
Court and the trial Court relied upon the agreement, considering it being more
than thirty years old, and decreed the suit of the respondent No.1. Article 100
of the Qanun-c-Shahadat Order 1984 describes parameters and condition for
considering the evidentiary , value of thirty years old document. According to
-J
cñ&AppIN@ rco2f 2014 	3
the said provisions of law, before arriving at any conclusion with regard to a
presumption in respect of a document, the Court must sauSb itself about its
originality, age, production from proper custody, unsuspicious character and
other circumstances. The Court may make some presumption that the
signature, handwriting and every other pad of such document, which purports
to he in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's
handwriting, and in the case or a document executed or attested, that it was
duly executed and attested by the persons by whom it purports to be executed
and attested, provided that the original is before the Court, without which no
such observations can he made. The presumption of genuineness with regard to
30 years old document is discretionary. therefore, the Court generally arrives at
its conclusion oil the document, after the evidence of both sides has been
given. The Court is not supposed to presume every document and signature
upon it as genuine, of a particular person, without considering the relevant
factors, necessary to bring the document within the parameter of Article IOU of
the Qanun_eShahadat Order, 1984, Reliance is placed on the judgments
reported as fang Bahadar and others vs. Toll Khan and another and Cit.
Muhammad Shaft vs. Shamim Khanum2
	
4.	Now considering the claim of the respondent No.2. The
judgments of the learned High Court and the trial Court did not contain any
observation with regard to the production of the original agreement. As such,
on the basis of a photo copy of the agreement. its age cannot he ascertained.
There is also no finding or observation of both the Courts to shown their
satisfaction about the proper custody of the agreement. Admittedly, the
12007 SCMR 497
12007 SCMR 838
—J
c] App1 Pa 1602 f2OT4 	4
agreement was exhibited through DW.3, who has no relation with the
document nor with the respondent No.2. The proper custody of the document
in the given circumstances was not established by the respondents. Moreover.
the learned High Court and the trial Court did not give any finding to show
their satisfaction with regard to the execution and signature of the father,
purported to have executed and signed the agreement. Both the Courts have
wrongly presumed it as genuine. Even otherwise, if a document is disputed by
the opponent, the onus to prove its execution in accordance with law is upon
the party, relying on it. Since the respondents were claiming to be the
beneficiary of the document in question, which has been disputed by the
petitioners, therefore, the burden of proof of its genuiness, age, production
from proper custody and its execution and signing by the executant was upon
them. The respondents did not produce any evidence in this behalf, enabling
the Courts below to presume that the predecessor of the plaintiffs and
defendants No.3 and 4 was the executant and signatory of the agreement,
therefore no presumption of correctness could be atlehed to the said
document. Both the courts have erred in law by drawing such presumption.
	 Reliance is also placed in the case reported as Mst. Hal vani Bar BiN through
L.R. vs. Mrs. Rehana A4a1 Ali Khan and others 3.
5. Without prejudice to above, if a Court considers any document to
be of thirty years or more old and presumes that the signature and every other
part thereof, is in the handwriting of a particular person, even then, it must be
taken into a consideration that whether the document so presumed, can legally
be acted upon or can it create any right, title or interest? It is a fact that it was
PLD 2014 SC 794
5c[AplITh 60flf20!4
not the responsibility of the father in law to give his property to the respondent
No.2, in lieu of a dower, rather, it was the responsibility of her husband. Under
such circumstances, at the best, it could be considered as a promise or a
commitment on behalf of the father in law. If it is believed that he had
promised through the agreement, to give the house to the respondent No.2,
admittedly, he did not act upon it in order to perform his commitment, nor the
respondent No2 take any step for the performance of the agreement till date. It
is a sealed principle of law that mere agreement does not create a title, unless it
is acted upon either by its execUtant or by way of a decree from a competent
Court of law. It is a fact th at the property has not been transferred to the
respondent N0.2 by the alleged executant of the agreement during his life time,
therefore after his death, his property automatically devolved upon his legal
heirs. Under such circumstances, the respondent No.2 cannot be considered as
owner of the house in question on the basis of the unperformed agreement.
]lencc, without gaining the status of an owner, the respondent No.2 cannot
enter into any transaction in respect of the house in question. The subsequent
agreement to sell arrived at between the respondents No.1 and 2 with regard to
the house in question is therefore invalid, as such is unenforceable. The
learned High Court and the trial Court have came to a wrong conclusion by
considering the respondent No.2 as an owner of the house and decreeing the
suit of the respondent No. 1. The findings of both the Courts are since contrary
to the facts and law, therefore, the impugned judgments and decrees are not
sustainable.
Thus, in view of the above, the appeal is allowed. The judgments
and decrees Of the learned High Court and the trial Court dated 13,08.2014 and
09.102001 respectively are set aside. The judgment and decree dated
c'S pp.! c. 16C2 of 2014
0605.2009 passed the Appellate Court are restored, as a result thereoL the suit
riled by the appellants is decreed and the suit filed by the respondent No.1 is
dismissed.
Announced in opdil Court at Islamabad
ti-Il
Approved for reporting"
Sarfra ,Ihmqd'- -
__ __- -1•
