IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original /Review  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
C.R. P No. 167/2012 in Suo Motu Case No.  5 of 2012  
(Against the order dated 14.6.2012 passed by his Court in SMC No. 5  of 2012 ) 
 
 
Dr. Arsalan Iftikhar.        Petitioner (s) 
VERSUS  
Malik Riaz Hussain etc.        Respondent  (s)  
 
 
For the Petitioner  :  Sardar M. Ishaq Khan, Sr. ASC with petitioner.  
 
For respondent No.1:    Mr. Zahid Hussain Bokhari, ASC  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor , AOR  
 
For respondent No.4  :  Mr. Shafi Muhammad Chandio, DAG.  
For the NAB (on Court notice):   Mr. K. K. A gha, Prosecutor General, NAB,  
Mr. M. Akbar Tarar , Additional  Prosecutor -General,  
NAB.  
     Mr. Fauzi Zafar, ADPG, NAB  
Date s of hearing:  31.7.2012, 2. 8.2012 & 28.8.2012 . 
 
J U D G M E N T  
           
 Jawwad S. Khawaja, J . This petition has been filed to seek review of our 
judgment dated 14.6.2012 passed in SMC No.5  of 2012 . The petition is focused on the 
allegation of partiality and bias of the learned A ttorney General, National 
Accountability Bureau (NAB) and a Joint Investigation Team (JIT) constituted by the 
Chairman, NAB to probe into the culpability of individuals including the petitioner  Dr. 
Arsalan  and respondent No.1.  namely, Malik Riaz Hussain.  After hearing  learned 
counsel for the parties and the Prosecutor General NAB and for reasons discussed 
below, we have transferred the inquiry and investigation from NAB to a Commission.  
2. Our judgment dated 14.6.2012 had been passed after considering the c oncise 
statements submitted by the parties and after hearing their learned counsel. The 
relevant part of our judgment on which the hearing of this petition is mainly focused is 
para 22 which, for ease of reference, is reproduced as under: - 
“While this suo moto action has been brought to an end in view of the 
material considered above, the learned Attorney General who has assisted 
us in this case is fully abreast of all aspects of this case. It is our expectation CRP 167/2012  2 
that he will set the machinery of the State i n motion  so that all those who 
may have committed any illegal acts, including Malik Riaz Hussain, Dr. 
Arsalan, Salman Ali Khan etc. are pursued and brought to book with the 
full force and rigour of the law ”.    
 
3. It has been brought to our notice through  the present proceedings that the 
Attorney General wrote a letter to the Chairman, NAB on 18.6.2012 , purporting to be in 
furtherance of  para 22  our judgment of 14.6.2012 . Learned counsel for the petitioner 
has taken us through the said letter which was placed on record by the learned Deputy 
Attorney General. According to learned counsel, instead of abiding by para 22 ibid the 
learned Attorney General has transgressed the terms thereof and has exert ed illegal 
and unwarranted influence over NAB . The contents of the letter dated 18.6.2012 
written by the Atto rney General will be  considered shortly . It may be noted that the 
learned Attorney General was not a contesting party in the case and was only assigned 
the limited function, as an officer of the Court and as  the principal law officer of the 
Federation, of setting the machinery of State in motion .  
4. The main allegation leveled by the petitioner against the Attorney General is 
that he acted in a partisan manner and influence d NAB to favour the respondent Mali k 
Riaz Hussain. To support his contention, learned counsel for the petitioner drew our 
attention to Writ Petition No. 258 of 2007 which was filed  in the Lahore High Court  by 
nine petitioners against a number of respondents including Malik Raiz Hussain who 
was arrayed as respondent No.  7. The Writ Petition and other documents filed in the 
case have been placed on record. Mr. Irfan Qadir (now Attorney General) represented 
Malik Riaz Hussain in the said Writ Petition . He  filed parawise comments and 
appeared in  Court on various dates of hearing  on behalf of Malik Riaz . The learned 
DAG, upon being questioned, stated that as per his information, the Attorney General 
did act as counsel for the respondent Malik Riaz Hussain in the said Writ Petition. 
Learned counsel  representing Malik Riaz Hussain interjected at this point and 
contended that there was nothing wrong or improper if Mr. Irfan Qadir represent ed 
the respondent as his  client in the case. He added that even Sardar Muhammad Ishaq 
learned counsel for the peti tioner had represented Malik Riaz Hussain in certain cases 
as his counsel.  CRP 167/2012  3 
5. There is indeed no impropriety if an Advocate represents a client in any given  
case. Learned counsel for the respondent is, however, missing the point  of the 
petitioner’s object ion. The objection  is not to the fact that the Attorney General, in his 
private professional capacity represented the respondent. The allegation being made is 
that neither during the course of hearing of SMC No.5  of 2012 nor when our judgment 
was announc ed in Court on 14.6.2012 nor at  any time thereafter the Attorney General 
disclosed to the Court his association or professional relationship with the respondent. 
It is quite clear that we would not have tasked the Attorney General with any 
responsibility in this matter if he had made disclosure to us as to his professional 
association with the respondent Malik Riaz Hussain. It is of concern to us that the 
learne d Attorney General did not make the requisite disclosure . 
6. Learned counsel fo r the petitioner con tended that the above facts provide 
substantiation in respect of a number of allegations which have been made against the 
Attorney General in this petition and which were reiterated during the course of 
arguments. The primary objection in this respect is t hat the learned Attorney General 
through his letter of 18.6.2012 sent to NAB , went much beyond the scope of our order 
of 14.6.2012 and this amounted to interference with and unlawful influence on the 
inquiry by NAB  and  also constituted  failure  on his part,  to abide by our order . To 
examine this objection we revert to para 22 ibid wherein the Attorney General had only 
been asked to “ set the machinery of the State in motion” . It is evident from the contents of 
his letter of 18.6.2012 addressed to the Chairman , NAB that the Attorney General went  
well beyond setting the machinery of the State in motion. The Attorney General’s letter 
dated 18.6.2012 is reproduced  below  in extenso: - 
“My dear Admiral Fasih Bokhari,  
This is to bring to your notice the order of the S upreme Court of 
Pakistan dated 14th of June 2012. The relevant extract thereof is 
reproduced below: - 
‘While this suo moto action has been brought to an end in view of the 
material considered above, the learned Attorney General who has 
assisted us in this c ase is fully abreast of all aspects of this case. It is our 
expectation that he will set the machinery of the State in motion so that 
all those who may have committed any illegal acts, including Malik Riaz 
Hussain, Dr. Arsalan, Salman Ali Khan etc. are pur sued and brought to 
book the with the full force and rigour of the law’.  
Having regard to the aforesaid desire of the Supreme Court, I take this 
opportunity to request you to kindly proceed in this matter in exercise of 
the powers conferred upon you by the  National Accountability CRP 167/2012  4 
Ordinance 1999, for the purposes of an inquiry or investigation so that 
all those found involved in the acts of corruption or corrupt practices are 
proceeded against in accordance with law.  
As the responsibility for inquiry into an d investigation of an offence 
alleged to have been committed under this Ordinance rest on the 
National Accountability Bureau to the exclusion of any other agency or 
authority , I am therefore referring this matter to you with the 
expectation  that you in you r capacity as Chairman of our country’s apex 
anti-corruption agency may constitute a broad based team  by including 
therein competent and honest officers from NAB, FIA and Islamabad 
Police . The desirability of inclusion of experts on financial crime from 
within your Bureau or any banker with expertise in forensics may also 
be considered to form a part of the said team.  
It is hoped that the needful will be accomplished at your earliest 
convenience in line with the letter and spirit of the aforesaid order of t he 
Supreme Court. You are also requested to send a fortnightly progress 
report to this office . 
 
             Sd/- 
Irfan Qadir  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
18.6.2012 ”  
  (underlining is ours for emphasis)  
 
The part s of the letter highlighted by us show the  extent to which the Attorney General 
transgressed the terms of our order of 14.6.2012.  
7. Secondly, we also find it odd that the Attorney General adopted a pos ition and 
used words in his letter which should have been objectionable to a truly independent 
investigator  but have , to date , remained unanswered and unattended . The Attorney 
General stated that he was “ referring this matter to [Chairman, NAB] with the expectation 
that [he in his]  capacity as Chairman of our country’s apex anti -corruption agency may  
constitute a broad based team by including therein competent and honest officers from NAB, 
FIA and Islamabad Police”. This “ expectation ” on the part of the Attorney General also 
went beyond the term s of para 22 of our judgment  ibid, and appears to have in fluenced 
the Chairman, NAB in the performance of his duties which he was required by law to 
undertake without outside influence. We are fortified in  this conclusion by the fact that 
pursuant to the Attorney General’s letter  the Chairman, NAB obediently  followed the 
Attorney General’s instruction  as if it w ere an obligatory and binding  command 
coming from his superior , thus giving rise to the perception that NAB’s independence 
appears to have  been compromised.  Surprisingly, this was done without consulting t he 
learned Prosecutor General, who is the top legal within NAO.  CRP 167/2012  5 
8. The foregoing facts which are floa ting on the  surface of this record provide  
prima facie evidence  that NAB may have wilted under the outside influence of the 
Attorney Gen eral and may, there fore, not be in a position to conduct an impartial 
inquiry in the matter. We may add that when we pass ed our order dated 14.6.2012, we 
had no reason to believe that the Attorney General will go beyond the simple and 
limited act of “setting the machinery of  the State in motion” . It is, therefore, disturbing to 
see that he chose to write a letter in terms reproduced above thus overstepping  the 
remit  of our order.  
9. In addition to the above, the unusual conduct of the learned Attorney General 
in these proceed ings has previously been subject of comment by us. In our order dated 
24.7.2012, we noted that Mr. Shafi Muhammad Chandio, learned DAG had undertaken 
on 17.7.2012 that he will file in Court the letter  sent by the learned Attorney General to 
the Chairman, N AB. The DAG  failed to file the sa me despite the lapse of several  days . 
We also noted that such failings impeded the administration of justice and could not be 
approved. Expressing our disappointment, we had asked Mr. Chandio, learned DAG 
to appear and info rm us of the reasons, if any, for not abiding by his undertaking, but 
were  informed that he was unavailable . We, therefore,  recorded in our order  that we 
were  “surprised and somewhat taken aback when the learned Attorney General became agitated 
at this and  made remarks that the Court was taking undue interest in this case, implying that 
this was not appropriate. In the same agitated state he also remarked that there were 
sensitivities to this case. We are in particular surprised at the attitude of the learn ed Attorney 
General because he was not present on the last date of hearing . Instead of putting his own office 
in order, it is clear that he had not been briefed by the learned DAG in respect of what 
transpired at that hearing ”. We had also commented  that “the learned Attorney General 
may be careful in maintaining the decorum of these proceedings being an officer of the Court in 
addition to being the principal law officer of the Federation ”. Perhaps the above facts which 
have now been brought to our attentio n, can help explain the Attorney General’s 
unusual conduct in the case.  
10. The effect prima facie, of the foregoing circumstances whether taken 
independently or cumulatively is that there is a reasonable and well founded prima CRP 167/2012  6 
facie basis for the petition er’s allegation that the Attorney General did not act fairly and 
impartially while purporting to act in furtherance of para 22 ibid reproduced above. 
Since these are matters of serious concern to us and  also would be  to the Attorney 
General as a member of our bar, it would be in the interest of fairness and justice if he 
is provided an opportunity  of hearing  to explain his conduct. The office shall, 
therefore, create a file and issue notice to the Attorney General.  
11. In the absence of the Attorney General , learned counsel for the respondent  took 
up cudgels on his behalf and contended that these were ba ld and unsubstantiated 
allegations  being leveled by the petitioner  and if accepted, would create a precedent 
where any accused person could level such allega tions to impugn the integrity of an  
investigating  officer or agency.  Learned counsel need not have any apprehension on 
this score. His  contention has no merit firstly , because the allegations are not frivolous 
or without substance  but are supported by judi cial record . The submission  of learned 
counsel for  the  respondent Malik Riaz Hussain is based on a misconception of 
established legal norms. It overlooks the fundamental distinction between judicial 
review of the investigative process to ensure fairness th erein as opposed to interference 
in an investigation itself which otherwise may not suffer from bias, dishonesty, 
partiality etc. Although the legal distinction is well settled in our jurisprudence, it will 
be useful to refer to some recent pronouncements of this Court. Firstly, in the case of 
Tariq Aziz -ud-Din (2010 SCMR 1301), it has been clearly stated that functions of 
executive bodies cannot be exercised “at their whims, sweet will or in an arbitrary manner; 
rather they are bound to act fairly, evenly and justly ”. The National Accountability 
Ordinance (NAO) has also attempted to insulate NAB from external influence in an 
attempt to ensure its impartiality  and professionalism .  This has been done inter alia, by 
providing security of tenure to the Chairma n and Prosecutor General of NAB. In the 
case titled Muhammad Yasin v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 132), we have 
highlighted the nature of  judicial review of executive actions or decisions and the 
grounds on which Courts will interfere in the same. These principles have been further 
elaborated in the case of Tariq Aziz -ud-Din supra wherein it has been held that “if the 
action or decision . . . has been arrived at by [an] authority misdirecting itself by adopting a CRP 167/2012  7 
wrong approach or has been approache d by irrelevant or extraneous matters , the Court would 
be justified in interfering with the same”. Recently, in a number of cases, we have 
transferred the investigation of criminal cases where we have found the investigation 
to be tainted by bias or lack o f competence. Thus the contention  of learned counsel for 
the respondent is without force  and is, therefore, rejected.    
12. In our order dated 26.7.2012, we have made note of and commented on two 
letters dated 23.7.2012 and 25.7.2012 which were addressed b y NAB to the Registrar of 
this Court in his official capacity. The two letters simply state that the Registrar is 
“acquainted with the facts and circumstances connected to the case”. The Registrar was also 
asked to bring “all original documentary and other  evidence to the NAB Headquarter” . 
However, no information or particulars were given as to the nature of the 
documentary and other evidence  or the facts and circumstances of the case. This form 
of letter has been st rongly deprecated by the Courts and is in  clear breach of settled 
law as enunciated by precedent .    
13. The clear and unambiguous pronouncements  given in the case titled Ghulam 
Hussain Baloch and another vs. Chairman, National Accountability Bureau Islamabad and 2 
others  (PLD 2007 Karachi 469) w ere violated  by NAB in its two letter s. In the cited 
precedent NAB has been  given express  guidelines as  to its responsibilities while 
summoning or requiring the attendance of persons/witnesses in an inquiry. A s per 
ratio of the case , before summoning a per son to attend , NAB was duty bound to 
identify and particularize the information sought from any witness etc. and to state the 
nexus between such information and the subject of the inquiry being conducted by 
NAB. It was observed by the Court that “while cal ling [for] the information from any 
person, the person must be informed of the fact, point, allegation, offence, name of accused, 
specified matter, if any, concerning the matters … in the notice so that the person can furnish 
such information” . None of thi s was done  by NAB . The Sindh High Court also laid 
down  the principle that if the specified information can be otherwise furnished, then 
the person “should not normally be called to appear in person”.  The case of Ghulam 
Hussain Baloch  supra gave further cla rity to NAB by declaring that “normally a person 
should not be asked to appear … for the simple reason that when the document or thing is CRP 167/2012  8 
received by the investigating officer [it] will serve the purpose and if for any reason attendance 
of such person is [ still] required  then he can be called by assigning valid and cogent reasons 
which will appear in the case diary”.  None of these guidelines , reiterated in a number of 
subse quent cases [e.g. Muhammad Younus Arain versus Chairman, NAB and another  (2008 
MLD 14 31), Niaz A. Baloch versus Chairman, NAB and 4 others  (2008 MLD 1451) and Raja 
Muhammad Zarat Khan and another versus Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, 
Ministry of Cabinet Division and 2 others  (PLD 2007 Karachi 597)]  was followed by NAB . 
Instead a n imperious and pernicious “thana”  mentality is apparent  from the letter, 
which NAB persisted with obdurately, as discussed below . This raises serious 
questions , prima facie,  as to the  fairness,  competence and professionalism of the 
members of the JIT.  
14. We are not in any doubt that the letter dated 23.7.2012 was in flagrant breach of 
the law laid down by binding precedent. What is even more egregious is that the  same 
error and violation of  legal norms and  principles was repeated by NAB on 25.7.2012  
throu gh another letter to the Registrar, purporting to be “a second notice for appearance” . 
In our order dated 26.7.2012 we observed that the Registrar being the executive head of 
the office of this Court had been asked in his official capacity to appear before  the JIT 
alongwith all original documentary and other evidence  but without informing him of 
the nature of such evidence. In the circumstances we had observed  that NAB should 
act with due care and ensure transparency to avoid an impression of absence of due  
diligence or lack of competence. On the same date i.e. 26.7.2012, the learned Prosecutor 
General NAB stated that he had been “offended” by the  reply received from the 
Registrar.  
15. It seems that instead of looking at and correcting the failure of NAB to  abide by 
the directions/guidelines given in the case of Ghulam Hussain Baloch supra,  and other 
precedents referred to above,  NAB took offence to the response given by the Registrar  
based on his justified assumption that he was being summoned in his offici al capacity . 
We were then  informed by the Prosecutor General  in Court,  that the Registrar had not 
been summoned in his official capacity. This surprising statement, however, is wholly 
inconsistent with the contents of the two letters which were written to the Registrar of CRP 167/2012  9 
this Court and were clearly address ed to him in his official capacity. The oral 
submission, therefore, that NAB was purporting to seek  some  evidence/information 
which was personal to the Registrar and not in his official capacity  is, on it s face, not 
tenable . This stance taken  in Court  on 26.7.2012  is nowhere even remotely indicated in 
the two letters of 23.7.12 and 25.7.12 sent to the Registrar. This is also apparent from 
the Registrar’s  reply as an officer of this Court. It is for this re ason we had stated that 
instead of being needlessly touchy and offended, NAB should  issue a letter if 
necessary , setting out the particulars of information/evidence which w ere being 
sought from Dr. Faqir Hussain (not as Registrar) and “if that information has nothing to 
do with his official duties, [it would] be for Dr. Faqir Hussain to respond to the same in his 
individual capacity ”. It appears that no such letter ha d been issued by NAB until the 
previous date of hearing . We may add at this point that it i s not open for investigating 
agencies (funded by public taxes) to take offence  or umbrage  when a citizen asserts his 
rights. The investigating agency has to act dispassionately , objectively  and strictly in 
accordance with law. The fact that a senior functi onary of NAB namely, the Prosecutor 
General who is the highest officer of NAB on the legal side  got offended due to a 
legitimate concern raised by the Registrar , further creates the perception that it may 
not be possible for NAB to conduct its investigatio n in a dispassionate and objective 
manner.  
 
ROLE OF FAISAL BASHIR MEMON SP (RURAL), MEMBER JIT : 
16.  On 31.7.2012, CCTV footage was screened in the Court Room as per our 
directive, in circumstances set out in our order of the same date. This was necessitat ed 
on account of a probe into the breach of security procedures of the Court on 12.6.2012 
when Malik Riaz Hussain first appeared in Court in SMC 5 of 2012.  The Hon’ble Judge 
of the Court Incharge of security had initially directed the IGP Islamabad to con duct an 
inquiry. However, the report of the IGP was perfunctory and was found 
unsatisfactory. It was, thereafter, that the Secretary, Ministry of Interior was directed to 
look into the matter and submit a report. The Secretary was inter alia,  required to p robe 
as to “why the SP Rural, Bashir Memon [a member of the JIT] and DSP Rural, Malik Tahir in 
uniform received Malik Riaz at the Court entrance and accompanied him? Why these two CRP 167/2012  10 
Police Officers were there when the regular court time was over and there wa s no court 
functioning? If these two Police Officers were deputed for security reasons, it was not notified / 
informed to the Supreme Court. The inquiry should look in this matter as to why these two 
Police Officers were there?” . Faisal Bashir Memon, it ma y be mentioned , was nominated 
as a member of the JIT  by the Chairman NAB  although he neither belonged to NAB 
nor was he under NAB discipline.  A three -Member inquiry committee constituted by 
the Secretary Interior, has concluded that Faisal Bashir Memon “ … has over stepped just 
to please the litigant Malik Riaz at the cost of his duty and lied all the way to deceive the 
committee by concealing the facts ”. The inquiry committee also recommended that “the 
competent authority may be moved to initiate department al action under Efficiency and 
Discipline Rules as well as under police rules against the said officer”.   
17. The relevance of Faisal Bashir Memon and his presence in the CCTV footage 
can be gathered from our order dated 31.7.2012 wherein we noted that “w e have seen in 
Court the footage of the entry of Malik Riaz Hussain in the Supreme Court premises and have 
also observed from the said footage that Faisal Bashir Memon was indeed “sticking close” to 
Malik Riaz Hussain and was also seen making a few protect ive/sheltering gestures while 
walking closely with and escorting the respondent Malik Riaz Hussain. In this view of the 
matter and even if, for the time being, we do not take into account the other submissions made 
on behalf of the petitioner alleging seri ous bias and partiality in the inquiry, it would, in our 
opinion, be prudent to stay the investigation … so that Faisal Bashir Memon can explain his 
position” . 
18. Pursuant to the above order, Faisal Bashir Memon has submitted his 
explanation. The same is full of inconsistencies and is, prima facie , riddled with 
untruths. To demonstrate these untruth s/inconsistencies, we may point out that he has 
not even attempted to explain his apparent conduct seen on CCTV as noted in our 
order o f 31.7.2012. Secondly, hi s security duty at the Supreme Court  (which was 
proffered by way of explanation)  was related to the hearing by a nine -member larger 
Bench before whom eleven Constitution Petitions (Memo Case) were listed. As per 
report of the Court Associate, the hearing i n the said case concluded around 10 a.m. CRP 167/2012  11 
Therefore, there was no further justification for Faisal Bashir Memon to be escorting 
Malik Riaz inside the Court building between 2:15 p.m. to 2:32 p.m.  
19. In his reply Faisal Bashir Memon has also tried to explai n his meeting  with 
Malik Riaz on 12.6.2012 by saying that he only greeted Malik Riaz Hussain by saying 
salam by way of Islamic tradition and that he was “proceeding to [his] place of duty outside 
the Supreme Court building after attending the proceedings b efore the Bench headed by Hon’ble 
Chief Justice of Pakistan”. This statement is belied , prima facie,  by the CCTV footage seen 
in Court  which shows Faisal Bashir Memon escorting and extending protocol to Malik 
Riaz seemingly as a “personal security employe e of Malik Riaz” . Furthermore, it is relevant 
to note that the DIG Security, Islamabad Police during  an inquiry  identified the 
personnel from his force who were seen hovering around  Malik Riaz Hussain. As per 
observations of the DIG,  at least six different CCTV cameras captured either Faisal 
Bashir Memon or his immediate subordinate Malik Tahir DSP (Rural) accompanying 
Malik Riaz rig ht from the reception entrance of the Supreme Court building upto the 
entrance  upstairs,  of Court Room No.1. These six cameras and the footage captured by 
them have been noticed  in the report by the DIG Security . This being relevant is 
reproduced verbatim, as under :- 
“i) Camera No.26:  At 1423:40 hours Malik Riaz Hussain arrived at public 
reception gate in two minutes. Haji Nawaz K hokhar and Colonel (name 
not known) and Mr. Faisal Bashir Memon SP/Rural  accompanied him. 
Mr. Ahmed Iqbal, DSP/SC and SI Irshad Ahmed, Line Officer SC were 
present at gate. Other people were stopped out side the gate . 
ii) Camera No.26:  At 1425:12 hours Mal ik Riaz Hussain entered the 
reception. Haji Nawaz Khokhar and Ali Riaz accompanied him. Mr. 
Liaquat Niazi, DSP  and Malik Tahir, DSP  also entered the reception. As 
some people were already present at reception and due to rush/disturbance, 
recording system o f camera No.2 remained off for 15 minutes.  
iii) Camera No.27:  At 1427 hours Malik Riaz Hussain and Media people are 
coming behind Haji Nawaz Khokhar, Mr. Ahmed Iqbal, DSP/SC and 
Malik Tahir, DSP/Rural . 
iv) Camera No.1:  At 1429 hours Malik Riaz Hussain alon gwith Mr. Faisal 
Bashir Memon, SP/Rural  entered public reception. Malik Tahir, DSP  
Media personnel and lawyers were also with them. (Clip seen in Court 
on 31.7.2012 ). CRP 167/2012  12 
v) Camera No. 10:  At 1430:36 hours Malik Riaz Hussain alongwith Mr. 
Faisal Bashir Memon, SP/Rural , his operator, Media personnel and 
lawyers went upstairs towards court room No.1.  
vi) Camera No. 13:  At 1431:10 hours Malik Riaz Hussain, Mr. Faisal Bashir 
Memon SP/Rural , his operator and Media personnel came in front of court 
No.1”.      
 
This re port made on 13.6.2012 based on available CCTV footage, shows prima facie,  that 
Faisal Bashir Memon has not been forthright , honest  and truthful in his reply filed in 
Court.  
20. We may also add that the duty roster issued by the SSP Islamabad clearly 
spec ified that Faisal Bashir Memon’s duty was confined to “ supervision in front  of 
Supreme Court of Pakistan ”. He, therefore, had no security duty assigned to him 
inside the Supreme Court buildi ng. Faisal Bashir Memon has made an attempt to 
justify his presenc e inside the Supreme Court Building by submitting he  was present  in 
connection with some cases which were listed for hearing on 12.6.2012 for which notice 
had been issued to the IG Islamabad. To support his submission he has attached with 
his reply a notic e issued by the Court in respect of cases (CRP No.20 of 2011 and 
connected matters) listed before a three -member Bench headed by Hon’ble the Chief 
Justice. The hearing of these cases was concluded at 1:15 p.m. The report of the Court 
Associate (CA) has spe cified with clarity that the said cases were fixed at serial No. 3 
before Bench -I headed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice and no police officer came to the 
rostrum during the hearing of the case (CRP No.20 of 2011 and connected matters) or 
seek to mark attenda nce as had been regularly done previously in these case s as 
manifested by order sheets dated 1.2.2012 and 27.2.12 wherein Mr. Faisal Bashir 
Memon SP has been marked present in the attendance sheet. The report of the CA is 
also in line with the proceedings in the aforesaid cases because investigation therein 
had been withdrawn from Islamabad Police shortly after 27.2.2012. These connected 
cases, according to the CA, were called for hearing at about 10 a.m. and the hearing 
continued until 1:15 p.m. when the m atters were adjourned to 22.6.2012. Faisal Bashir 
Memon, therefore, had no business inside the Court building, even if he had been 
assigned security duty in front of the Supreme Court . CRP 167/2012  13 
21. We are concerned that even after the above circumstances have come to the 
notice of NAB , Faisal Bashir Memon is being defended rather than being probed under 
section 31 of the NAO and other legal provisions  as to his conduct . In the statement 
submitted in Court by NAB, it has been stated that “in this case NAB has confide nce in the 
abilities of Mr. Faisal Bashir Memon to be a part of credible, transparent and fair inquiry and 
he has given an explanation to this … in respect of his presence in the Court and his meeting 
with Mr. Malik Riaz as per video recording” . This state ment in the face of such 
overwhelming  evidence , prima facie, against Faisal Bashir Memon further shows  an 
apparent  lack of objectivity, transparency and fairness on the part of NAB. It would 
have been much more appropriate for NAB to examine the facts whic h are evident 
from the record rather than  turning a blind eye to the same and  defending Faisal 
Bashir Memon without even looking at such facts, record and video footage which 
have been noted by the DIG, Security , Islamabad  and also separately by the inquir y 
committee constituted by the Secretary , Ministry of  Interior .  
22. The above narration of events has been given in some detail because it shows 
either bias  or lack of transparency o r gross incompetence on the part of NAB or that 
the proceedings of  the in quiry  may have been tainted by  considerations other than 
merit. We cannot find any other explanation as to why NAB and the five Member JIT 
which supposedly was comprised of upright and diligent officers, failed to abide by  
law or adhere to norms demonstrat ing fairness, competence and transparency . These 
circumstances , noted above, lend further  credence  prima facie,  to the allegation that 
NAB may not have been  acting in a  fair, impartial and  lawful manner in the inquiry.      
23. We may add that  Mr. K.K. Agh a, learned Prosecutor General NAB had 
informed us  that Salman Ali Khan  (son in law of Malik Riaz)  had been summoned and 
would appear before the JIT in Islamabad in the week commencing Monday i.e. 
30.7.2012. We are, therefore, surprised that the JIT as per explanation given by Faisal 
Bashir Memon , had a lready booked itself for a trip  to England  from 1.8.2012 to 6.8.2012 
during which period Salman Ali Khan had been summoned to appear before the JIT in 
Islamabad. It may well be that the Prosecutor General had been kept in the dark in this CRP 167/2012  14 
respect because we donot expect him to make an incorrect or misleading statement at 
the Bar.  But this also points to a lack of transparency on the part of NAB.   
24. We have considered above only such factors of the case which are demonstrable  
from the  available  record in relation to the Attorney General, NAB, the Joint 
Investigation Team and Faisal Bashir Memon. There are a number of other 
circumstances which have been adverted to by learned counsel representing the 
petitioner . Instead of elaborating on these aspects of the case  it would be more 
appropriate to leave consideration of the same for the inquiry which we propose to 
order.  
25. On 2.8.2012, the learned Prosecutor General NAB had made a statement in 
Court which has bee n reproduced in the order of the said date. It was stated  by him,  
inter alia, that “ the formation of the JIT has become controversial to the extent of several 
allegations of bias/impartiality being alleged against the Chairman NAB and members of the 
JIT”. It was also added that “NAB has no particular interest in proceeding with this inquiry”  
and if the inquiry is transferred to any other agency “ NAB has absolutely no issue with 
that”. The opinion of the Chairman NAB has also been stated that “to retain SP F aisal in 
the inquiry team may lead to the perception of the inquiry team not carrying out a  fair and 
transparent inquiry” . Nasrullah Gondal, another member of the JIT is an outsider being 
employed with FIA. Both Nasrullah Gondal and Faisal Bashir Memon hav e been 
removed from the inquiry team and thus  as per above statement,  “in effect the JIT no 
longer exists” . The remaining 3 members of the erstwhile JIT namely,  Kausar Iqbal 
Malik, Ahmed  Luk and Aamer Shahid, who are employees of NAB have also 
demonstr ated  their ignorance of the law  or utter disdain for judicially recognized 
norms of fair investigation and due process. No action to date, appears to have been 
taken agains t them for violating such norms. On the contrary, their continued 
participation in the i nquiry is being urged and defended. Mr. Akbar Tarar, learned 
Additional Prosecutor General NAB gave a verbal assurance to us in Court that 
although NAB is not insistent or interested in continuing with the inquiry, if the Court 
entrusts such inquiry to NAB , the same shall be conducted in an impartial and CRP 167/2012  15 
transparent manner. This assurance, however, does not  inspire much confidence in 
light of the objective reality emerging from the foregoing discussion.  
26. We have previously emphasized that even -handed openness and transparency 
are among  the defining features of our legal system. In our judgment under review, we 
have made it clear that “even the highest constitutional functionaries, and their kith and kin, 
cannot but submit themselves and their affairs to the law” . In the case titled Syed Yousaf Raza 
Gillani versus Assistant Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan  (2012 SCMR 424) , we have 
cited the hadith of the Holy Prophet (peace be upon him) wherein he warned : “O 
people, those before you were ruined because  when someone of high rank among them (sharif) 
committed theft, they would spare him, but when a weak person from amongst them (zaeef) 
committed theft, they would inflict the prescribed punishment upon him .” (Sahih Bukhari).”  
Executive agencies or Courts a re duty bound to give effect to the rule of law without 
fear or favour , within their respective spheres of authority. In our judgment of 
14.6.2012, we have r eminded Courts and investigating  agencies “that they must proceed 
with no consideration before them , save the law and the Constitution”.  Guidance in this 
regard is also available in the Holy Quran for State functionaries, including members of 
investigating agencies: -   
ﯾَﺎ أَﯾﱡﮭَﺎ ٱﻟﱠﺬِﯾﻦَ آﻣَﻨُﻮاْ ﻛُﻮﻧُﻮاْ ﻗَﻮﱠاﻣِﯿﻦَ ﺑِﭑﻟْﻘِﺴْﻂِ ﺷُﮭَﺪَآءَ  ﻟِ ﻠﱠﮫِ وَ ﻟَﻮْ ﻋَﻠَﻰۤ أَﻧْﻔُﺴِﻜُﻢْ أَوِ ٱﻟْﻮَاﻟِﺪَﯾْﻦِ وَٱﻷَﻗْﺮَﺑِﯿﻦَ إِن ﯾَﻜُﻦْ ﻏَﻨِﯿّﺎً أَوْ ﻓَﻘِ ﯿﺮاً ﻓَﭑﻟﻠﱠﮫ  
أَوْﻟَﻰٰ ﺑِﮭِﻤَﺎ ﻓَﻼَ ﺗَﺘﱠﺒِﻌُﻮاْ ٱﻟْﮭَﻮَىٰ أَن ﺗَﻌْﺪِﻟُﻮاْ ُ   وَإِن  ﺗَﻠْﻮُواْ أَوْ ﺗُﻌْﺮِﺿُﻮاْ ﻓَﺈِنﱠ ٱﻟﻠﱠﮫَ ﻛَﺎنَ ﺑِﻤَﺎ ﺗَﻌْﻤَﻠُﻮنَ ﺧَﺒِﯿﺮاً  
 
Tran slation:  
“O ye who believe! Stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to Allah, even as against 
yourselves, or your par ents, or your kin, and whether i t be (against) rich or poor: for 
Allah can best protect both. Follow not the lusts (of your hearts), les t ye swerve, and if 
ye distort (justice) or decline to do justice, verily Allah is well -acquainted with all that 
ye do.”  
[Al-Qur'an, 004.135 (An -Nisa) ] 
 
27. Given the circumstances noted above, we have concluded that any inquiry by 
NAB in the matter will n ot be free from perception of partiality  or bias or lack of 
competence . In order, therefore, to meet the ends of justice and to ensure a fair, 
impartial, honest and competent inquiry, the same should be t ransferred to some other 
person or agency to act ind ependently , fairly and justly. We have given thought to 
possible alternatives towards this end. Although at the hearing of SMC 5 of 2012, it had 
been suggested by learned counsel for Malik Riaz that a judicia l commission  similar to 
the three -Member Memo Co mmission  be constituted, this  suggestion had consciously CRP 167/2012  16 
not been accepted  us. We are of the opinion that in order to keep matters clear of any 
subjective perceptions,  it would be appropriate if the inquiry is entrusted to someone 
with relevant seniority, experience and standing.  After giving consideration to the matter, 
we entrust the inquiry to a one man inquiry Commission  comprising of Dr. Muhammad Shoaib 
Suddle  who is a senior functionary having experience of investigations in the police and  fiscal 
hierarch ies and is occupying an independent tenured position  as the Federal Tax Ombudsman. 
The professionalism and thoroughness of the inquiry undertaken by him in SMC 16 of 2010 
(ISAF Containers Scam) has also persuaded us to refer this inquiry to him . He wi ll:- 
(a) probe into the culpabil ity of Malik Riaz Hussain, Dr. A rsalan 
Iftikhar, Salman Ali Khan and all those  others who may be found 
involved  in criminal activities  in the light of our earlier order 
dated 14.6.2012 and the observations made hereinab ove; 
(b) spec ify the legal provisions and offences, if any, which may be 
attracted in the case based on the fact finding undertaken by the 
Commission ; 
(c) inquire into and ascertain such facts as may be relevant, 
connected with or ancillary to the determination of the fore going 
matters  and to set the machinery of the State in motion so that all 
those who may have committed illegal acts are pursued and 
brought to book with the full force and rigour of the law . 
 
The entire record available with NAB which relates to this matte r shall be handed over to the 
Commission . The Office shall also provide copies of the record of this petition and of SMC 05 of 
2012 to the Commission.  
28. The Commission shall have the following powers and may seek such further orders as 
may be considered  necessary: - 
i) he shall exercis e all the powers  envisioned in the Supreme Court Rules, 
1980 and the powers  of Judicial Officers for the purpose of carrying out 
the object s mentioned hereinabove ;  
ii) he shall  be free to avail the services of advocates, experts o f forensic 
science,   persons with relevant experience, including fiscal laws etc. 
State functionaries when called upon to do so  shall provide necessary 
assistance to the Commission ;  
iii) the Commission shall be authorized to collect evidence within and 
outsid e Pakistan according to prevailing laws on the subject ; 
iv) the Commission is required to complete this task within a period of 
thirty days after receipt of the copy of this order .        
 
29. There appears to be sufficient material on record (considered above ) to show, 
prima facie, that Faisal Bashir Memon SP and his immediate subordinate Tahir Malik DSP , may 
have submitted false , dishonest  or deliberately misleading statements in Court during 
these proceedings  or during inquiries ordered by the Court . The sai d two officers of 
Islamabad Police were specifically asked if they wished to add anything to their written 
submissions filed in Court (CMAs Nos. 3411/12 & 3413/12 ). They stated that they had CRP 167/2012  17 
nothing to add. In order to ensure that they receive due process,  the Commission shall 
look into the facts relevant to the conduct of Faisal Bashir Memon SP and Tahir Malik 
DSP and the material adverted to above. However, considering the foregoing aspects of 
the matter relating to these two officers , we consider it appr opriate that the said officers 
are assigned duties and are kept posted at the Islamabad Police H eadquarters during 
the course of the  inquiry. The proceedings in the inquiry shall not preclude the 
departmental authorities from taking disciplinary proceedings against these two 
officers in accordance with law  as has also been recommended by the inquiry 
committee of the Ministry of Interior.   
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
Anno unced on 30.8.2012.  
A.Rehman . 
 
Approved for reporting . 
 
 
 