IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
Present :  
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
SUO MOTO CASE NO .7 of 2017  
(Suo Moto Action Regarding Islamabad -Rawalpindi Sit -in (Dharna)  
And 
C.M.Appeal .33 of 2018 in C.M.A.Nil of 20 18 in S.M.C.7 of 2017  
(Against the orders of Registrar of this Court returning the impleadment 
application being not entertainable .) 
           
 
Appellant:     Raja Khalid Mehmood, in person  
     (in C.M.Appeal.33/2018)  
 
For Federation:     Mr.Sohail Mehmood , DAG  
Col. Falak Naz, Director (Legal), MOD  
     Mr.Tahir Akbar Awan, SO, MOI  
 
For I.C.T. :    Tariq Mehmood Jehangiri, AG, Islamabad.  
     Sheikh Zubair, SP, I -9 
     Syed Azhar Hussain Shah, DPS     
For PEMRA:     Hafiz S. A Rehman, Sr.ASC  
     Ch.Akhtar Al i, AOR  
     Mr.Muhammad Zahir, GM, (Operation)  
Voluntarily appeared:   Rana Masood ul Hassan       
Date of Hearing:    25.04.2018  
ORDER  
  C.M.A. 3196/2018 places on record the report filed by the 
PEMRA regarding  the action taken by the council of complaints sh ows 
that merely advic e has been issued and one channel has been  censure d 
for going beyond the area cordoned  for the law enforcement agencies.  We 
have noted with dismay the  lack of  action taken by PEMRA on  the 
complaint s against various channels where serio us breach and v iolation 
of law has been raised. No action against any  other  channel is shown to 
have been taken and action taken  against one channel  seems to be 
merely cosmetic and not serious.  SUO MOTO CASE NO.7 of 2017 .       2 
2.  On the last date of hearing specific directions were issue d for 
the learned Attorney General to assist the Court ; learned DAG informed 
the Court  that learned Attorney General is out of Pakistan for one week .  
3.  Col. Falak Naz,  Director, Ministry of Defen ce is in attendance  
but is not in a position to answer the  queries raised by the Court . 
Therefore, it is directed that on the next date  of hearing the Secretary, 
Ministry of Defense to appear before the Court  flank ed by the learned 
Attorney General.  
4.  During the course of the proceeding representative of Geo 
News and Dawn TV complain ed that in certain areas at the behest of 
some forces the ir channels are interrupted and not allowed to be aired 
and their publications are also restricted  in such areas . Hafiz S. A 
Rehman, Sr.ASC  for PEMRA is in attendance and after  inquir ing from the 
PEMRA officers  confirms such  statement and states that certain reports 
have been received on this count. Apparently no action has been taken. 
Learned DAG to ensure that fundamental right s of the people  including  
the right of information  (Article 19A of the Constitution)  is strictly 
enforced and all newspaper s and media  channels are freely made 
available to the citizens of Pakistan.  
5.  We have  been  informed that the  office of the  Chairman 
PEMRA is still vacant. Learned DAG informed that process  to appoint the 
Chairman is underway. It may be observed that on 19.03.2018  this 
Court had already directed  that Chairman PEMRA to be appointed within 
four weeks . The impediment in the way of appointment of the Chairman 
of PEMRA has not been mention ed. Let the report of the Search 
Committee  which we are told has been delegated the task to choose an 
appropriate candidate  be placed on record. Learned DAG  to ensure that SUO MOTO CASE NO.7 of 2017 .       3 
the order of the Court calling for the appointment of the Chairman is 
complied with otherwise action against those responsible may be taken.  
6.  In paragraph 7 of the order dated 16.02.2018 it was noted 
that the report of the Inter-Services  Intelligence was insufficient. Let a 
comprehensive report be submitted which should attend to the q ueries 
that have raised.  
7.  Since the learned Attorney General is out of Pakistan matter 
is being adjourned to a date immediately after ten days.  Needless to say 
that none of the parties is in attendance may put forward excuse s that 
they were not aware of the fixation of the case and the directions passed 
herein as the order was dictated in their presence.    
   
Judge  
         Judge  
ISLAMABAD, THE  
25th of April, 2018  
Syed Farhan Ali  
 