IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
    
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB  
 
Criminal Appeal No.324/2011 and Criminal Appeal No.325/2011  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 17.6.2 010 of the Lahore High Court, Lahore 
passed in Crl.A.No.2124/05, Crl.Rev.No.150/05 and M.R.No.107/05).  
 
 
Mst. Rukhsana Begum       ….Appellant  
         (In Cr l.A.324/ 2011) 
VERSUS  
 
1. Sajjad son of Inayat          
2. Mehdi son of Inayat  
3. Abdul Salam son of Walayat  
4. Zaraat son of Inayat  
5. Abid son of Bahadar  
6. Bilal son of Mehdi Khan  
7. Khushi Muhammad son of Zarrat  
8. Afzaal Mehdi son of Mehdi Khan  
9. Masood alias Rana son of Adalat Khan  
10. The State        (In Cr l.A.324/11)  
         ….Respondent s 
------------ ------------  
1. Sajjad  son of Inayat           
2. Mehdi son of Inayat  
3. Afzaal Mehdi son of Mehdi Khan  
4. Masood alias Rana son of Adalat Khan  
…Appellants (In Crl.A.325/2011)  
 
VERSUS  
 
The State        (In Crl.A.32 5/11)  
….Respondent  
     ___________________   
 
In Crl.A.324/ 2011 
For the  appell ant:   Mr. Ansar Nawaz Mirza, ASC  
    Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
Respondents -2,5,6,8,9:   Mr. Allah Bakhsh Gondal, ASC  
Respondent -10/State:   Ch. Zubair Ahmed Farooq, Addl.PG, Pb  Crl.As.324 -325/2011  2 
In Crl.A.32 5/2011 
For the  appellant s:  Mr. Allah Bakhsh Gondal, ASC  
    Mian Ghulam Hussain AOR (Absent)  
 
For State :   Ch. Zubair Ahmed Farooq, Addl.PG, Pb  
 
Date of hearing:   25.1.2017  
JUDGMENT  
  DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN, J udge :- Both these appeals 
have been filed with leave of the court dated 3.8.2011 f or reappraisal 
of the evidence.  
2.  We have heard learned ASCs for the parties and the State 
and have carefully made the reappraisal of evidence.  
3.  Muhammad Fa azil, while reporting the crime to 
Inspector /SHO  Police Station, Sarai Alamgir on 22.2.2003 , apparently 
at 1.35 A.N. shown , at some  place out of police station, has alleged 
that on the fateful day at about 11.00 am , he alongwith his sons 
Muhammad Fayyaz  and Muhammad Yar (deceased) , Muhammad Sharif 
and Fayyaz  son of R ahimdad after taking round of their wheat crop 
near ‘Khohar ’ sat in the open plot and were smoking ‘ HUKKA ’, when in 
the meanwhile , Inayat son of Qutab  Din  armed with hatchet, Zaraat, 
Mehdi, Sajjad sons  of Anayat armed with rifles, Abdul Salam son of 
Walayat armed with rifle, Abid son of Muhammad Sajjad armed with 
hatch et, Bilal son of Mehdi armed with hatche t, Afzaal Mehdi alias Bodi 
son of Mehdi Khan armed with hatche t, Khushi Muhammad son of 
Zaraat armed with hatche t and Muhammad Masood alias Rana son of 
Adalat Khan (gunman of accused Sajjad ) armed with hatche t, in a 
concerted manner  attacked them after  encircling all of them. Zara at Crl.As.324 -325/2011  3 
fired at Muhammad Fayyaz  hitting him on his left thigh , followed by 
Mehd i whose fire shot hit Muhammad Fayyaz  on left lower thigh then, 
Sajjad fired at Muhammad Fayyaz  which hit the dorsal  of right foot , 
which was broken. Abdul Salam fired at his son Muhammad Yar which 
hit on his left shoulder  then Mehdi fired at Muhammad Yar which hit  on 
his lower belly. As a result , both of his sons fell down and while lying 
on the ground , accused Inayat gave hatche t blow to Muhammad 
Fayyaz  on the right shin/calf . Abid caused hatche t injury to 
Muhammad Yar on his right shoulder and thereafter , accus ed Masood, 
Abid, Bila l, Afz aal Mehdi alias Bodi and Khushi Muhammad gave 
hatche ts blows to both of his sons o ne after another as a result both 
sustained serious injuries on the mandible, neck, forehead  and skull 
and after satisf ying that both had died , threaten ed us no t to come 
near them otherwise , they w ould meet the same fate.  
  Motive for the crime has been shown enmity between the 
two families.  
4.  On this report , FIR No.65 was registered for crimes under 
sections 302/148/149 PPC by police station Sarai Alamgir District 
Gujrat.  
5.  The Investigating Officer , inspected the spot and recovered 
blood stained e arth from the place s of the two deceased while on 
29.3.2003 , at the instance of Sajjad accused , .8 mm, rifle was  also 
recovered from his residential house.  
6.  On 29.3.2003 at the instance of Mehdi accused one rifle 
apparently of Kalashnikov  shape, was recover ed from his house while , 
on the same date , at the instance of Abid accused a hatchet was Crl.As.324 -325/2011  4 
recovered from his house which was found blood stained. Similarly, at 
the instance of accused Mehdi alias Bodi alleged crime hatche t was 
recovered from his house which  too was blood sta ined. In the same 
fashion , at the instance of accused Masood alias Rana alle ged crime 
hatchet was recovered on the same da y from his house. All these were 
taken into possession vide recovery memos Ex -PE, Ex-:PF, Ex -PG, Ex -
PH and Ex -PJ. 
7.  The dead bod ies along with injury sheets  and inquest 
reports , were sent to mortuary , for postmortem examination under the 
supervision of escorting constables. Autopsy on both the dead bodies 
was conducted on the same date but at 11.00 pm and 11.30 pm 
respectively.   
8.  Rough site plan and scale site plan were prepared , during 
spot inspection eight crime empties of .8-mm rifle were secured from 
near the two dead bodies and taken into possession vide memo -Ex-PT. 
9.  At the conclusion of the investigation , charge sheet was 
submitted to the trial court , where , the prosecution examined 12 PWs 
in all and after recording the statement of the accused  under section 
342 Cr.PC ., accused Zar aat, Mehdi, Sajjad and Abdul Salam wer e 
sentenced to death on two counts while  accused Masood, Bilal, Afza al, 
Mehdi, Khushi Muhammad and Abid were awarded life imprisonment. 
All the accused were also awarded three years R.I. under section 148 
PPC, however, accused  sentenced to life imprisonment , were given 
benefit of Section 382-B Cr.PC. 
10.  The convict appellants fi led criminal appeal No.2124/2005 
while the trial court sent a Murder Reference No.107/2005. On the Crl.As.324 -325/2011  5 
other hand , the complainant , filed Criminal Revision Petition 
No.150/2005 , in the Lahore High Court, Lahore.  
11.  Through , the impugned judgment dated 17.6.2010 , the 
appeal of  present  appellants (Criminal Appeal No. 325/2011) i.e. of 
Mehdi, Masood alias Rana, Sajjad and Afzaal Mehdi was dismissed . 
12.  Admittedly, there was a longstanding enmity between the 
parties , therefore , we have to see as to what extent the witnesses who 
were inimical to the accused , are supported by any corroboratory 
evidenc e of independen t and un -impeachable nature.  
13.  In the r idder to the FIR, the Investigating Officer has 
mentioned that the compla inant Muhammad F aazil met him 
somewhere in the way while proceeding to the police station. In past, 
it had become routine practice of the police that indeed in such like 
crimes , the FIR/written co mplaint s were being taken on the crime spot 
after preliminar y investigation, however, after this court had 
disapproved this practice , they have invented a new way of misleading 
the court of law because invariably, in every second or third case , 
same a nd similar practice is adopted but with newly invented 
methodolog y. 
14.  In the inquest report of Muhammad Fayyaz , the time of 
death is shown 12.40 noon on 22.2.2003 , while in the FIR , the time of 
occurrence is shown 11.00 am which lasted only for few min utes. The 
same time of death is given in the case of Muhammad Yar -deceased in 
the inquest report. Both the inquest reports were prepared on the 
crime spot as has been shown  on the last page of each one . In column 
No.23 , no crime empty has been shown present there, albeit in the Crl.As.324 -325/2011  6 
recovery memo  and in the site plan , these e mpties had been shown 
recovered lying very close to both the dead bodies. Th is deliberate 
omission , create s reasonable doubts  about the recovery .  
15.  Another intriguing aspect of the matter is that , according 
to the FIR, all the ac cused encircled the com plainant, the PWs and the 
two deceased thus, the apparent object was that none could escape 
alive. The complainant being father of the two deceased and the head 
of the family was supposed to be the prime target . In fact he has 
vigorously pursued the case against the accused and also depose d 
against them as an eye witness. The site plan position s would show 
that, he and the other PWs were at the mercy of the assailants  but 
being the prime target even no threat was extended to him . Blessing 
him with unbelieva ble courtesy and mercy shown to him by the 
accused knowing well that he and the witnesses would depose against 
them by leaving them unhurt , is absolutely unbelievable story.  Such 
behavior , on the part of the accused , runs counter to natur al human 
conduct a nd behavior explained in the provision s of Article 129 of the 
Qanun -e-Shahadat, Order 1984, therefore, the court is unable to 
accept such unbelievable proposition.  
16.  The site plan would further show that, the complainant 
party was having no land near o r around the crime spot and even the 
cattle -shed where , they were , allegedly sitting , was belong ing to one 
Nazir Ahmad, therefore, the claim of the complainant  that they took a 
round of their crop prior to the occurrence , stood falsified . This was 
the only purpose for the complainant  and the PWs to be present with 
the deceased which has not been established through any Crl.As.324 -325/2011  7 
documentary or other evidence. The second eye witness namely 
Muhammad Sharif (PW -9) undeniably belongs to another village. It 
was suggested to him by the defence that his village is 30 -Kilometer  
away from the crime spot. Although he denied the same but the 
witness was attempting to conceal the true distance as is evident from 
the observation recorded by the trial court (page -76), therefore, he  
can be construed as a chance witness. The defen ce also suggested to 
him that his daughter is married to the nephew of the complainant 
which he denied. He also admitted that 2/3 cattle  lifting  cases were 
registered against him, however, he denied that one case was 
register ed against him by the Zaraat accused/appellant. He also 
admitted that while coming from his village  to the village of the 
complainant , river Jhelum intervenes.  This witness , has also made 
dishonest improveme nts in his statement at the tria l from the one he 
had given to the police under section 161 Cr.P.C.  He has further 
admitted that , after arrival of the police at the spot , the statement of 
the complainant was recorded  first thus, it provide strength to the 
view of the Court that FIR was l odged at crime spot after deliberation 
and consultations.  
17.  In ordinary parlance, a chance witness is the one who , in 
the normal course is not supposed to be present on the crime spot 
unless he offers cogent, conv incing and believable explanation , 
justifying his presence there.  
18.  In the instant case , this witness has shown no work or 
definite purpose of visit to crime spot , therefore, his presence on the 
crime spot is not believable and his testimony , for th is reason alone is Crl.As.324 -325/2011  8 
rejected. More so, when for reach ing the spot, he had confronted  
surging waves of fast flowing water of  the river.  
  A single doubt reasonably showing that a 
witness/witnesses ’ presen ce on the crime spot was doubtful when a 
tragedy t akes place, would be sufficient to discard his /their testimony 
as a whole. This principle may be pressed into service in cases where 
such witness/witnesses are seriously inimical or appears to be a 
chance witness because judicial mind would remain disturb ed about 
the truthfulness  of the testimony of such witness es provid e in a 
murder case, is a fundamental principle of our criminal justice system.  
19.  As discussed earlier, the complainant was at the mercy of 
the accused as according to his version he alongwith the two deceased 
was encircled  and was under direct and immediate threat of death but 
he was still able to give photograph ic narration of the occurrence by 
attributing individual role to each one of the several accused inflicting 
injuries with hatch ets and fire arms on specifi c parts of the bodie s of 
the two deceased. This fact , by itself is sufficient , to disbelieve his 
presence at the crime spot at the fateful  time.  
20.  As we have already declared that , investigation conducted  
in this case , was neither fair nor honest, therefore, the recovery 
effect ed of the so -called crime weapons has also lost its legal worth 
which otherwise, is not implicating  the appellants except Sajjad.  
21.  It is also pe rtinent to mention here, that the attesting 
witness to all these recoveries of incriminating articles  is Muhammad 
Sharif (PW -9) whose testimony we have already disbelieved as a 
whole.  It is fundamental principle of justice that corroborat ory Crl.As.324 -325/2011  9 
evidence , must come from independent source providing strength 
and endorsement to the account of the eye witnesses,  therefore, eye 
witnesses , in the absence of extraordinary and very exceptional and 
rare circumstances , cannot corroborate th emselves  by becoming 
attesting witness/ witnesses to the recovery of crime articles. In 
other words, eye witnesses cannot corroborat e th emselves  but 
corroboratory  evidence must come from independent source and 
shall be supported by independent witnesses other than eye 
witnesses, thus, these recoveries are equally  of no judicial efficacy.   
22.  In this case, s ome of the accused have been 
killed/murdered allegedly by the complainant party and some died 
during imprisonment  thus, the private execution to death of some of 
the accused , by the complainant party , would suggest that they 
themselves took the revenge from those , who were involved  in the 
crime albeit , the learned counsel for the complainant strongly opposed 
this view but he was unable to controvert that some of the acquitted 
accused have been killed.  
23.  In view of the analysis  and combined study of the entire 
evidence  by way of reappraisal , with much care and ca ution, we are of 
the considered view , that the prosecution has failed to prove its case 
against the appellants beyond any reasonable doubt, therefore, this 
appeal (Criminal Appeal No.325/2011)  is allowed and while extending 
benefit of doubt to the appellants , they are acquitted of all the charges 
leveled against them.  For the reasons given above , Criminal Appeal 
No.324/2011 filed by Mst. Rukhsana Begum is dismissed.   
24.  These are the detailed reasons for our  short order of even 
date 25.1.2017 which is reproduced below:  Crl.As.324 -325/2011  10 
“Criminal Appeal No. 324 of 2011:  
For reasons to be recorded later, this appeal is 
dismissed.  
Criminal Appeal No. 325 of 2011:  
Per report of the Superintendent, District Prison, 
Gujrat and as was admitted at t he bar by the learned 
ASC for the appellants, S ajjad son of Muhammad 
Inayat one of the appellants has died, therefore, to 
his extent this appeal stands abated, while the 
convictions and sentences awarded to other 
appellants/accused, namely, Mehdi son of In ayat, 
Afzaal Mehdi son of Mehdi Khan and Masood alias 
Rana son of Adalat Khan by the learned High Court 
vide the impugned  judgment dated 17.6.2010 are 
set aside and they are acquitted of all the charges 
leveled against them. They be set free forthwith, if 
not required in any other case. Detail reasons to 
follow separately. ” 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the   
25th January, 2017  
Sarfraz/ -‘   
 
 
‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING’  