IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
   Present:  
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, HACJ  
   Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
   Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
   Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 
SUO MOTU  CASE NO.4 OF 2021  
 
 
In attendance:  
   Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
   Attorney General for Pakistan.  
   Mr. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP.  
 
   Mr. M. Latif Afridi, President SCBAP.  
   Mr. Khushdil Khan, V ice Chairman , PBC.  
 
   Mr. Jehangir Khan Jadoon, ASC.  
Mr. Amjad Nazir Bhatti,  
President, Press Association of Supreme Court   
 
Dates of hearing:   23, 25 and 2 6.08.2021 . 
 
    ORDER  
 
Munib Akhtar, J. : This matter was disposed of by a short order on 
26.08.2021  (reported as In the matter of Suo Motu  Case No. 4 of 
2021 [No.3]  2021 SCMR 1612) , which was  in the following terms:  
 
“For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject to 
what is set out therein by way of amplification or otherwise:  
 
1.  It is declared that the invocation/assumption of the  
suo motu jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution is based on, and shall be guided by, the 
following principles:  
 
a.  The Chief Justice of Pakistan  is the sole authority by 
and through whom the said jurisdiction can be, and is to 
be, invoked/  assumed.  
b.  The Chief Justice may invoke/assume the said 
jurisdiction in his discretion and shall do so if so 
requested or recommended by a Bench of the Court . 
c.  No Bench may take any step or make any order 
(whether in any pending proceedings or otherwise) as 
would or could constitute exercise of the suo motu 
jurisdiction (such as, but not limited to, the issuance of SMC 4/2021  2
any notice, making any enquiry or summonin g any 
person or authority or any report) unless and until the 
Chief Justice has invoked/assumed the said jurisdiction.  
 
2.  All matters already pending in respect of, or involving, 
the suo motu jurisdiction of the Court shall, notwithstanding 
para 1, conti nue to be heard and disposed of by such 
Benches as are constituted from time to time by the Chief 
Justice.  
3.  In view of the above , the order dated 20.08.2021 
stands recalled . SMC No.4 of 2021 and all filings therein 
shall stand disposed of.  
4.  The subs tantive claims made by the Press Association 
of Supreme Court and others in the application presented in 
Court on 20.08.2021 shall be placed before the Chief Justice 
of Pakistan for consideration. ”  
Those reasons are given below.  
2. On August 20th, a Friday, the judicial day started with a 
ceremony: the oath taking of Justice Umar Ata Bandial as the 
Hon’ble Acting C hief Justice of Pakistan (“HACJ ”). The oath was 
administered by Justice Qazi Faez Isa. That day three Benches 
held court. The first (“Bench -I”), co mprising of three members, was 
headed by the HACJ. The second (“Bench -II”), comprising of two 
members, was headed by Justice Qazi Faez Isa. The third (“Bench -
III”), comprising of three membe rs, was headed by Justice Ijaz U l 
Ahsan.  By all accounts, the day proceeded in the normal and 
ordinary course insofar as the cause list of each Bench was 
concerned. However, as the day drew to a close, something quite 
extraordinary —indeed  unprecedented —occurred, that triggered a 
chain of events that has culminated in thi s judgment.   
3. In Bench -II, it appears that the learned Judges had finished 
with their work as per the cause list but had not yet risen for the 
day. It was apparently at that moment that a group of journalists / 
vloggers , who either  were already present in th e courtroom  or 
entered  at that time, came forward and presented a 
remonstrance —an application of grievances —to the learned senior 
member of the Bench. The said document, referring to Article 
184(3) of the Constitution, set out in some detail the ir grievanc es 
as regard s stated  serious, persistent and continuing violations of 
their fundamental rights as such by various agencies and actors , 
named and unnamed. The remonstrance (herein after the 
“Application”) was signed by five journalists /vloggers , who SMC 4/2021  3
include d the then present and a former President of the 
professional body, the Press Association of the Supreme Court 
(herein after the “Association”).  The Application was perused by the 
learned senior member.  It appears that also present in the 
courtroom was a vlogger  who had not signed the Application . It 
seems  that the learned senior member queried from him as to why 
he was not a signatory . It appears that the vlogger  stated that he 
did not agree with the presentation of the Application. This was 
apparently for the reason  that there was one (or perhaps more) 
petition(s) under Article 199 of the Constitution  pending in the 
Islamabad High Court, the subject matter of which at least 
partially overlapped with what was set out in the Application.  (In 
vlogs  posted th ereafter , this vlogger  expressed the view that it was 
his understanding that the applicant -journalists /vloggers  were 
only interested in presenting their Application to Bench -II, i.e., as 
headed by the learned senior member thereof.) Be that as it may, 
in the event a detailed order was made by the learned Bench. Th e 
order  has since been reported as In the matter of Suo Motu  Case No. 
4 of 2021 [No.1]  2021 SCMR 1602 . The last paragraph stated as 
follows (emphasis in underling supplied):  
 
“13. The office is dir ected to number this petition and to 
array the Press Association of the Supreme Court as petitioner 
No. 1 and the other signatories as petitioner Nos. 2 to 5. 
And, to array the aforementioned Ministries, FIA, PEMRA, IG 
Police Islamabad, PTC and PBC as respondents. Adjourned 
to 26 August 2021 by or before which date all replies 
should be fil ed. Since this Bench of the Supreme Court has 
taken notice pursuant to Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
and has heard the applicants at some length let this case be 
fixed before the same Bench .” 
 
4. This order, and especially the portion thereof where 
emphasis has been supplied, w ere unprecedented and  prima facie 
flew in the face of both the law and practice of the Court. The office 
therefore felt it appropriate (in our view quite correctly) to place the 
matter before the HACJ. A detailed note  was put u p, which inter 
alia referr ed to past precedents and trac ed in some detail the 
history and manner in which the suo motu  jurisdiction of the 
Court had hitherto been invoked. The HACJ  was pleased to make 
the following order thereon on 21.08.2021  (emphasis sup plied) : 
“14. The order of the learned Bench dated 20.08.2021 
directing registration of application now numbered as SMC SMC 4/2021  4
No.4 of 2021 takes Suo Motu  notice of the said application 
submitted in the Court room. It orders notice to a number of 
Federal Governmen t authorities as well as the Law Officers 
of the Federation and Provinces. The order proceeds to fix a 
date for next hearing of the matter, namely, 26.08.2021 and 
further directs that such matter be listed before the same 
Bench that has passed the order.  
15. This office note has put up a number of orders passed 
by learned Benches of this Court which demonstrate a clear 
practice to refer each of the foregoing aspects, namely, notice, 
date of hearing and composition of Bench to the Chief Justice. 
A circular dated 19.07.2005 on the subject has also been 
placed on record.  
16. The order dated 20.08.2021, prima facie, deviates from 
the established practice of the Court in respect of invocation of 
its Suo Motu  jurisdiction. Therefore, what action may be taken 
pursuant to the said order dated 20.08.2021 requires clarity 
for which it would be appropriate that the matter is addressed 
on the judicial side . Accordingly, a larger Bench comprising:  
 
 Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, HACJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice  Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmad  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 
is constituted to hear the matter on Monday 23.08.2021. ” 
 
5. On August 23rd, the immediately following Monday, when the 
larger Bench took up the matter, Mr. M. Lat if Afridi, t he Preside nt 
of the Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan sought 
permission to make some submissions. Permission was granted 
and after hearing the learned President  an order was made , since 
reported as In the matter of Suo Motu  Case No. 4 of 2021 [No.2 ] 
2021  SCMR 1609.  Notices were directed to be issued  to the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan, the learned President SCBA, the 
learned Vice Chairman of the Pakistan Bar Council and learned 
counsel, if any, who wished to appear on behalf of the journali sts/ 
vloggers  who had filed the Application. The order, inter alia, stated 
as follows (emphasis in underlining supplied) : 
 
“3. It is important that the original constitutional  jurisdiction 
of the Court under Article 184(3) read with its powers  under 
Article 187 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of  
Pakistan (‘ Constitution’ ) is invoked under a procedural 
scheme  that lends credibility, certainty and consistency to 
the substantive proceedings that follow in the exercise of 
that jurisdiction. The Court has a discernible settled practice  
regarding the procedural issue of how Suo Motu  motions 
may be  entertained by the Court. In contrast, however, the SMC 4/2021  5
order dated  20.08.2021, prima facie, makes a departure from 
the norms of  the applicable procedural pr actice. Taking into 
account the distinction between the invocation of the 
jurisdiction of the Court on the one hand and the exercise 
thereof on the other, the question arises: How is the Suo 
Motu  jurisdiction of the Court  under Article 184(3) of the 
Consti tution to be invoked? In the light of the answer to this 
question the propriety, manner and extent to which the 
order dated 20.08.2021 can be implemented by the office is 
another question that needs to be addressed . 
 
… 
 
5. At the moment, the judicial order  dated 20.08.2021  
directing notice to and reports from several Federal 
Government  authorities is in the field. On account of the 
question now before the Court which goes to the root of the 
jurisdiction, it is inappropriate to implement the said order 
becau se that may obscure and unsettle the practice of the 
Court for invoking its Suo Motu jurisdiction resulting in 
needless uncertainty and  controversy with attendant 
consequences . Therefore, the resolution of the question 
raised before this Court at an early  date is essential. 
Accordingly, the parties and the learned Law  Officer named 
above shall come prepared with their submissions  on 
25.08.2021 . Meanwhile, the order of the learned two 
Member  Bench dated 20.08.2021 shall remain in abeyance. ” 
 It was also clarified as follows  (emphasis supplied) : 
“4. … However, it must be borne in mind that 
notwithstanding  an important question raised before the 
Court by the applicant  journalists, we are neither in a 
position nor intend to consider their substantive grievan ce in 
the exercise of our Suo Motu  jurisdiction at this stage. The 
only aspect of the case that is presently under our 
consideration is the manner and procedure whereby the Suo 
Motu  jurisdiction is to be invoked and in particular whether, 
and if so how, su ch action may be initiated at the instance or 
on the recommendation of a learned Bench of this Court .” 
 
6. On August 2 5th, when the matter was taken up, the learned 
Attorney General led in making submissions.  He began wi th what 
was called a clarificato ry subm ission.  It was submitted that it was 
being said in some quarters that the L arger Bench  was a 
“monitoring” Bench that had been  constituted over and above  
Bench -II. The learned Attorney General strongly dispelled this 
impression. It was submitted that the La rger Bench was not in any 
manner a “monitoring” Bench, but rather an enlarged one to 
consider the important question (as set out in the order of 
23.08.2021) raised by the making of the order of 20.08.2021  by 
Bench -II. It was submitted that the latter order  was not final; it 
could be recalled or modified at any time. There was no SMC 4/2021  6
requirement that the matter initiated in terms of the order of 
20.08.2021 had to be heard by the same Bench and, in particular, 
nothing therein that placed a clog on the power of th e Chief Justice 
(here the HACJ) to constitute a larger Bench for the hearing. 
Pending proceedings were routinely heard by different Benches as 
constituted from time to time.  
7. We pause to state that in our view the learned Attorney 
General correctly s et out the legal position. As explained in detail 
in the paras below Benches of this Court are constituted by the 
Chief Justice and they cannot ( and specifically in the context of 
invoking suo motu the jurisdiction under Article 184(3)) self -
constitute or self -propagate or self -perpetuate. As we conclude 
below , that, with respect, was a fundamental error made by the 
learned Bench -II in making the order of 20.08.2021 , which was in 
any case not a final order  dispositive of anything said  therein  or 
done thereby . It was ful ly within the power of the HACJ  to 
constitute a larger Bench to consider the question raised in para 3 
of the order dated 23.08.2021. This Bench is not in any sense or 
manner a “monitoring” Bench set up over and above the learned 
Bench -II. It is so held.  
8. Continuing with the submissions of the learned Attorney 
General, it was submitted (relying on a written synopsis placed by 
him before the Court)  that the jurisdiction of the Court under 
Article 184(3) was invoked through various methods. These were 
(a) the formal filing of a petition, in compliance with the various 
procedural and other requirements as set out in the Supreme 
Court Rules, 1980 (“1980 Rules”), (b) an order by a Bench hearing 
a matter (i.e., petition, appeal, etc) that it be regarded as o ne under 
Article 184(3), (c) a Bench invoking the said jurisdiction in respect 
of any matter arising from a matter being heard, though distinct 
and separate from it, (d) the Chief Justice suo motu invoking the 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3), (e) one or more Judges as such 
(i.e., not while sitting as a member of a Bench) taking notice of a 
matter and referring it to the Chief Justice and (f) a singular 
situation where a Bench suo motu invoked the jurisdiction and did 
not refer it to the Chief Justice, but  the matter was on an office 
note so brought to the latter’s attention and the matter was 
ordered to be listed separately as a suo motu case (SMC). The SMC 4/2021  7
learned Attorney General referred to various examples in this 
regard , which were placed before us in the  paper book, taking us 
in detail through the same . The learned Attorney General referr ed 
to various  judgments and further submitted that it was well settled 
that the Chief Justice was the master of the roster and the 
constitution of Benches for the hearing  of cases was a power that 
vested solely in him. It was submitted that although the approach 
of the Court for invoking of the jurisdiction under Article 184(3) 
showed great flexibility , a Bench constituted for the hearing of 
cases could not purport to act independently and entertain matters 
under or with reference to the said Article and hear and decide the 
same without any reference or recourse to the Chief Justice. This, 
it was submitted, would not be conducive to the public good and 
may in fact lead to c onflicting decisions and administrative and 
judicial contradictions. It was also specifically submitted as follows 
(para VI of the written synopsis):  
 
“An even more compelling consideration which calls for 
regulating the procedure for invoking the jurisdiction is that 
if individual parties or litigants are allowed to pick and 
choose benches of their preference, this may result in 
complete chaos which woul d seriously undermine the system 
of administration of justice in the country. This may also 
result in allegations of nepotism and favouritism, which 
though will invariably be frivolous and unwarranted, yet it 
will shake the public confidence in the institu tion of 
Judiciary. ” 
This was characterized by the learned Attorney General as 
being, or leading to the possibility of, “forum shopping” which 
ought to be condemned in no uncertain terms and firmly stamped 
out. The learned Attorney General concluded by maki ng specific 
recommendations with regard to the invoking of the suo motu 
jurisdiction (in, especially, para IX of the written synopsis). He 
also, at the conclusion of the hearing, drew attention to the 
position with regard to the Indian Supreme Court and pl aced 
before us the relevant extract from the rules of procedure of that 
Court.  
9. The learned Vice Chairman of the Pakistan Bar Council 
(“PBC”) read out the orders of 20.08.2021 and 23.08.2021 and a 
circular that had been issued in 2005 by the then Chief Justice. 
Referring to Article 184(3) and the constitution of Benches in terms 
of Or der XI of the 1980 Rules, the learned Vice Chairman SMC 4/2021  8
submitted that the learned Bench -II had acted well within the 
jurisdiction of the Court when it entertained the Application. Such 
was permissible and not contrary to law. Strong reliance was 
placed on Watan Party and others v Federation of Pakistan and 
others  PLD 2012 SC 292, 327 -8. Referring to the circular aforesaid, 
it was submitted that it duly recognized that a Bench of the Court 
could invoke suo motu the jurisdiction under Article 184(3). If at 
all (although that was not accepted) the consideration of the 
Application and the making of an order on the basis thereof or with 
reference thereto was a lapse  it was only procedural in nature  and 
nothing more. Reliance was placed on Suo Motu Case No. 17 of 
2017 2019 SCMR 318. Reference was also made to the inherent 
powers of the Court under O. XXXIII, Rr. 6 and 7 of the 1980 
Rules. It was submitted that the order of 20.08.2021 was valid and 
proper and called for no modification or recall.  
10. Learned counsel appear ing for one applicant -vlogger  (Mr. 
Aamir Mir)  supported the order of 20.08.2021. Learned counsel 
referred to Article 175(2) and 184(3) and a judgment of this Court 
reported as  Brother Steel Mills Ltd. and others v Mian Ilyas Miraj 
and others  PLD 1996 SC 54 3 at 547.  It was submitted that when 
the order of 20.08.2021 was considered, it was not at all a suo 
motu invocation of the jurisdiction. Rather, it was simply that the 
learned Bench -II, on an examination of the Application, considered 
it a proper matter f or consideration and disposal under Article 
184(3) and directed the office to register it as such.  It may be noted 
that on a query from the Court, learned counsel made a 
remarkable statement: that the applicant -vlogger  whom he 
represented had simply receiv ed the Application via WhatsApp and 
had signed it as such. The source from whom the Application was 
received was not disclosed by learned counsel. The President of the 
Press Association of Supreme Court filed a statement before the 
Court which, inter alia,  stated that the questions raised were those 
of law in respect of which he was not in a position to be of 
assistance. Full confidence was reposed in the Court and all the 
Judges thereof.  
11. The learned President of the Supreme Court Bar Association 
(“SCBA”), relying on Article 176, submitted that Article 184(3) 
referred to the “Supreme Court”. It was submitted that all Benches SMC 4/2021  9
of the Court were the “Supreme Court” and exercised the various 
jurisdictions vesting in the Court. Such was also the case with the 
learned Bench -II when it was presented with the Application, and 
considered it and made an appropriate order in relation thereto 
with reference to, and in terms of, Article 184(3). If any ma tter 
came to the knowledge of any Bench with reference to Article 
184(3) it could formulate an appropriate question in relation 
thereto and refer the matter to the Chief Justice. The learned 
President also relied on the cases referred to by the learned Vic e 
Chairman , PBC and submitted that the order of 20.08.2021 by the 
learned Bench -II was valid and proper . The learned President 
submitted that the question posed in the order of 23.08.2021 was 
important and required resolution, but that that ought to be don e 
by the Full Court and prayed that the question be so referred to 
the whole of the Court and decided accordingly. We may note that 
the learned President had earlier also made the same request on 
23.08.2021.  
12. We have heard learned counsel as above and consi dered the 
record and case law cited. Before we address the question raised  
three points may be made. Firstly, we are concerned , in relation to 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution,  with the suo motu invoking of 
the jurisdiction of this Court. At least s ome, and probably many , of 
the observations made in this judgment will be found to apply not 
merely  to that jurisdiction but also to the other s that inhere in this 
Court  and even to the jurisdictions of courts at large. Th is is 
inevitable. However, strictly spe aking, we are concerned with a 
limited and specific question of law. Secondly, some (and, again, 
perhaps many) of the observations made may appear to be 
unqualified and cast in absolute  terms. However, rules and 
principles of law  both substantive and procedural,  howsoever 
broadly stated and general they may appear to be , invariably 
become encrusted in provisos , qualifications, limitations , 
exceptions  and the like . Likewise, the various Articles of the 
Constitution here considered have been before the C ourt earlier as 
well, and a rich, multilayered, nuanced and complex jurisprudence 
has developed in relation thereto. To set out all of th at in relation 
to what is said in this judgment would be needlessly burdensome. 
Therefore, the apparent absoluteness of what is said here  both in 
relation to specific Articles of the Constitution and principles of SMC 4/2021  10
constitutional law  should not mislead. The qualifications , provisos , 
etc are to be taken as read.  Finally, a point of nomenclature. The 
point in issue —and the qu estion to be addressed here —relates to 
what is generally referred as the “suo motu jurisdiction of the 
Court”. That, really speaking, is nothing but convenient shorthand 
for the “suo motu invocation of the jurisdiction of the Court under 
Article 184(3)”. I n other words, “suo motu jurisdiction” is not some 
substantive jurisdiction separate from, or independent of, Article 
184(3). Rather, it is but a way of how that jurisdiction is invoked. 
These expressions are therefore understood to be  the same  and are 
used here interchangeably.  
13. The precise question before us, set out in para 3 of the order 
of 23.08.2021, is narrowly shaped and tightly focused. It relate s to 
the judicial process for a certain jurisdiction of this Court.  In order 
to provide the necessary context  and analytical framework that 
process can be thought of as comprising three “ categori es”. By way 
of a starting point the categories can be set out as follows:  
Firstly, a court must have jurisdiction; secondly, tha t 
jurisdiction must be properly invoked; and, thirdly, the 
jurisdiction must be properly exercised.  
It is to be kept in mind that the categorization is sequential. 
The first category is a sine qua non  for the other two. And, for 
jurisdiction to be exercise d it must first be invoked. The first 
category requires that the court must have the legal power to 
decide  (since that, in its essence, is what it means to have 
jurisdiction)  whatever it is that it is called upon to decide. In the 
common law tradition that , in the vast majority of cases, is a 
dispute of the sort that is regarded as susceptible to determination 
by a court of law, cast in adversarial terms between two or more 
parties. The second category raises, in the present context, 
questions of “who” and “how”, i.e., who can  bring a dispute before 
a court (a question of standing) and the manner in which  the 
dispute  is to be so brought  (e.g., by filing a plaint or presenting a 
petition etc) . The third category , subject to the first two,  is the 
actual exercise of the power to decide.  
14. While we are concerned with the second category it must be 
kept in mind that it is but one among three. There is also, as we SMC 4/2021  11
will see later, a fourth “element ” involved, which serves as a link or 
bridge betw een the second and third categories , and can be 
regarded as raising a “how” issue, though of a nature different 
from that posited above . But, the essence of the matter is 
contained in the tripartite formulation. Conceptually, each  
category  is distinct and separate from the others and as will be 
seen it was an absence and loss of clarity in this regard that , with 
respect,  led to error on 20.08.2021. But this does not mean that 
each category operates independently of the others.  There are 
many instances of li nkages between the three.  Most importantly, 
as the jurisdiction continues to be exercised as cases come before 
the Court  (the third category)  that can, and does, alter judicial 
understanding of what the jurisdiction means. That obviously 
affects the first category, i.e., what it means to “have” jurisdiction. 
And that can affect who can invoke the jurisdiction and how it can 
be invoked, i.e., the second category. Likewise , the question 
whether the court ha s jurisdiction and/or that the jurisdiction has 
been properly invoked, if raised (e.g.) by way of an objection  or 
when considering a threshold requirement , can only be resolved by 
the court exercising jurisdiction.  However, even though it may not 
be possible to describe the relationship between the three 
categories exclusively in linear  terms , the sequencing already 
referred to is  nonetheless  an integral aspect of the judicial process . 
That the relationship is dynamic and interactive  (and may even to 
a certain extent be iterative)  ought not to be ignored . But at the 
same time  it must be clearly understood that linkages and 
“spillovers” do not affect, and certainly cannot destroy or deny, the 
conceptual categorization into which the judicial process is 
arranged.  
15. It is also important to note that t his tripartite  arrangement is 
not simply a matter of  merely  classificatory convenience . The three 
categories are a blend of matters substantive and procedural . 
Certainly, the one with which we are concer ned is the one most 
procedural in nature and operation. But , as we now intend to 
show, taken as a whole  the three categories constitute  the very 
essence of judicial power.  This point is importan t for achieving 
conceptual clarity , so as to enable the question before us to be 
properly addressed . For th is however a constitutional digression is 
required , to which  we turn . SMC 4/2021  12
16. The constitutional doctrine of separation of powers between 
the three organs of the State, i.e., the legislative, executive and 
judicial branches is not expressly set out in our Constitution but it  
is by now well established that it is an important and fundamental 
aspect of constitutional law. The doctrine infuses and informs 
constitutional structures, is indispensable for a proper 
understanding of the organs of governance and is vital for a proper 
delineation of their functions and interactions, whether in 
apposition or opposition . In our jurisprudence the doctrine is 
usually referred to as the trichotomy of powers.  It is established 
by, and attested in, any number of judgments of this Court. Thus, 
in Jurists Foundation v Federal Government and others  PLD 2020 
SC 1 it was stated to be  “a fundamental principle of our 
constitutional construct” (pg. 40). The Full Court, in Dr. Mobashir 
Hassan and others v Federation of Pakistan and others  PLD 2010 
SC 26 5 referred to a number of decisions and set out the doctrine 
in its traditional form, as follows (pg. 347):  
“It is also to be borne in mind that Constitution envisages 
the trichotomy of powers amongst three organs of the State, 
namely the legislature, executive and the judiciary. The 
legislature is assigned the task of law making, the executive 
to execute such law and the judiciary to interpret the laws. 
None of the organs of the State can encroach upon the field 
of the others.”  
 And in the leading case  of State v Zia -ur-Rehman and others  
PLD 1973 SC 49 (herein after “ Ziaur Rehman ”) the following general 
description is to be found  (pg. 66, emphasis in original) : 
 
“…in the case of a Government set up under a written 
Constitution, the functions of the State are distributed 
amongst t he various State functionaries and their respective 
powers defined by the Constitution. The normal scheme 
under such a system, with  which we are familiar, is to have 
a trichotomy  of powers between the executive, the Legislatu re 
and the judiciary. But each of these  organs may itself be 
fashioned in a variety of different shapes and forms. Thus 
the Legislature may be unicameral or bicameral; the  
legislative subjects may be divided between the federating 
units and the federation in a federal system or even the 
legislative power may  be divided between the executive and 
the Legislature as in our present system. The executive, 
Legislature takes the Presidential or the  Parliamentary form. 
The judiciary also may consist of various type s and grades of 
Courts with the highest at the apex either as an  ultimate 
Court of Appeal or a Court of Cassation. There may also be 
other administrative tribunals outside the judicial pyramid.  
 SMC 4/2021  13
In all such cases, it will also be the function of the 
consti tution to define the functions of each organ or each 
branch of an organ,  as also specify the territories in which, 
the subjects in respect of which and sometimes even the 
circumstances in which these functions  will be exercised by 
each of these organs or s ub‑organs. Limitations would, 
therefore, be inherent under such a system so that one 
organ  or sub‑organ may not encroach upon the legitimate 
field of the other. Thus, under a written Constitution, the 
Legislature of a federal unit  will not be able to legis late in 
respect of a subject which is within the field of the federal 
Legislature, nor will a federal Legislature be  able to legislate 
upon a subject which is within the exclusive field of the 
Legislature of the federating units. It cannot, therefore, be 
said that a Legislature, under a written Constitution, 
possesses the same powers of "omnipotence" as the British 
Parliament. Its powers have  necessarily to be derived from, 
and to be circumscribed within, the four corners of the 
written Constitution. ” 
 
17. The position  under our Constitution —i.e., where the doctrine 
is not expressly set out in the text but is  nonetheless  firmly 
entrenched in, indeed is deeply woven into the very fabric of, 
constitutional law —may be contrasted with, e.g., the US 
Constitution . There, as is well known, the doctrine is expressly set 
out in the text . Thus, Article I expressly vests “all” legislative 
powers of the United States in Congress, A rticle II vests executive 
power  in the President and Article III vests the “judicial Power ” in 
the Supreme Court and such “inferior” courts as may be created by 
Congress.  The point is reinforced by the adoption of the 
Presidential form of government. Our Constitution, in contrast, 
sets up a polity that is generally described as a Westminster st yle 
parliamentary democracy. Here the division between the executive 
and legislative branches is much less rigid , with accompanying 
overlapping . Thus, to take but one example at the federal level (the 
provincial position being equivalent), our Constitution  allows for 
the promulgation of Ordinances by the executive branch . Article 
89(2) expressly provid es that an Ordinance is to have the same 
force and effect as an Act of Parliament, and Article 260(2) stat es 
that whenever the Constitution speaks of an Act o f Parliament or a 
federal law, that is to be taken to include an Ordinance. However, 
the distinction between these branches on the one hand, and the 
judicial branch  on the other,  is much more rigid and strictly 
enforced. This is  so, among other reasons,  in order to ensure  and 
protect  the vital constitutional principles of the independence of SMC 4/2021  14
the judiciary and access to justice, which are now regarded as 
fundamental rights in and of themselves.  The intermingling and 
overlapping of executive and legislative powers  is thus to be 
contrasted with the ir rigid separateness f rom the judicial power . 
18. While the Constitution does not, as such, use the term 
“judicial power” it does say something, in Article 175, of the 
judicial branch in general terms.  Clause (1) provides that there 
shall be a Supreme Court, a High Court for each Province and for 
the Islamabad Capital Territory and “such other courts as may be 
established by law”.  Clause (2) provides as follows:  “No court shall 
have any jurisdiction sav e as is or may be conferred on it by the 
Constitution or by or under any law .” Cast though it is in negative 
terms, this provision ought not, in our view, be read in minimalist 
and literalist terms  notwithstanding , with respect,  some 
observations in the ca se law that might suggest otherwise.  For one 
thing, this may seriously jeopardize or compromise the 
independence of the judiciary and result in a substantial erosion 
(and even denial ) of access to justice. Further, s uch an approach 
would, among other conse quences, divest the courts of jurisdiction 
that is regarded as inherent. To take but one example, it is well 
established that s. 151 CPC does not invest the court with any 
powers but only saves its inherent powers. A literal and minimalist 
reading of Artic le 175(2) may cast doubt on this (and equivalent) 
provisions, which would clearly be incorrect. In our view, the 
conferring of jurisdiction on courts by the Constitution and the law  
(and since the law must ultimately find repose in the Constitution, 
the fo rmer in particular)  does not mean only such as is expressly 
so conferred. It includes  also, but is not limited to,  all such 
jurisdiction as by intendment or necessary implication ( especially 
including, on the constitutional plane,  such as may be  required to 
give full expression to constitutional provisions and principles ) 
must be held to vest or inhere in courts of law. Perhaps a better 
appreciation of Article 175(2)  can be obtained by inverting its 
language: “all court s shall have  only such  jurisdiction a s is or may 
be conferred on them by the Constitution or by or under any law ”. 
When so viewed, it becomes  clearer that Article 175 does tell us, 
albeit indirectly, something about the “judicial power” of the State.  
On a combined reading of clauses (1) and ( 2) it can be concluded  
that, by application of the doctrine of separation of powers,  the SMC 4/2021  15
judicial power does vest in the judiciary but that the actual 
allocation of this power among the various components of the 
judicial branch (i.e., the jurisdiction of a particular court) is to be 
as is conferred (either directly or otherwise ) by the Constitution or 
law. Clause (3) , in requiring the separation of the judiciary from 
the executive,  provides further confirm ation  that the judicial power 
vests in the judicial branch.  We pause here to note the 
Constitution also recognizes, in addition to Courts of law, the 
existence and jurisdiction of what are called Administrative Courts 
and Tribunals. This is not only under Articles 212 and 225 but 
also in te rms of entry No. 14 of the Federal Legislative List (and a 
corresponding legislative competence that, though not enumerated, 
is available also to the Provinces). Quite how the Constitution 
seeks to establish and balance the interaction and interplay 
betwee n Court on the one hand and Tribunals on the other in 
relation to judicial power is a matter not before us and hence 
outside the scope of what is said here.  
19. The distinction between judicial power on the one hand and 
jurisdiction on the other was also note d in Ziaur Rehman  in the 
following terms by the learned Chief Justice, who gave the 
judgment of the Court (pp. 69 -70, emphasis in original ): 
 
“… I should make it c lear that I am making a distinction 
between "judicial power" and "jurisdiction". In a  system 
where there is a trichotomy  of sovereign powers, then ex 
necessitate rei  from the very nature of things the judicial 
power must  be vested in the judiciary. But what is this 
judicial power. "Judicial Power" has been defined in the 
Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol . XVI,  Paragraph 144, as 
follows:‑ 
 
"The judiciary or judicial department is an independent 
and equal coordinate branch of Government, and is that 
branch thereof  which is intended to interpret, construe, 
and apply the law, or that department of Government 
which is charged with the declaration of  what the law is, 
and its construction, so far as it is written law."  
 
This power, it is said, is inherent in the judiciary by reason 
of the system of division of powers itself under which, as 
Chief  Justice Marshal l put it, "the Legislature makes, the 
executive executes, and the judiciary construes, the law." 
Thus, the determination of  what the existing law is in 
relation to something already done or happened is the 
function of the judiciary while the pre determinati on of  what 
the law shall be for the regulation of all future cases falling 
under its provisions is the function of the Legislature.  SMC 4/2021  16
 
It may well be asked at this stage as to what is meant 
by "jurisdiction"? How does it differ from "judicial power"? 
Apart f rom setting up the organs the Constitution may well 
provide for a great many other things, such as, the subjects 
in respect of which that  power may be exercised and the 
manner of, the exercise of that power. Thus it may provide 
that the Courts set up will exercise  revisional or appellate 
powers or only act as a Court of  [Cassation]  or only decide  
constitutional issues. It may demarcate the territories  in 
which a particular Court shall function and over which its 
Writs shall run . It may specify the persons i n respect of 
whom the judicial  power to hear and determine will be 
exerciseable. These are all matters which are commonly 
comprised in what is called the  jurisdiction of the Court. It 
expresses the concept of the particular res or subject 
manner over which  the judicial power is to be exercised  and 
the manner of its exercise. Jurisdiction is, therefore, a right 
to adjudicate concerning a particular subject ‑matter in a 
given case, as  also the authority to exercise in a particular 
manner the judicial power ves ted in the Court. ” 
20. Thus, on the constitutional plane “jurisdiction” as used in 
Article 175(2) refers to or indicates that part of the judicial power 
that is allocated to a particular court . To the crucial question , what 
is meant by “judicial power” , one answer has been given in Ziaur 
Rehman  in the passages just extracted above. However, with 
respect, it is only a partial answer.  It accords with the traditional 
description of the trichotomy  of powers, which has also been noted 
above.  It no doubt suff iced for purposes of the issues raised by the 
facts and circumstances of the appeals that were before the Court.  
It is also pertinent to note that the extract taken  in Ziaur Rehman  
from Corpus Juris Secundum , Vol. 16, §144, is from the 
commentary  to that s ection . The s ection contains, in its opening 
paragraph the following statement of the law  (emphasis supplied) : 
“The term “judicial power” as employed to designate one of 
the three great branches or departments in which the powers 
of government are divided may be broadly defined as the 
power to hear and determine  those matters which affect life, 
liberty, or property, and the judiciary, or judicial department 
of the government as that branch thereof which is intended 
to interpret, construe, and apply the law. ” 
 The question with which we have to contend is different  from 
the issues before the Court in Ziaur Rehman  and necessitates  a 
deeper analysis , at a more fundamental level. This requires us, for 
reasons that will become clear shortly, to take a look at the  
Australian Constitution.  SMC 4/2021  17
21. Now, the constitution  just mentioned , like the US 
Constitution, provides expressly for the separation of powers. 
Section 1 vests the legislative power of the Commonwealth in the 
Federal Parliament  and s. 61 vests the executive pow er in the 
Queen (exercisable by the Governor -General acting  on the (binding) 
advice of the Federal Cabinet) . Most relevantly for our purposes s. 
71 (found in Chapter III of the Constitution)  vests the “judicial 
power ” of the Commonwealth in a “Federal  Supreme Court to be 
called the High Court of Australia ”, such other federal courts as 
may be created and also other courts as may be invested with the 
federal judicial power , in both instances  by Parliament.  However, 
like Pakistan and unlike the position in th e United States, the 
polity set up by the Australian Constitution is a lso a Westminster 
style parliamentary democracy  (also referred to as the cabinet form 
of government) . What that means in the context of the doctrine of 
separation of powers was explained  by the High Court  of Australia  
in Wilson v Minister for Aboriginal and Islander Affairs  (1996) 189 
CLR 1, [1996] HCA 18 as follows (internal citations  in this and 
other judgments quoted below are  omitted):  
“10. … The functions of the judicial branch are 
constitutionally separated from the functions of the 
Legislature and the Executive - the political branches of 
government: "The Constitution  of the Commonwealth is 
based upon a separation of the functions of government, and 
the powers which it confers are divided into three classes - 
legislative, executive and judicial". In each branch of 
government, its proper powers are vested: ss 1, 61 and 71. 
The Constitution  reflects the broad principle that, subject to 
the Westminster system of responsible government, the 
powers in each category - whose character is determined 
according to traditional British conceptions - are vested in 
and are to be exercised by separate organs of government. 
The functions of government are not separated because the 
powers of one branch could not be exercised effe ctively by 
the repository of the powers of another branch. To the 
contrary, the separation of functions is designed to provide 
checks and balances on the exercise of power by the 
respective organs of government in which the powers are 
reposed.  
11. Harriso n Moore wrote that under the Australian 
Constitution  there was, between legislative and executive 
power on the one hand and judicial power on the other, "a 
great cl eavage" . The function of the federal judicial branch is 
the quelling of justiciable controversies …. The institutional 
separation of the judicial power assists the public 
perception, central to the system of government as a whole, SMC 4/2021  18
that these controversies h ave been quelled by judges acting 
independently of either of the other branches of government.  
12. The separation of the judicial function from the other 
functions of government advances two constitutional 
objectives: the guarantee of liberty and, to that  end, the 
independence of Ch III judges …. 
 
13. The separation of the judiciary is no mere theoretical 
construct. Blackstone rightly perceived that liberty is not 
secured merely by the creation of separate institutions, some 
judicial and some political, but  also by separating the judges 
who constitute the judicial institutions from those who 
perform executive and legislative functions …. 
14. The separation of judicial function from the political 
functions of government is a further constitutional 
imperative t hat is designed to achieve the same end, not only 
by avoiding the occasions when political influence might 
affect judicial independence but by proscribing occasions 
that might sap public confidence in the independence of the 
Judiciary. That independence is  especially important in a 
federal system ….”  
 The Privy Council emphasized the importance of the 
independence of the judiciary in Attorney -General (Cth) v The 
Queen  [1957] 2 All ER 45, [1957] UKPC 4 (also known as the 
Boilermakers’  case):  
“…in a federal system the absolute independence of the 
judiciary is  the bulwark of the constitution against 
encroachment whether by the legislature or by the executive. 
To vest in the same body executive and judicial power is to 
remove a vital constitutional safeguard. ” 
 The foregoing observations  well apply , mutatis mutandis,  to 
the position under our Constitution to the relationship and 
interaction between the executive and legislative branches o n the 
one hand and the judicial branch on the other . 
22. It will be seen from t he foregoing that, notwithstanding the 
express enunciation of the doctrine of separation of powers in the 
Australian Constitution and the absence of such textual 
statements in ours, the actual position under the two constitutions 
is not dissimilar . It foll ows that what the High Court of Australia 
has said of the meaning of “judicial power” in terms of s. 71 can be 
usefully applied to what that means in relation to our Constitution.  
And this brings us directly to the nub of this constitutional 
digression: th at the tripartite categorization of the judicial process SMC 4/2021  19
described earlier is not a matter of mere procedure ; it is part of the 
very essence of the judicial power.  
23. In the early case of Huddart, Parker and Co. v Moorehead  
(1909) 8 CLR 330, [1909 ] HCA 36, Gr iffith, CJ formulated a 
definition of “judicial power” that has proved enduring and is to 
this day the leading statement of law in Australia. The learned 
Chief Justice defined the expression as follows (at pg. 357):  
 
“…I am of opinion that the words "judicial power" as used in 
sec. 71  of the Constitution  mean the power which every 
sovereign authority must of necessity have to decide 
controversies between its subjects, or between itself and its 
subjects, whether the rights relate to life, liberty or property. 
The exercise of this powe r does not begin until some tribunal 
which has power to give a binding and authoritative decision 
(whether subject to appeal or not) is called upon to take 
action. ” 
 The Privy Council has at least twice paid tribute to this 
formulation. In Shell Company of  Australia Ltd. v. Federal 
Commissioner of Taxation  [1931] AC 275, [1930] UKPC 97, the 
formulation  was set out in extenso  and described as “one of the 
best definitions”.  And in the Boilermakers’  case (supra) it was 
called a “classic and widely accepted” de finition. The High Court 
itself has regarded it as seminal. In Private R v Cowen  [2020] HCA 
31, Edelman J in his concurring judgment recalled the many 
earlier decisions where Griffith , CJ’s formulation was described as 
“a classic statement of the character istics of judicial authority” and 
(echoing the Privy Council) “one of the best definitions of judicial 
power” (see para. 172, and the authorities gathered in fn 296 and 
297).  
24. The definition put forward by Griffiths , CJ has also found 
mention in our case la w, albeit indirectly and as part of a general 
consideration of Australian decisions as to the meaning of judicial 
power: see Dr. Mubashir Hassan v Federation of Pakistan  PLD 2010 
SC 265 at 431 (para 132) and District Bar Association Rawalpindi v 
Federation  of Pakistan  PLD 2015 SC 401 at 893 (judgment of Mian 
Saqib Nisar, J. (as his Lordship then was) at para. 180). It has also 
been considered and applied in other common law jurisdictions.  In 
India i t has been cited many times, e.g., in Dr. Subramanian 
Swamy  v Arun Shourie  (2014) 12 SCC 344, where among others 
the earlier decision of Bharat Bank Ltd. v. Employees of the Bharat SMC 4/2021  20
Bank  AIR 1950 SC 188 was referred to. In the latter decision, 
Mahajan, J in his concurring judgment called Griffith , CJ’s 
formulation as the “best definition” on “high authority”. In Ireland, 
it has been cited in  Akpekpe v The Medical Council and others  
[2013] IEHC 38, [2014] 3 IR 420, where the earlier “landmark” 
judgment of M v The Medical Council  [1984] 1 IR 485 was relied 
upon, in wh ich the “ Huddart Parker ” principles were expressly 
adopted. In Sri Lanka, it was cited , among other cases,  in Farooq v 
Raymond and others  [1996] LKSC 5, (1996) 1 Sri LR 217, and in 
Canada one aspect of it was applied by the Supreme Court in 
Dupont v Inglis  [1958] SCR 535.   
25. The foregoing survey of multi -jurisdictional authorities 
shows that Griffith, CJ’s formulation has stood  the test of time and 
is regarded as virtually a judicial definition, and certainly as an 
authoritative  statement as to the legal mean ing of judicial power.  It 
is not of course to be regarded as the absolute last word , as the ins 
and outs of the Australian jurisprudence  itself show . For example , 
in R v Davison  [1954] HCA 46, (1954) 90 CLR 353 it was said that 
“[m]any attempts have been made to define judicial power, but it 
has never been found possible to frame a definition that is at once 
exclusive and exhaustive ”, and  in Attorney General (Cth) v Alinta 
Ltd. [2008] HCA 2  Hayne J said ( at [93] ) that “no single 
combination of necessary or  sufficient factors identifies what is 
judicial power ”. Even the Privy Council, despite the tributes noted 
above, did say in Labour Relations Board of Saskatchewan v John 
East Iron Works Ltd.  [1948] UKPC 75, [1949] AC 134 (an appeal 
from Canada) as follows : 
 
“Without attempting to give a comprehensive definition of 
judicial power, they accept the view that its broad features 
are accurately stated in that part of the judgment of Griffith 
C.J. in Huddart, Parker & Co. Pty. Ltd. v. Moorehead  (1909) 8 
CLR, at p 357, which was approved by this Board in Shell 
Co. of Australia Ltd. v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation  
(1931) AC 275. Nor do they doubt, as was pointed out in the 
latter case, that there are many positive features which are 
essential to the existence of judicial power, yet by themselves 
are not conclusive of it, or that any combination of such 
features wil l fail to establish a judicial power if, as is a 
common characteristic of so -called administrative tribunals, 
the ultimate decision may be determined not merely by the 
application of legal principles to ascertained facts but by 
considerations of policy als o.” SMC 4/2021  21
Notwithstanding the foregoing, there can be no doubt that 
Griffith, CJ’s formulation certainly captures the essence of the 
concept  and, in our view, illumines  very well  the nature of judicial 
power under, and in relation to , our Constitution . We may also 
note that the description of judicial power given in  the opening 
paragraph of § 144 of Vol. 16 of the  Corpus Juris Secundum , noted 
above (see para  20), accords with Griffith, CJ’s formulation 
inasmuch as it likewise emphasizes that the essence of the po wer 
is to “hear and determine”  matters that “affect life, liberty, or 
property”.  Indeed, these three categories are found verbatim in 
what was said by Griffith, CJ.   
26. For present purposes , our immediate interest in Griffith, 
CJ’s formulation is that the tripartite categorization of the judicial 
process noted above can be clearly discerned in it. The formulation 
comprises of two sentences. The first sentence (“ the power  which 
every sovereign authority  [i.e., courts which exercise th is power in 
terms of the doctrine of separation of powers]  must of necessity 
have to decide controversies ….”) is equivalent to the first category, 
of the requirement that the court must have jurisdiction to decide 
whatever it is that it is called upon to d ecide. The second sentence 
encapsulates the second and third categories. This sentence may 
be recast as follows: “The exercise of this power does not begin  until 
[a court]  is called upon to take action ”. The apparent reversal of the 
two categories is of co urse merely  a textual device; the sequence is 
established by the bridge provided by “until”.  The tripartite 
categorization thus lies at the heart of judicial power , as an 
integral part thereof . Conceptual clarity with regard thereto, and 
careful adherence to the sequencing, are not merely an aid to 
better understanding; they are essential for a proper application of 
the judicial power itself.  
27. Griffith CJ’s formulation was, as is to be expected, cast in 
orthodox, even classical terms squarely in line with the common 
law tradition. There must be a dispute (“controversy”) relating to 
legal rights or claims, disputants (whether all in the private sphere 
or involving both the public and private spheres), one or more 
claimants who come knocking at the door of th e court ( calling 
upon it to take action ) and an exercise of judicial power  
(jurisdiction ) by the court to resolve the dispute. This traditional SMC 4/2021  22
approach works well enough in the vast majority of cases and  the 
tripartite categorization has  been set out alon g similar lines. But, 
things have moved on since 1909 and we have to address the suo 
motu  jurisdiction of this Court under Article  184(3), a late 
twentieth century development that  (if we may respectfully 
conjecture)  would perhaps have baffled Griffiths, C J and may  even 
have been alien to him . But, h owever it might have fared with the 
learned Chief Justice, there can no w be no  gainsaying that the suo 
motu  jurisdiction is an expression of the power that vests in the 
judicial branch , and is a jurisdiction tha t stands allocated to this 
Court alone in terms of Article 184(3). The question therefore  
becomes as to how Griffith CJ’s formulation needs to be adapted 
and restated in order to attain conceptual clarity with regard to  the 
tripartite categorization , speci fically in the context of the suo motu  
jurisdiction . To this we therefore turn.  
28. Viewed analytically, the adaptation can be regarded as being 
articulated in  two “modes ”, though  three are given  here, with  the 
first serving as a point of comparison and departure. The “modes”  
are presented in a form suited for analytical  purposes , and that  
does not necessarily track the case law chronologically.  The 
“modes”  did not develop linearly, neatly following one from  the 
other in the sequence set out below. In actuality they emerged in a  
manner best described as  interactive , iterative  and interdependent . 
Nor are the “ modes ” exclusive in the sense that the existence of 
one preclud es the others. The law , as it  has developed, allows all to  
co-exist. However, the aim of the present exercise remains , as 
always, to attain  conceptual clarity . The first “ mode ” of Article 
184(3) is in substance no different  from Griffith CJ’s  formulation. 
For, this involves one or more petitioners formally filing  a petition 
under  the provision,  that compl ies with all procedural 
requirements (such as are, inter alia, set out in Order XXV of the 
1980 Rules) and in which the former claim  (against  identified / 
specified  respondents)  a denial, abridgement or curtailment of, or 
interference with, one or more fundamental rights that are both 
personal to them  (i.e., inhere directly , immediately  and specifically , 
though not necessarily exclusively,  in the claimants)  and also raise 
questions of public importance with re ference  to the ir enforcement. 
Such  petitions are eventually (after going through the normal 
process es of the office) fixed  for hearing and disposal  before SMC 4/2021  23
Bench es of the Court as constituted  from time to time by the Chief 
Justice , i.e., for the exercise of the jurisdiction  conferred by Article 
184(3) . As is clear from this brief description, the entire matter 
moves from start to finish along orthodox lines.  In principle, in this 
“mode”  the Court is a passive recipient . It spring s into action (as it 
were) only once , and when , called upon to act by claimants , by 
(and on ) presentation of the ir petition and then resolving the 
dispute under Article 184(3) in adversarial terms. In practice, as a 
result of experience with the other “modes” discussed below, 
matters have developed along somewhat different lines.  However, 
this aspect need not detain us  here. 
29. In the second “mode”  (i.e., the first requiring adaptation of 
Griffith CJ’s formulation) , the Court’s evolving understanding of 
Article 184(3) cause d its attention to focus  more tightly  (and in a 
sense perhaps even exclusively)  on what this provision enable s it to 
do, namely, enforce fundamental rights (subject to the requirement 
that a question of  public importance be involved). This involve s a 
shift in how the jurisdiction is viewed: not so much (or only) as a 
power to decide a dispute in terms as outlined in the first “mode” 
(important though that certainly is) but rather as a constitutional 
duty to enforce fundamental rights, in particular  of those segments 
of society as are perceived to be marginalized, disempowered  or 
disadvantaged, especially including  those who can be regarded , in 
that powerfully  evocative phrase  from a bygone era,  as “the 
wretched of the earth”.  Issues relating to minorities are another 
area of concern.  But not only that. In this changed perception of 
the Court’s function,  the jurisdiction is also regarded as a duty to 
“cleanse” the constitutional structures, organs and insti tutions  
and stand guard over them . The constitutional duty so conceived 
may extend not only to identified or identifiable groups but even , 
more diffusely,  simply to the nation as a whole. Clearly, this shift 
from power to duty alters  perceptions as to  the nature of the 
jurisdiction that the Court “has” (i.e., the first category of the 
tripartite formulation) . It states the jurisdiction much  more 
expansively , inclusive as it now is of both a power and a duty , with 
focus shifting (some might say decisively) from the former to the 
latter . In terms of  Griffith, CJ’s formulation  the Court may not now 
(especially when fulfilling its perceived duty) be seen as deciding a 
dispute stricto sensu , but rather , more broad ly, as resolving a SMC 4/2021  24
“controversy” with regard to the enforcement of fundamental 
rights.  This adaptation , while necessary to accommodate the more 
diffuse  perception of what it is that the Court can do under Article 
184(3) , is nonetheless  within the scope of  any modern 
understanding of what the learned Chief Justice said  in the first 
sentence of his description of the judicial power .  
30. This change in perception also, among other things,  inclines 
the Court to adopt a more activist stance.  After all, if the Court  has 
a duty to perform  under Article 184(3) , and one that is set on a 
high (even exalted) constitutional pedestal, it cannot (as it were) 
just sit around and wait for a case to drop in  its docket that is not 
merely a dispute stricto sensu  but also has aspe cts and features 
that comport with said duty. But the activist approach so 
engendered  requires a rethinking of the second category of the 
tripartite formulation . Who it is that can now invoke the 
jurisdiction of the Court (i.e., call upon it to take action) and how 
that can be done ? The changing perceptions of the second “mode” 
require a loosening of standing requirements and the manner in 
which the matter can be raised. And that is, in fact, what 
happened. Thus, i n the case cited by the learned Vice Chairman of 
the PBC , Watan Party and others v Federation of Pakistan and 
others  PLD 2012 SC 292, petitions were formally filed under Article 
184(3) raising issues said to be of public importance and involving 
enforcement of fundamental rights which did not, as such, involve 
directly, immediately and specifically any grievance or claim 
persona l to the petitioners; rather, they  involved what might be 
called the fundamental rights of the nation at large. The issue of 
maintainability (which was raised by the Co urt itself: see at pg. 
309, para 8) was answered in the affirmative , in terms of 
observations made, inter alia, at pp. 327 -8 (para 35)  (which were 
relied upon by the learned Vice  Chairman ). It is to be kept in mind 
that this was not a case of suo motu  jurisdiction.  Rather, it was 
one that, in our view, constitutes an important milestone in the 
shaping and crystallization of the second “mode” . In th is “mode” 
then the person(s) who raise the matter under Article 184(3) (i.e., 
call upon t he Court  to take action) need not be claimants  or 
disputants  stricto sensu , although of course they can certainly be 
that as well . The petitioners  can even be only informants , simply 
laying certain facts before the Court as are regarded by them to SMC 4/2021  25
involve question s of public importa nce for the enforcement of 
fundamental rights of an identified or identifiable group (not 
including the petitioners) or even, much more generally, of the 
nation as a whole . Accompanying this loosening of the standing 
requirement is also a relaxation of procedural requirements as to 
how the matter is presented  (but it is to be kept in mind that the 
matter must still be presented formally in , or at least pass 
through , the office ). These adaptations, reflecting as they do th e 
idea the Court is now performing a constitutional duty, also mean 
that the Court is not now to be regarded as proceeding only in 
adversarial terms; there is a shift to what is called the inquisitorial 
mode.  As in the first “mode” , the matters that are to be regarded as 
falling in the second “mode” are placed for  hearing and disposal 
before  Benches of the Court constituted from time to time by the 
Chief Justice for the exercise of the jurisdiction.  
31. This brings us to the third “mode”  (i.e., the second 
adaptation to Griffith  CJ’s formulation) , which involves the suo 
motu  jurisdiction.  Here, the view as regards the first category of 
the tripartite formulation —i.e., what is the nature of the 
jurisdiction that the Court has —remains the same as in the second 
“mode”. Indeed, if anything there is an intensification of the 
perception that Article 184(3) impos es a constitutional duty , and 
hence a strengthening of the activist stance and a deepening of the 
inquisitorial approach . Concomitant ly, there are  changes in 
thinking as to the  exercise of the  jurisdiction (i.e., the third 
category). The real change however is as regards the second 
category,  the invocation of the jurisdiction —and this is of course 
the very question with which we are confronted. The invoking of 
the jurisdiction suo motu  is, in essence,  recognition that what is 
crucial is t he information (i.e., the set of facts , howsoever brief ly or 
sketchily articulated ) that constitutes the basis on which the 
jurisdiction is to be exercised. As is clear from the second “mode”  
the focus  has shifted from the source of the information to the 
information itself.  Now, issues, if any, regarding the source  in a 
sense  become almost wholly  eclipsed.  It will be seen that in the 
first and second “modes”, the source is external to the institution. 
(It may be noted that we have deliberately used the term 
“institution” and not “Court”.) In the first “mode” t he source is a 
petitioner who is also directly, immediately and specifically a SMC 4/2021  26
disputant/claimant. In the second “mode” the rules of standing 
have been relaxed to the point that the petitioner need only be an 
informant and nothing else. Yet, in both “modes ” there is formally 
someone who stands outside the institution . The third “mode” is 
recognition that there need not be a petitioner  at all  as long as the 
information is, or  can become , available.  However, there must still 
be someone who brings forth the in formation.  For, the requirement 
that the jurisdiction has to be invoked (the second category), i.e., 
that the Court must be called upon by someone to take action (in 
terms of Griffith CJ’s formulation) remains: it is, after all, part of 
the essence of the judicial power. Who then is now to be that 
someone ? To this there can be only one answer: th at someone 
must be internal to the institution.  Of course, the “someone” (to 
whom we turn in a moment) would inevitably have some external 
source for the information, e.g., a newspaper report or a  complaint 
or letter (anonymous or otherwise)  or some other basis for the 
relevant facts . But now, and this  is the crucial difference from the 
other two “modes”, there is no petitioner as such. It is someone 
from within the institution itself who invokes, i.e., calls upon the 
Court to exercise , the jurisdiction under Article 184(3).   
32. Who can that “someone” be? In our view,  realistically  the 
following possibilities present themselves:  
a. it can be a Bench of the Court when acting judicially 
as such;  or 
b. it can be one or more Judges  as such , and here two 
sub-possibilities exist: (i) it can be any one of the 
Judges; or  (ii) the Chief Justice alone;  
 
It will be seen that these possibilities are internal ; one 
involves the Court  exercising jurisdiction  as such and the other the 
institution, i.e., either a Judge (which would include the Chief 
Justice) as such or the Chief Justice alone . It now remains to be 
determine d which of these possibilities is conceptually viable  and 
constitutionally perm issible . We proceed seriatim .     
33. In order to consider whether  a Bench of the Court when 
acting judicially as such can invoke the suo motu  jurisdiction, we 
need to consider the constitution of Benches and the allocation of SMC 4/2021  27
work whereby the Benches exercise the jurisdiction of the Court. 
This is indeed the fourth “element” which was alluded to in para 
14 above, which serves  as the link or bridge between the second 
and third categories of the tripartite formulation. For, as is well 
known,  in the ordinary course  this Court does not sit  en banc  (as 
does, e.g., the US Supreme Court) but in Benches.  And the 
Benches do not, and cannot, self -constitute or, once constituted, 
self-propagate or self –perpetuate. Rather, it is settled law that it is 
the Chief Justice alone who is the master of the roster and who , 
from time to time , constitutes Benches for the exercise of the 
various jurisdictions of the Court. This applies (to take the 
language of Order XI of the 1980 Rules)  to “every cause, appeal or 
matter” to be heard and disposed of by the Court. Now, the 
Benches constituted by the Chief Justice are, eac h of them, the 
Court when they are so exercising the various jurisdictions that 
inhere in the Court. However, even here there are limitations and 
qualifications. The most important for present purposes is that a 
Bench cannot self -select the causes, appeals  or matters that are to 
be taken up and decided by it.  It cannot pick and choose 
whichever case it wants from those on the docket.  That too, 
ultimately, is within the power of the Chief Justice. In everyday 
terms, as per current practice, the Chief Justice  constitutes two - 
and three -member Benches on a weekly basis and a cause list is 
issued which earmarks the cases which are to go before each 
Bench. Special benches  (including those comprising of a larger 
number of Judges than just indicated)  may also be co nstituted 
from time to time for a variety of different reasons, for whom, 
again, a cause list is issued.  Now, what are those cases? They are 
the ones in which the jurisdiction of the Court has already been 
invoked . The exercise of the jurisdictions that in here in the Court 
is therefore controlled and regulated by (among others) the 
following factors, as relevant for present purposes. Firstly, it can 
only be exercised by Benches duly constituted by the Chief Justice. 
Secondly, the Benches can only take up su ch cases as are listed 
before them and cannot self -select. Thirdly, the cases that are 
listed before the Benches are those where the jurisdiction of the 
Court has already been invoked.  In other words, the constitution SMC 4/2021  28
(and existence) of Benches presupposes  the existence of causes, 
appeals or matters in relation to which the Benches will exercise 
the jurisdictions of the Court.  Conceptually, the two are distinct, 
separate and independent one from the other. These two aspects of 
course relate to nothing other  than the third and second 
categories, respectively, of the tripartite formulation.  
34. It follows from the foregoing that the Benches are constituted 
only for the purposes of exercising the jurisdiction s of the Court  in 
relation to what is already o n the dock et. Can such a Bench invoke 
suo motu  the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 184(3)? In our 
view the answer has to be in the negative.  For a Bench, constituted 
as above, to be able to do so would mean that a Bench can both 
self-constitute and self -propagate. But that is neither possible nor 
permissible. In such a situation, the second and third categories of 
the tripartite formulation wo uld collapse, and merge to become 
one. That would be absolutely  counter to the essence of the judicial 
power. Furthermore, t he invoking of the jurisdiction  suo motu , i.e., 
the calling upon the Court to take action, brings forth a fresh or 
new “controversy”  (i.e., cause or matter) to be decided by the 
Court. Can a Bench , that cannot self -select cases for its 
consideration  even from the existing docket , add a fresh cause 
theret o? The question, surely, answers itself. Put differently, if a 
Bench constituted as  above suo motu invoke s the jurisdiction of 
the Court in relation to any matter, then in respect thereof  it would 
have self -constituted. And if it require s that the matter be fixed 
before it (and, explicitly or implicitly, before it alone), then in 
respect  thereof  the Bench  would have self -propagated  and self -
perpetuated .  
35. Our conclusion therefore is that the first possibility identified 
in para 32 above is both conceptually non -viable and 
constitutionally impermissible, being in negation and violation of 
the judicial power itself, as encapsulated in Griffith CJ’s 
description and set out in terms of the tripartite formulation . 
36. We turn to the second possibility . Can the “someone” within 
the institution, who can invoke suo motu  the jurisdiction of the 
Court under Article 184(3), be any one (or more) of the Judges, or 
can it be the Chief Justice alone?  It is of course not in doubt that SMC 4/2021  29
the Chief Justice can invoke the  jurisdiction suo motu.  The 
innumerable times that Chief Justices have done so, and continue 
so to do, suffices to establish this. The only question therefore is 
whether, in addition to the Chief Justice, any Judge or Judges as 
such may do so. As will be s een below, while there have been  some 
examples  where the jurisdiction was invoked suo motu at the 
instance of an individual Judge other than the Chief Justice , there 
is not any consistent or sustained practice in this regard . Now, t he 
learned Attorney Gene ral, at the conclusion of his submissions, 
drew attention to the position in respect to the Supreme Court of 
India. There, applications for the enforcement of fundamental 
rights under Article 32 of the Indian Constitution are dealt with in 
Order 38 of the ir Supreme Court Rules, 2013. This Order is 
divided into various parts, the last of which (comprising of Rule 12) 
relates to “public interest litigation”  (or PIL as it is known) . This 
Rule provides in  its sub-rule (1) as follows:  
 
“A Public  Interest  Litigation Petition may commence in any of  
the following manners:  
 
(a) as a suo motu  petition in pursuance of  the order of  the 
Chief  Justice or Judge of  the Court.  
(b) in pursuance of an order of  the Chief Justice or a Judge 
nominated by the Chief  Justice  on a letter or representation . 
 
(c) by an order of the Court to treat a petition as a Public 
Interest Litigation Petition.  
 
(d) by presentation of  a petition in the Court. ” 
Thus, in India it seem s that, as expressly provided in the 
rules themselves, the answer to the possibility now under 
consideration would be that the jurisdiction can be invoked suo 
motu by any of the Judges of the institution.  However, it is 
interesting to note that the suo motu  label is used exclusively to 
the situation where the source of the information is the Judge 
himself (clause (a)). If the source of the information is “external” to 
the Judge, more specifically being a letter or representation (clause 
(b)), then the PIL pe tition can only commence on the order of the 
Chief Justice or a Judge nominated in this regard by the former. 
As should be clear from the discussion above, the situation 
envisaged in clause (b) would here be regarded as more flexible. It 
could, depending o n how and by whom the letter or representation SMC 4/2021  30
is received  and dealt with , be regarded as falling in either the 
second or the third of the “modes” identified above.  
37. Looking at the matter conceptually , and with all due respect 
to the position in India, in o ur view it is the Chief Justice  alone  
who is that “someone” within the institution who can suo motu 
invoke the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 184(3). The 
position of the office of the Chief Justice, in particular vis-à-vis the 
other Judges, is com plex and perhaps ultimately not susceptible to 
what might be called “black letter” enunciation. For present 
purposes, t wo contrasting p erspectives are relevant . One is where 
the Chief Justice is a member of a Bench constituted as such , to 
act (i.e., exerci se jurisdiction) in terms as described above . Here  
(subject to what is said below)  he is one among equals, this being 
without prejudice to the special responsibilities that fall on him 
(and the deference which is his due) as the senior member of the 
Bench (though  these are, in substance  but not in entirety , the 
same as  to those that fall on any Judge who is the senior member 
of any Bench so constituted).  The other is in relation to other 
responsibilities, duties and powers, especially but by no means 
exclusively as regards  administrative matters, which inhere in the 
office and are exclusive to the Chief Justice.  One such has already 
been noted above, i.e. , his position as the master of the roster.  The 
office of the Chief Justice is , in non -judicial settings,  the repository 
of important functions  and powers , many of which of course 
impact directly on judicial powers and functions also. These 
functions, powe rs and responsibilities are not susceptible to 
precise and exhaustive delineation. It is an aspect of the common 
law tradition that many have accrued to the office over time , and 
not in the same manner or to like extent in all common law 
jurisdictions. Dif ferent and divergent paths are available, which  
can and have been taken . All may be conceptually  viable and yet, 
in the peculiar circumstances of a particular jurisdiction, one or 
the other may  crystallize, to  be uniquely adopted and applied.  In 
our view, it is in this perspective that the proposition now under 
consideration is to be treated. In India, as seen above, the pathway 
adopted is for the jurisdiction to be invoked suo motu by any 
Judge in one particular situation, but only by the Chief Justice or 
a Judge nominated by him in another. In this country , the choice 
has been different: it is the Chief Justice alone who is that SMC 4/2021  31
“someone” within the institution who can suo motu  invoke the 
jurisdiction.   
38. The statement just made follows from how the practic e has 
settled, especially since the issuance of the circular dated 
19.07.2005 , alluded to in the order  of the HACJ  dated  21.08.2021  
(herein after referred to as “the Circular”). As noted above, there 
have been some  instances where the jurisdiction was invoked suo 
motu by Judges other than the Chief Justice.  Thus,  in the 1990’s, 
Saleem Akhtar, J. both invoked and exercised suo motu  the 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3): see In re: Human Rights Case 
(Environmental Pro tection in Balochistan ) PLD 1994 SC 102 and In 
re: Pollution of Environment caused by smoke, emitting vehicles, 
traffic muddle  1996 SCMR 543. Moving forward,  on or about 
28.09.2004 Rana Bhagwandas, J. noticed a news report in the 
daily press and, after dir ecting that notices be issued to various 
functionaries, ordered that “the case be registered as suo motu  
direct petition under Article 184(3) read with Article 187”. It was 
further directed that after issuance of notices the matter be placed 
before the Chi ef Justice “for appropriate orders as to its marking to 
an appropriate Bench”. In the second matter, on or about 
21.12.2004 Hamid Ali Mirza, J. noted an incident which had been 
widely reported in the press, and in respect of which a complaint 
had been rece ived for suo motu  action. It was ordered that notices 
be issued to various functionaries and that the “case shall be 
registered under Article 184(3) read with Article 187” and 
thereafter placed before the Chief Justice “for appropriate orders as 
to its mar king to appropriate Bench”. In each case the Chief 
Justice ordered that the cases be placed before Benches of which 
Rana Bhagwandas, J. and Hamid Ali Mirza, J. , respectively , were 
members  (SMC Nos. 2 and 3 of 2004) . On or abo ut 04.07.2005, 
Rana Bhagwandas,  J. noticed another news report and after 
issuing notices to concerned functionaries directed that “this 
reference” be registered as a “ Suo mot u case”, directing the office 
to “put up the reference as well as report of Inspector General of 
Police before Ho nourable Chief Justice for constitution of a Bench”  
(SMC No. 8 of 2005) . It should be noted that each of the two 
Judges concerned invoked suo motu the jurisdiction of the Court 
but did not exercise it; for that, the matter was referred to the 
Chief Justice . On or about 30.10.2007 Syed Jamshed Ali, J. SMC 4/2021  32
forward ed a news report to the Chief Justice regarding a certain 
matter and recommended that “it appears to be a fit case for suo 
motu  exercise of jurisdiction of this court under Article 184 of the 
Constitution to examine the legality and validity of the actions on 
banks in public sector in writing off loans”. On this 
recommendation the Chief Justice directed the registration of a 
suo m otu case (SMC 26/2007). However, it is pertinent to note 
that the learned Judge did not, as had been the situation in the 
earlier instances noted, suo motu invoke the jurisdiction. Rather, 
only a recommendation was made.  
39. It seems therefore  (and this point is again taken up below)  
that individual Judges have not, as a matter of sustained practice, 
sought to suo motu  invoke the jurisdiction of the Court.  That has 
been left in the hands of the Chief Justice. However,  that does not 
end the inquiry. I n matters p roceeding before  Benches constituted 
in terms as described above to act judicially (i.e., matters already 
on the Court’s docket  and placed before the Benches ) the suo motu 
jurisdiction has also been involved . For reasons that will become 
clear later, a dis tinction has to be made between Benches headed 
by the Chief Justice and those of which the Chief Justice was not a 
member.  We first look at  a sampling of  instances from the latter 
category.  
40. On or about 02.09.2016, a learned two member Bench  (Amir 
Hani Musl im and Mushir Alam, JJ.) , while hearing CA 82 -K/2016, 
recommended invoking suo motu the jurisdiction of the Court and 
directed that “[if] the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan approves 
the recommendations of the Bench” then notices be issu ed to the 
concern ed authorities (reported as State through Chairman NAB v 
Hanif Hyder and another  2016 SCMR 2031). The Chief Justice 
ordered that the matter was to be treated as a Suo Motu case  (SMC 
17/2016) . On or about 19.01.2017, a learned three member Bench  
(Dost Muham mad Khan, Qazi Faez Isa and Faisal Arab, JJ.) , while 
disposing of Crim. P. 1177/2016 directed in respect of a certain 
matter that “a separate file be opened with a copy of this order” 
and that notices be issued to specified functionaries , and that “this 
may be placed for approval before the Hon’ble Chief Justice for 
exercising suo motu  jurisdiction”. The Chief Justice accorded his 
approval  (SMC 1/2017) . On or about 08.05.2017, a learned two SMC 4/2021  33
member Bench  (Gulzar Ahmed and Dost Muhammad Khan, JJ.) , 
while dealing with CPLA 1331/2017 etc directed certain specified 
functionaries to, inter alia, prepare a report in respect of a stated 
matter. An interim report was subsequently submitted and further 
time was sought, the matter being placed (it seems) before the  
learned Judges in Chamber. One of the learned Judges  (Gulzar 
Ahmed, J.)  was inclined to grant the extension sought. The other 
learned Judge  (Dost Muhammad Khan, J.)  however was of the view 
that since the matter was of “vital public importance requires to be 
taken into cognizance under Article 184(3) of the Constitution and 
to be placed before Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan”. The Chief 
Justice was pleased to direct that the matter may be registered as 
a suo motu case (SMC 6/2017).  
41. On or about 21.11.2017  a learned two member Bench  
(Mushir Alam and Qazi Faez Isa, JJ.) , when dealing with CP 
2983/2016 and, in particular, while considering an application for 
adjournment moved on behalf of counsel for the petitioner issued 
notices , in relation to a dharna , to specified functionaries and 
directed for the re -listing of the matter two days later . (It may be 
noted that the adjournment had been sought on the ground that 
counsel could not attend to the matter as the route was being 
blocked by the dharna .) On 23.11.20 17 the matter was re -listed 
before the same learned Bench. It was, inter alia, ordered (while 
adjourning the matter to 30.11.2017) that the office “prepare a 
separate file with regard to this matter so that Civil Petition No. 
2983/2016, which could not pro ceed on the last date of hearing on 
account of the illegal actions of the protestors, can be separately 
heard”. The office sought orders from the Chief Justice, asking for 
approval for the registration of the matter as a suo motu case. The 
Chief Justice ac corded his approval (SMC 7/2017). This suo motu 
case was ultimately disposed off by a judgment reported as Suo 
Motu Case N o. 7 of 2017  PLD 2019 SC 318.  
42. On or about 05.08.2020 a learned two member Bench  
(Mushir Alam and Qazi Faez Isa, JJ.) while disposing o ff Crim. P. 
650/2020 directed that in respect of a specified matter as 
identified therein a separate file be prepared as a suo motu case. 
The office (relying on the Circular) sought orders from the Chief 
Justice, pointing out that a similar  matter had alre ady been SMC 4/2021  34
considered in earlier suo motu proceedings (SMC 13/2016) which 
had since been disposed of vide order dated 31.03.20 17 by a 
learned three member Bench , and that certain proceedings 
emanating from that (by way of compliance) were also disposed of 
by a three member Bench on 12.03.2020 . The Chief Justice 
directed that the matter be registered as a suo motu case (SMC  
2/2020).    
43. On or about 12.10.20 20 a learned two member Bench (Qazi 
Faez Isa and Amin ud  Din Khan, JJ.) while dealing with an 
adjournment application filed in CP 3998/2016  took up a matter 
and directed that in relation thereto “a separate file be prepared 
and numbered in respect of this matter by the office and to place it 
before the Hon’ble Chief Justice for constitution of an appropriate 
Bench to hear the case”. The matter was registered as directed by 
the Chief Justice (SMC 3/2020) and it was further directed that it 
be placed before a three member Bench headed by the Chief 
Justice.  
44. On or about 03.02.202 1 a learned two member Bench (Qazi 
Faez Isa and Maqbool Baqar, JJ.) took  notice of a news report  and 
direct ed, with reference to CP 20/2013 , for the issuance of  notices 
to specified functionaries  for 10.02.2021. The order was then listed 
as a miscellaneous application ( CMA 490/2021) . CP 20/2013 had 
already been disposed of (the judgment being reported as Action 
against distribution of development funds by Ex Prime Minister Raja 
Parvaiz Ashraf: In the matter of PLD 2014 SC 131).  It is to be no ted 
that the said disposed of matter was not listed before the learned 
Bench on 03.02.2021 nor was there any CMA pending therein . The 
office, after recounting the history of the disposed of case and 
various reviews and contempt applications filed in relati on thereto 
(all already disposed of), sought the orders of the Chief Justice. The 
Chief Justice directed that the matter be placed before a five 
member Bench, which disposed of the CMA on 10.02.2021 
(judgment reported as Action against distribution of deve lopment 
funds to MNAs/MPAs by Prime Minister: In the matter of CMA No. 
490 of 2021 in Constitution Petition No. 20 of 2013  PLD 2021 SC 
446).  
45. It will be recalled from para 39 above that a distinction was 
drawn between Benches headed by the Chief Justice and those of SMC 4/2021  35
which he is not a member, and the discussion so far has been in 
respect of the latter category. It is time to look at the reason for 
this distinction. Now, Benches  headed by the Chief Justice do 
invoke the suo motu jurisdiction of the Court.  However, there is a 
crucial distinction between such Benches and those of which the 
Chief Justice is not a member.  When a Bench headed by the Chief 
Justice seems to invoke the s uo motu jurisdiction that, in law, is 
not an act of the Bench. The reason is that what appears to be one 
act is, when analyzed conceptually, found in law  to be  a 
combination of three distinct steps. The first is where the Chief 
Justice, acting as such, inv okes suo motu the jurisdiction of the 
Court in respect of a matter. The second is where, in respect 
thereof , he constitutes the Bench headed by him to exercise the 
jurisdiction so invoked. And the third is where the Bench does 
exercise said jurisdiction. S ince it is all happening together the 
three steps, each distinct and separate in law though it is, become 
conflated. Thus, what seems (and in a practical sense is) one act is 
shown, when unraveled and examined conceptually, to comprise in 
law of three dist inct elements. Each of the elements is perfectly 
legitimate within its own scope and the fact that they have, as it 
were,  been rolled into one act on account of the Chief Justice 
heading the Bench should not confuse.  As a matter of law the 
invoking of the suo motu jurisdiction by such a Bench is  
equivalent to  nothing other than an invocation by the Chief Justice 
alone.  
46. The position as regards the suo motu invocation of the 
jurisdiction can also be examined by looking at the data in more 
general terms, for t he period from the issuance of the Circular 
(19.07.2005) to end 2021. It appears that such cases are registered 
as either Human Rights Cases (HRC) or Suo Motu Cases (SMC). In 
all HRC cases the suo motu jurisdiction is invoked by the Chief 
Justice alone and  is then directed to be placed before a Bench 
constituted in terms as described above (i.e., fixed in Court). We 
are informed that over the relevant period 1028  cases  were so 
registered  (this includes cases for the whole of 2005.)  Over th e 
period  from the Circular to end 2021  243 cases were registered as 
SMC cases (this includes the one case, referred to in para 44 
above, where it was registered as a CMA).  Of these 28 cases appear 
still to be pend ing. An analysis of the SMC cases shows that in 158 SMC 4/2021  36
cases (65%) the suo motu jurisdiction was invoked by the Chief 
Justice alone  (and of these, in 20 cases it was done on the 
recommendation of an individual Judge) . Seventy seven cases 
involved Benches of the Court, but of these in 52 cases (21.4%) th e 
Bench was headed by the Chief Justice. As explained above, as a 
matter of law, the suo motu jurisdiction was here also invoked by 
the Chief Justice. The balance 25 cases involved Benches of which 
the Chief Justice was not a member. But even here in 6 cas es the 
matter was simply referred to the Chief Justice. Thus, in only 19 
cases (7.8%) was the suo motu jurisdiction invoked by a Bench of 
which the Chief Justice was not a member. Finally, in eight cases 
(3.3%) the suo motu jurisdiction  was invoked by an i ndividual 
Judge as such (the last such instance, it appears, being SMC 
6/2015 on 09.07.2015).  The position that emerges is clear.  
47. When the data for the HMC and SMC cases are combined  
(giving a total of 1 271 cases) , the position becomes even clearer.  
The Ch ief Justice alone invoked t he jurisdiction suo motu in 1186 
cases (1028  plus 158), i.e., 93.3 % of the total. The cases where the 
jurisdiction was so invoked by a Bench headed by the Chief Justice 
constit ute 4.09% of the total. Thus, in 97.39 % of the cases the suo 
motu jurisdiction was invoked by the Chief Justice either directly 
or as a matter of law. The cases where this was done by a Bench 
not headed by the C hief Justice constitute a miniscule  1.5% and 
those where this was done by individual Jud ges were a  vanishingly 
small 0.6 %. (The balance 0.5% represents the cases where the 
matter was s imply referred to the Ch ief Just ice by the Benches 
concerned .) These figures speak for themselves. The pathway 
adopted in this common law jurisdiction is clear. The settl ed 
practice is that the suo motu jurisdiction is to be invoked by the 
Chief Justice alone and not by any other Judge as such. The few 
cases where Benches not headed by the Chief Justice invoked the 
jurisdiction was , for reasons already stated, with respect , a 
conceptual error that was constitutionally impermissible.  
48. One other point may be made. It will be noted that in terms 
of the short order whereby this matter was disposed of (set out at 
the beginning of the judgment) it was stated that the Chief Justice  
“shall” suo motu invoke the jurisdiction  “if so requested or 
recommended by a Bench of the Court ”. The reason for this is that SMC 4/2021  37
if the practice up to now is considered it seems that Chief Justices 
have not turned down any such request or recommendation, 
emanating as it does from Judges ensconced in the formal setting 
of a Bench constituted as such. It is only in this sense that a 
Bench has been referred to, and not by way of any recognition that 
it can itself invoke suo motu the jurisdiction of the Court. H owever, 
it is of course entirely for the Chief Justice to decide the time and 
manner in which the jurisdiction is to be suo motu invoked and 
the Bench by whom it will be exercised.  
49. The above analysis with regard to the suo motu invoking of 
the jurisdiction  of the Court under Article 184(3) may therefore be 
summarized as follows: (i) it is constitutionally impermissible and 
conceptually non -viable for a Bench of the Court, constituted and 
acting judicially as described above , to suo motu invoke the 
jurisdict ion; and (ii) it is the Chief Justice alone who may do so.  
50. Insofar as the Circular is concerned, it also in certain 
aspects and respects, suffers from a lack of conceptual clarity. In 
order to fully rationalize the position  we recommend that the office 
may place the Circular before the Hon’ble Chief Justice for such 
reconsideration as may be deemed appropriate.   
51. This brings us to the order dated 20.08.2021 (2021 SCMR 
1602) made by the learned Bench -II, for its consideration and 
examination in light of the  foregoing discussion and analysis. The 
attendant facts relating to the making of the order have already 
been set out above.  In our view, there can be no doubt that, with 
respect, the learned Bench erred materially in law  in making the 
order . The learned Be nch suo motu invoked the jurisdiction of the 
Court under Article 184(3). This is absolutely clear from a perusal 
of the order as a whole and, in particular, para 11 thereof where 
the learned Bench clearly stated  that “ We have decided  to treat 
this applicat ion as one under Article 184(3) of the Constitution….” 
(emphasis supplied)  read with para 13, where a direction was given 
to the office “to number this petition”, with parties arrayed as 
ordered . In this para also it was specifically asserted that “…  this 
Bench of the Supreme Court has taken notice pursuant to Article 
184(3)  of the Constitution….”  This, with respect, it could not do. 
There was a failure to  properly  abide by , and to apply, the judicial 
power as explained above. This failure was, with r espect, the result SMC 4/2021  38
of a lack of conceptual clarity.  In respect of the subject matter of 
the Application  not only did the learned Bench self-constitute but, 
in directing that notices be issued to named functionaries (and 
directing that replies be furnished before the next date of hearing) 
and that the matter be listed before it, the learned Bench also self -
perpetuated and self -propagated. As explained above, this  simply 
could not be done. With respect, the learned Bench acted in a 
constitutionally impermissi ble manner . The office quite correctly 
sought orders from the HACJ and it was well within the relevant 
powers (and, in our respectful view, duty in the facts and 
circumstances of the present case) of the Chief Justice (which for 
the time being  vested  in, and fell upon,  the HACJ) for an 
authoritative pronouncement to be sought on the question posed 
in the order of 23.08.2021.  That question stood answered in the 
short order of 26.08.2021 , as explained and amplified in terms of 
what has been  set out in this ju dgment . We are , with respect, 
unable to subscribe to the action taken by the learned Bench -II. 
The order of 20.08.2020 could not be allowed to stand. A ttendant 
consequences necessarily had to follow , as set out in para 3 of the 
order dated 26.08.2021 .  
52. We are now reaching the end of the judgment. Before the 
coda there is one onerous duty that , regrettably , must  be 
performed. While the matter was being heard by this Bench, 
another extraordinary event occurred. The learned senior member 
of Bench -II, on 25.08.2021 , filed an application ( “CMA”) in this 
matter.  The text of the CMA ran to 15 pages. In it, the learned 
Judge sought, inter alia, to justify the order dated 20.08.2021 and 
to criticize and attack the formation of the Larger Bench by the 
HACJ  and the order of 23.08.2021 made by the Larger Bench. 
Indeed, the order last mentioned was referred to as a “purported 
order” passed by a “monitoring Bench” . A wholly unwarranted 
attack  ostensibly directed at  the Registrar of the Court  was also 
launched . This was an extraordinary and unprecedented 
intervention  in pending proceedings . We say  no more.  While we 
chose, in order to mainta in the dignity of the Court, not to draw 
attention to the CMA during the course of the hearing, it is 
necessary, as a matter of law, t o give quietus to it. It is hereby 
declared, and directed  to be, expunged from the record.  SMC 4/2021  39
53. While the question before us has been addressed, there is 
nonetheless something addition al that we would like to say.  The 
suo motu  invoking of the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 
184(3) has, over the years, come in for its share of analysis, 
debate, discussion and, indeed, criticism. It must be acknowledged 
that this is not something confined just to the Bar but extends to 
the Bench also. That the jurisdiction can be so invoked cannot now 
be gainsaid. But the time has come to recognize that there is a  
certain  imbalance , which ought to be corrected. The imbalance lies 
in what has been called the “fourth element” above, i.e., th e link or 
bridge between the invoking of the jurisdiction and the exercise of 
it. As has been explained above, law and practice require that the 
suo motu  invoking of the jurisdiction lie solely with the Chief 
Justice. As also seen the law mandates that the  constitution of 
Benches for the exercise of the jurisdiction lies with the Chief 
Justice alone. It is this that creates an imbalance , and we need not 
dwell on whether this is a matter of perception only, or both 
perception and reality.  Either way it is something that, it must be 
fairly conceded, ought to be addressed.  
54. How is the balance to be achieved? To this different answers 
can be given. However, the one that seems to us to be most readily 
capable of application is for a suitable pr actice to develop and 
crystallize in relation to the “fourth element”. Since both the suo 
motu invocation of the jurisdiction and the constitution of a Bench 
to exercise that jurisdiction lie in the same hands, it is for those 
hands, in our respectful view , to act in a manner that dispels any 
perception of the imbalance.  
55. The foregoing are the reasons for the short order of 
26.08.2021.  
 
Acting Chief Justice  
 
      Judge  
 SMC 4/2021  40
         Judge  
 
      Judge  
 
         Judge  
Islamabad, the  
26th August, 2021  