IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(REVIEW  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE NASIR -UL-MULK  
MR. JUSTICE  JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE  ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALI  
MR. JUSTICE  KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
MR. JUSTICE  MIAN SAQIB NISAR  
MR. JUSTICE  ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA  
MR. JUSTICE  SARMAD JALAL OSMANY  
MR. JUSTICE  AMIR HANI MUSLIM  
MR. JUSTICE  IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY  
MR. JUSTICE  GULZAR AHMED  
MR. JUSTICE  SH. AZMAT SAEED  
MR. JUSTICE  IQBAL HAMEEDUR RAHMAN  
MR. JUSTICE  MUSHIR ALAM  
 
CIVIL REVIEW PET ITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  
 
General (R) Parvez Musharraf     (In both cases)  
… Petitioner  
VERSUS  
1. Nadeem Ahmed (Advocate) and another  (In CRP 328/2013)  
2. Sindh High Court Bar Association through  
its Secretar y and others     (In CRP 329/2013)  
… Respondents  
 
For the Petitioner:   Syed Sharif ud Din Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
    Assisted by Ch. Faisal Hussain, Advocate  
    Raja Muhammad Ibrahim Satti, Sr. ASC  
Assisted by Shazia Yasin, Advocate and 
Mr. Osman Ibrahim, Advoca te 
    Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Ahmed Raza Kasuri, Sr. ASC  
    Barrister Muhammad Ali Saif, ASC  
    Syed Zafar Abbas Naqvi, AOR  
 
For the Respondent (1):  Mr. Rasheed A. Rizwi, ASC/Caveator  
Mr. Asim Iqbal, President Sindh High 
Court Bar Association  
 (In CRP 329/2013)  
 
Date of Hearing:   28, 29 & 30.01.2014  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ .- Through these 
review petitions, petitioner has sought review of this Court’s 
judgment dated 31.7.2009 (short order and detailed reasons CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  2
reported in Sindh  High Court Bar Association vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 789) . Although these petitions are barred 
by 1576 days, yet in the interest of justice, we have heard 
petitioner’s learned counsel at some length and have considered 
the submissions made e ven on merit.  
2. The f acts giving rise to the instant review petition s 
briefly stated are that on 12.10.1999, petitioner General (R) Pervez  
Musharraf who was then the Chairman Joint Chief s of Staff 
Committee and Chief of the Army Staff seized power by dismiss ing 
the government of the then Prime Minister Mian Muhammad 
Nawaz Sharif . He proclaimed a State of Emergency throughout 
Pakistan and assumed the office of Chief Executive of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, issued the Provisional Constitutional Order 
No. I of 1999 as also the Oath of Office (Judges) Order No. 10 of 
1999. On 25.1.2000 yet another Oath of Office (Judge s) Order No. I 
of 2000 was promulgated wherein it was provided that the Judges 
of Superior Courts who were holding office immediately before t he 
commencement of the said Order would  not continue to hold office 
if the said Judges were not given or d id not take Oath in the form 
as set out in the Schedule as a result of which certain Judges 
ceased to hold office. These orders were  challenged before  this 
Court through  several petitions which were dismissed .  However, 
the actions of General Pervez  Musharraf were validated with 
certain conditions and limitations (Syed Zafar Ali Shah v. General 
Pervez Musharraf, Chief Executive of Pakistan  (PLD 2000 SC 869) 
which inter alia were: 
(ii) That constitutional amendment s by Chief Executive 
can be resorted to only if the Constitution fails to CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  3
provide solution for the attainment of its declared 
objectives;  
(iii) That no amendment shall be made in the salient 
features of th e Constitution i.e. independence of 
judiciary, federalism, parliamentary form of 
government blended with Islamic provisions;  
(iv) That the Fundamental Rights provided in Part II, 
Chapter I of the Constitution shall continue to hold the 
field but the State will be authorized to make any law 
or take any executive action in deviation of Articles 15, 
16, 17, 18, 19 and 24 as contemplated by Article 
233(1) of the Constitution, keeping in view the 
language of Articles 10, 23 and 25 thereof;  
(v) That the three years period  is allowed to the Chief 
Executive with effect from the date of Army Takeover 
i.e. 12th of October 1999 for achieving his declared 
objectives ;  
(vi) That the Chief Executive shall appoint a date, not later 
than 90 days before the expiry of the aforesaid period 
of three years, for holding of a general election to the 
National Assembly and the Provincial Assemblies and 
the Senate of Pakistan; and  
(vii) That this Court has jurisdiction to review/re -examine 
the continuation of the Proclamation of Emergency, 
dated 12th October, 1999 at any stage if the 
circumstances so warrant as held by this Court in the 
case of Sardar Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari v. 
Federation of Pakistan PLD 1999 SC 57.  CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  4
3. Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, former  Chief 
Justice of Pakistan who headed the  Bench which delivered the 
judgment review of which is sought (Sindh High Court Bar 
Association  PLD 2009 SC 879 Supra ) was Chief Justice of the High 
Court of Balochistan when Oath of Office (Judges) No.1 of 2000 
was promulgated  and State of Emergency was proclaimed . Since 
six Judges of the Supreme Court ceased to hold office for not 
taking fresh oath and vacancies occurred , he was elevated to this 
Court and subsequently he became the Chief Justice of Pakistan.  
4. On 9th of March, 2007, the petitioner filed a Reference 
before the Supreme Judicial Council under Article 209 of the 
Constitution against Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, 
Chief Justice of Pakistan and that  was challenged by the latter 
through  Constitution Petition No. 21 of 2007 which was accep ted 
on 20.7.2007  by a 9 -Member Bench of this Court as a result of 
which he was restored (Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, 
Chief Justice of Pakistan v. The President of Pakistan , short order 
PLD 2007 SC 578 and detailed judgment of which is at PLD 20 10 
SC 61 ). 
5. After the restoration of the Chief Justice on account of 
the aforesaid  judgment of this Court (PLD 20 07 SC 578), a Bench 
of this Court was hearing a petition wherein the issue mooted was 
whether General Pervez  Musharraf (who then was President a nd 
Chief of Army Staff) was qualified to contest an election to the 
office of the President  or not . Petitioner apprehending an adverse 
verdict decided to take a drastic action against the Judiciary. 
Sensing this the Chief Justice of Pakistan constituted a Bench of 
available 7 Judges of the Supreme Court, which, passed a restraint CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  5
order [in the case of Wajihuddin Ahmed  {C.M.A. No. 2869 of 2007 
in Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2007 )] against the apprehended  
instruments and measures and directed, inter alia,  the Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts not to take oath under PCO or 
take any o ther extra -constitutional step.  
6. The petitioner proclaimed a State of Emergency on 
3.11.2007 and prescribed a fresh Oath of office for all Judges of 
the Supreme Court and H igh Courts and it was provided therein 
(Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007) that a Judge who did not take 
Oath of office under the said Order shall cease to hold office. About 
15 Judges of the Supreme Court including Chief Justice of 
Pakistan Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and 56 
Judges of the High Courts were prevented from performing the 
duties of their constitutional office  as they did not take such oath.  
7. Certain Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts 
including the Chief Justice of Pakistan  were put under house 
arrest. Immediately thereafter, General Pervez Musharraf made the 
appointment of Abdul Hameed Dogar, J, as the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan, who was at serial No. 4 of the seniority list of the Judges 
of the Supreme Court, i.e. Chief Jus tice of Pakistan, Rana 
Bhagwandas, J, (as he then was) and Javed Iqbal, J were senior to 
Abdul Hameed Dogar, J.  
8. Through a suspectedly prompted petition, t he afore -
referred proclamation of emergency was challenged in  the case of  
Tika Iqbal Muhammad Khan v. General Pervez Musharaf and 
others  (PLD 2008 SC 178) and this Court headed by Mr. Justice 
Abdul Hameed Dogar validated all the afore -mentioned acts of 
petitioner General Pervez  Musharraf and the review petitions were CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  6
dismissed ( Tika Iqbal Muhammad Khan v. General Pervez 
Musharraf, Chief of Army Staff, Rawalpindi and 2 others  (PLD 
2008 SC 615) . Meanwhile , elections were held in the country as a 
result of which Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani became Prime Minister of 
Pakistan who in his first speech before the Parli ament before 
taking Oath of office announced the release of all the Judges who 
had been detained. After a few days, petitioner General Pervez  
Musharraf resigned. On account of the persistent demand of Bar 
Associations and general public, Judges who were prevented from 
working,  on account of Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007 
including the then Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr. Justice Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry had to be restored. After restoration  of 
Chief Justice of Pakistan and other Judges , the actions of General 
Pervez  Musharraf and the appointment of Judges after 3rd of 
November, 2007 came under challenge and this Court pronounced 
the judgment in Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of 
Pakistan (Short order at PLD 2009 SC 789 and detailed reason s at 
PLD 2009 SC 879) which is sought to be review ed through these 
review petition s.  
9. Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of these 
petitions made the following submissions: - 
Raja Muhammad Ibrahim Satti, ASC  
10. The judgment dated 31.7.2009 passed in Const. 
Petition Nos. 9 and 8/2009 is void , per-incurium and not binding 
as far as the petitioner namely General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf is 
concerned inter alia for the  following  reasons : 
a. Admittedly General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf was not a 
party in either  of the Constitution Petitions and no relief 
had been sought against him.  CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  7
 
b. Right to "access to justice to all" is a well recognized 
inviolable right under Article 9 of Constitution and this 
include s right to an impartial Court or Tribunal and this 
fundamental right has not been adhered to.  
 
c. There was no proper lis before this Court while passing 
judgment of 31.7.2009 as the events and actions of 3rd 
November 2007 and Proclamation of Emergency etc were 
not directly under challenge.  
 
d. The Constituti on Petitions under Article 184(3) were not 
competent and even otherwise this jurisdiction does not 
extend to set aside a judgment of the Supreme Court.  
 
e. This Court has wrongly assumed the jurisdiction to 
adjudicate the events and acts of 3rd November, 2 007 as 
the same stood validated by 7 Members Bench of 
Supreme Court in Tikka Iqbal Khan's case (PLD 2008 SC 
178) and subsequent review of Tikka Iqbal Khan's case 
was dismissed by 14 Members Bench (PLD2008 SC 615).  
f. The basic and fundamental principle of  audi alteram 
partem (that no one shall be condemned unheard) ha d 
totally been violated and all the persons including 
petitioner General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf were 
condemned unheard.  
g. The judgment of 31.7.2009 is void on the sole ground of 
bias as admi ttedly the petitioner and Mr. Justice Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry, H CJP were in fact earlier having 
very good relation s but later on turned into adversaries 
and both were at dagger s drawn . They were litigating 
against each other and the petitioner also file d a 
Reference against Mr. J ustice Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudh ry, HCJ P and on 3rd November 2007 the 
Emergency was imposed for the second time to get rid of 
Mr. J ustice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudh ry and some 
member s of Judiciary . As such the bias and enmity 
betwee n Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and 
General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf  was obvious and CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  8
therefore, Mr. J ustice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudh ry, 
CJP was disqualified to hear and decide the matter 
concerning him. More so when earlier on he had also 
recused hi mself to hear cases of General (Retd) Pervez 
Musharaf on 18.10.2007 and thereafter he himself 
entertained, constituted the Bench and presided over the 
Bench and decided the matter through the judgment of 
31.7.2009 against General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf 
against whom he was totally bias ed and inimical and 
thus the judgment is a nullity on the basis of bias .  
h. It is a recognized principle of law and jurisprudence that 
justice is not only to be done but the same should 
manifestly be seen to be done . In the ju dgment under 
review, this basic principle of administration of justice is 
not reflected.  
i Very important questions of Constitutional interpretation 
were involved and both the Attorney General and 
Federation had failed in their duty to assist the Court 
and defend the case for which they were under legal and 
lawful obligation but they avoided the same for political 
reasons and even so this Court was bound to correctly 
interpret the Constitution and apply the law on the 
subject which has not been done in the  instant case and 
the entire case has been decided before obtaining the 
view point s of the person s who were to be affected by the 
judgment.  
j. At one stage this Court had considered to issue a notice 
to the petitioner without adding him as a party or getti ng 
amended Constitution Petitions and just as a formality 
sent a Notice to the petitioner at his residence at Chak 
Shahzad, Islamabad whereas it was known to everybody 
that General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf was abroad and was 
being subjected to life threats a nd could not come to 
Pakistan. The s ervant at petitioner's residence at Chak 
Shahzad refused to receive the notice and he informed 
the Process Server that General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf 
was abroad and thereafter no step had been taken for CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  9
proper service of  the petitioner and the judgment was 
announced even without declaring ex -parte proceedings 
and thus the judgment is per incurium, void and coram 
non judice as there was no view point of the other side 
and the entire judgment was based on the arguments of 
the petitioners.  
k. The judgment passed and the findings recorded qua 
General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf are not sustainable in 
the eyes of law as the factual controversies have been 
decided in Constitutional jurisdiction which are against 
law and that too with out any opportunity of rebuttal 
afforded to the petitioner.  
l. The judgment is also to some extent self -contradictory as 
the binding and operative judgment is contained in a 
Short Order reported as Sindh High Court Bar 
Association v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 789). 
The Short Order does not speak of any act of abrogation 
or subversion of the Constitution or prosecution of 
General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf for acts and events of 3rd 
November 2007 rather this Hon'ble Court simply 
declared those actions as unconstitutional and rightly so. 
Because every violation of the Constitution is neither 
High Treason nor subversion or abrogation of the 
Constitution as held in Shar af Faridi's case and also as 
reflected under Article 45 of the Constitution.  
m. On the b asis of the short order passed in the Sindh High 
Court Bar Supra, C.P. No. 454/2009 was filed in Sindh 
High Court and a Division Bench of the said Court 
comprising of two Hon'ble Judges including the Hon'ble 
Chief Justice of High Court of Sindh who was a m ember 
of the 14 -member Bench in Sindh High Court Bar Supra 
disposed of the said constitution petition with following 
observations: - 
"However we are also conscious of the fact that 
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of Pakistan in the 
judgment dated 31.7.2009 in Con stitution Petition 
No.8 and 9/2009 has not issued any direction for 
prosecution of General (Retd) Pervez Musharaf 
hence we restrained ourselves from doing. CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  10
Therefore, it should be appropriate for the 
petitioner to approach and make such prayer 
before the S upreme Court of Pakistan and seek 
direction in this respect".  
 
 
n. Even otherwise it was earlier held by a five Members 
Bench of the Supreme Court that the Supreme Court had 
not issued any direction for prosecution of the petitioner 
for High Treason becaus e it is within the domain of the 
Federal Government (Moulvi Iqbal Haider v. Federation of 
Pakistan 2013 SCMR 1683).  
o. It is also not out of place to mention that though the 
judgment in Sindh High Court Bar Supra was 
announced on 31.7.2009 but even the pet itioner in 
Constitution Petition Nos. 8 and 9/2009 did not file any 
review petition for prosecution of General (Retd) Pervez 
Musharaf for High Treason. Another petition was filed by 
the Communist Party of Pakistan against about 627 
respondents including Ge nerals, Corp s Commanders, 
Chief of Air Force, Prime Minister, Cabinet, 
Parliamentarians and others in this respect but the same 
was not entertained by the office of Supreme Court. 
Moulvi Iqbal Haider filed CP. No. 2255/2010 which 
remained pending for about  two and half years but no 
order was passed, however on return of General (Retd) 
Pervez Musharaf the petition of Moulvi Iqbal Haider was 
heard. It was initially fixed before a two Member Bench 
but subsequently another Hon'ble Judge was included in 
the Benc h whereas the application was made for 
constitution of Full Court or a Larger Bench of 14 
Members (as the judgment of 31st July was passed by 14 
Members ) but Hon'ble Chief Justice did not agree to 
constitute Larger Bench or Full Court and ultimately 
culmin ated in the order dated 3.7.2013 and reported as 
(2013 SCMR 1683).  
p. The judgment needs to be reviewed if not set aside in toto 
as it also violates the doctrine of past and closed 
transaction and also the principle that the judgments of CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  11
Supreme court oper ate prospectively and not 
retrospectively.  
11. During the course of arguments, Raja Muhammad 
Ibrahim Satti admitted, on Court query, that petitioner General (R) 
Pervez Musharraf had a notice of the petition filed by Moulvi Iqbal 
Haider before the Sindh High Co urt through citation published in 
Daily Dawn and further that after dismissal of the said petition by 
the said Court Moulvi Iqbal Haider challenged the order before the 
Supreme Court in which General Musharraf was represented by 
him (Raja Muhammad Ibrahim Satti). The case is reported as 
Moulvi Iqbal Haider Vs. Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of 
Law & Justice (2013 SCMR 1683).  
12. The petitioner had proclaimed State of Emergency 
pursuant to a letter received from the then Prime Minister of 
Pakistan (lett er reproduced in PLD 2009 SC 879 supra at page 
1035 para 58). At this stage, the Court asked him as to whether 
the Prime Minister advised the President to act in violation of the 
Constitution to which the answer was no. The Court further asked 
him whether the Prime Minister had given any advice to impose 
State of Emergency or the petitioner acted in his own discretion, to 
which Mr. Satti replied that the petitioner acted in his own 
discretion. He referred to the judgment of this Court in Tikka Iqbal 
Muhamma d Khan Vs. General Pervez Musharraf (PLD 2008 SC 
178) to contend that in the said judgment this Court had validated 
the imposition of state of emergency and all orders passed by the 
petitioner. He added that one of the factors mentioned by the 
Prime Minist er in his letter for deteriorating law and order 
situation was the interference by the Courts. He submitted that in 
the afore -cited case PLD 2008 SC 178 supra some judges of this 
Court during hearing of the said case recused themselves on the 
ground that t hey had at one stage or the other released certain 
accused in terrorist cases but nevertheless they were invited to 
take oath by the then President. He in particular referred to that 
paragraph of the proclamation of emergency which specifically 
mentions th at the same was being done after deliberations in 
meetings with the Governors, Cabinet Ministers and the Corp s 
Commanders. The Court at this stage referred to Abdul Hameed CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  12
Dogar, former Judge/CJP Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 
SC 315 at page 321 para  8) wherein Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar 
who was made the Chief Justice after the imposition of the state of 
emergency admitted and regretted that he did not comply with the 
7 Member Bench’s order of this Court dated 3.11.2007.  
13. A three Member Bench passed th e order for 
proceedings against General Musharraf for ‘high treason’ and 
unless the judgment under challenge is reviewed, the Special 
Court / Tribunal constituted to try the petitioner is likely to be 
influenced by the observations made therein. He referre d to 
Shoukat Ali Dogar Vs. Ghulam Qasim Khan Khakwani (PLD 1994 
SC 281) and Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmad ( AIR 1945 PC 18 ) to 
contend that the Court should not interfere in the function of the 
investigating agency. He referred to Sharf Faridi v. The Federa tion 
of Islamic Republic of Pakistan through Prime Minister of Pakistan 
and another  (PLD 1989 Karachi  404) and Government of Sindh Vs. 
Sharaf Faridi (PLD 1994 SC 105) to argue that every violation of 
the Constitution does not amount to ‘high treason’. He a dded that 
the petitioner in his capacity as President could be impeached 
under Article 47 of the Constitution but when asked he admitted 
that the order was passed by the petitioner in his capacity as Chief 
of Army Staff and not as President. He referred to  Article 12 to 
contend that the law has to have prospective effect and not 
retrospective and Article 6 as presently worded can not be applied 
retrospectively. He lastly contended that in view of Article 270AA of 
the Constitution, PCO 2002 and 2007 are on s ame footing.  
 
Syed Sharif ud Din Pirzada , Sr. ASC  
14. Mr. Sharif ud Din Pirzada, learned Sr. ASC submitted 
that the judgment under review stands vitiated on account of 
personal bias that the former Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr. Justice 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudh ry had against the petitioner since 
petitioner had filed a Reference  against him and had also imposed 
state of emergency on account of which he was rendered 
dysfunctional . He further contended that the salutary principles  of CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  13
due process and right to fair t rial have been violated. Learned 
counsel relied on the following case law on question of bias: - 
i) Matlub Hussain v. Gaman with others and the Crown  
(PLD 1951 FC 115).  
 
 ii) Asif Ali Zardari Vs. The State  (PLD 2001 SC 568  at 
 page 587 ), 
 
iii) All Pakistan New spapers Society Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 1 at page 58, para 55)  
 
iv) AWG Group Ltd and another v. Morrison and another  
(2006 (1) All ER 967 at page 971)  
 
v) Anwar and another v. The Crown  (1955 FC 185 at 227 
and 233)  
 
 vi) Zulfikar Ali Bhut to Vs. State  (1977 SCMR 514)  
 
15. Responding to a Court query as to whether the 
principle of severance can be applied in this case to which his reply 
was that it cannot be applied in the present case because the 
former Chief Justice was in a commanding positio n and he could 
influence the other Judges . He referred to Bangalore principles 
reproduced in Shim on Shetreet’s book “Culture of Judicial 
Independence”  at page 598 . The Court confronted him with the law 
laid down by this Court in Nadeem Ahmed Vs. Federation  of 
Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 1062) wherein it was inter alia  held that if 
one member is disqualified , this would not vitiate the judgment 
given by the Court.  
16. Having considered the submission s m ade, the 
questions which crop up for consideration in these review petitions 
mainly are as follows: - 
(i) Whether there are grounds tenable in law to condone 
delay of 1576  days in filing these petitions;  CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  14
(ii) Whether while passing the judgment under challenge, 
petitioner was not issued any notice and the judgment 
under challenge ca n be interfered with on the ground that 
petitioner was condemned unheard;  
(iii) Whether the judgment under challenge is reflective of an 
element of bias which can be considered as a ground in 
review jurisdiction to ensure substantive justice;  
(iv) Whether the conclus ion drawn and the findings rendered 
in the judgment review of which is sought are patently 
incorrect and something obvious has been overlooked by 
the Court which, if considered, would warrant review of 
the said judgment;  
(v) Whether the error in the judgment is so apparent and 
material that if the same had been brought to the notice 
of this Court before the pronouncement of the judgment, 
a different c onclusion could have been drawn; and  
(vi) Whether the judgment under challenge has the effect of 
giving retrospectiv e effect to Article 6 ? 
 
Q. No.1   Whether there are grounds tenable in law 
to condone delay of 1576 days in filing 
these petitions;  
 
 
17. This petition is barred by 1576 days and in the 
application (Civil Misc. Application No. 8164 of 2013) filed by 
petitioner  for condonation of delay , the grounds pressed into 
service are : 
1. That the petitioner who was President of Pakistan 
was compelled by the circumstances to resign the 
office and thereafter, he left for abroad as he was 
having security threats to his life by T alibans and 
from many others quarters and he was not in a CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  15
position to come to Pakistan and file the review 
petition.  
2. That it was in March 2013 when the petitioner 
landed in Pakistan and by that time Mr. Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry, Chief Justice of Pakistan  
was Head of Judiciary who was having  personal 
enmity, bias and grudge against the petition er 
and the petitioner was not expecting any justice 
as long as he was in office, and so is evident 
when he knocked at the door of various High 
Court s for justice.  
3. That the case of petitioner squarely fall s within 
four corner of the case of Mian Muhammad 
Nawaz Sharif where he filed a Crl. Appeal 
against his conviction after about 9 years but that 
delay was condoned in similar situation and the 
case of the petitioner is  even more plausible as if 
the judgment is not reviewed the same is to be 
used against him in High Treason against which 
entails the penalty of death or life imprisonment 
and, therefore, the judgment of Mian Muhammad 
Nawaz Sharif reported in PLD 2009 SC 81 4 is 
fully applicable and also the case of 
disqualification of Mian Muhammad Nawaz 
Sharif reported as PLD 2009 SC 531 is relevant 
for condonation of delay.  
4. That now after superannuation of Mr. Justice 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, Chief Justice of 
Pakistan t he petitioner after obtaining the 
certified copy and engaging the counsel is filing 
the instant review petition without any delay and 
as such the delay cause d in filing of the review 
petition was beyond the control of the petitioner 
and thus there is suffi cient cause for condonation 
of delay.”  
 
 
18. In support of the application , learned counsel 
contended that since the petitioner had filed a Reference against 
the then Chief Justice of Pakistan Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry who presided over the Bench (which delivered the 
judgment under review ) petitioner apprehended utter bias from 
him and therefore as long as he remained Chief Justice, he did not 
file a review petition. The argument is not a sufficient grou nd in 
law to condone the delay. Because, first he could have appear ed 
during hearing of the said case and asked that Mr. Justice Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry should not hear the case; second even after CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  16
the pronouncement of the judgment he could file review petition 
and could have requested the Court th at the then Chief Justice 
who presided over the Bench should not hear the review petition 
and may recuse himself; and third in the judgment under 
consideration despite the finding that the imposition of State of 
Emergency by Chief of Army Staff was unconst itutional and void, 
the Court  did not direct the trial of the petitioner  under Article 6 of 
the Constitution ; if there was bias there could have been directions 
to that effect ; and fourth the Bench which disposed of the petition 
in view of the undertaking given by the Federal Government that it 
shall proceed against the petitioner under Article 6 (in C.P. No. 
2255 of 2010 reported at 2013 SCMR 1683 ) was not presided over 
by the then Chief Justic e against whom bias is alleged.  
19. The contention that the delay b e condoned since the 
petitioner was not heard or that the judgment on that count is void 
ab initio  and that no limitation runs against a void order is not 
tenable because even against a void order, limitation would run 
and would be computed from the date o f knowledge. In 
Muhammad Raz Khan v. Government of NWFP  (PLD 1997 SC 397), 
this Court specifically adverted to the question whether a party can 
be extended indulgence which pleads that the order was not 
challenged in time as it was void. The Court repelled  the argument 
and held: - 
“Principle of justice and fair play does not help 
those who were extraordinary negligent in 
asserting their right and despite becoming aware 
about alleged void order adverse to their interest 
remain in deep slumber. Therefore, acco rding to 
our considered opinion, facility regarding 
extension of time for challenging orders cannot be 
legitimately stretched to any length of 
unreason able period at the whims, choices or 
sweet will of affected party. Thus, order termed CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  17
as nullity or void could at best be assailed by 
computing period of limitation when he factually 
came to know about the same. When a person 
presumes that adverse order is a nullity or totally 
devoid of lawful authority and ignores it beyond 
the period specified by law of lim itation, then he 
does so at his own risk. Therefore, in all fairness 
terminus a quo will have to be fixed, the date of 
knowledge of alleged void order; which too must 
be independently established on sound basis. In 
this behalf we derive strength from the 
observations contained in PLD 1975 Baghdad -ul-
Jadid 29 (Sayed Sajid Ali v. Sayed Wajid Ali) and 
1978 SCMR 367 (S. Sharif Ahmad Hashmi v. 
Chairman, Screening Committee)."  
 
 
20. In Qaisar Mushtaq Ahmad v. Controller of 
Examinations  (PLD 2011 SC 174), this Court w hile dismissing an 
appeal which was barred by 14 days held as follows: - 
“The fact that the applicant himself for 
unexplained reasons allowed his appeal to 
become time barred, thus filed the C.P.L.A., in 
which his request for the conversion etc. was 
specifi cally disallowed, can by no stretch of any 
factual or legal imagination be considered a 
ground for the condonation of delay. We are not 
convinced, if the case of the applicant is covered 
by the cases reported as Zulfiqar and others v. 
Shahdat  Khan (PLD 200 7 SC 582) as in that case 
the Court for certain reasons allowed the 
conversion of C.P.L.A. into an appeal or treated 
alike, whereas in the present matter the situation 
is converse, due to the order dated 9 -5-2005 
whereby the Court declined the request of 
conversion, rather it was observed that the direct 
appeal so initiated by the applicant shall be 
subject to all just exceptions (emphasis supplied). 
This order as mentioned above has attained 
finality, therefore it cannot be directly or indirectly 
revisited . The question thus now to be resolved is 
not about the conversion of the C.P.L.A. into an 
appeal or vis -a-viz, but whether for the un -
disclosed, unexplained and abstract reasons, 
which the applicant still has described in this 
application as beyond his co ntrol (emphasis 
supplied), the delay can be condoned. In my 
considered view, this in the given circumstances 
of the case is not permissible, as it shall amount 
in an indirect manner, to provide vantage and 
gain to the delinquent party for its unexplained 
inaction in approaching this Court in proper 
remedy, which he could not achieve in the earlier CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  18
C.P.L.A., (see order dated 9 -5-2005), over the 
other side which has earned a right for such 
lapse of the applicant; the other judgment 
reported as Chairman, N. -W.F.P. Forest 
Development Corporation and others v. Khurshid 
Anwar Khan and others (1992 SCMR 1202) cited 
by the applicant's counsel is also inapt to the 
present case and is distinguishable on its own 
facts.”  
 
 
21. In Messrs Blue Star Spinning Mills v. Collector  of Sales 
Tax (2013 SCMR 587) , this Court clearly  held that the rule that no 
limitation runs against a void order is not an inflexible rule that a 
party cannot sleep over to challenge such an order; that it is bound 
to do so within the stipulated/prescribe d period of limitation from 
the date of knowledge before the appropriate forum. It has never 
been petitioner ’s plea that he did not have the knowledge of the 
impugned judgment. Even otherwise it has been admitted by 
petitioner’s learned counsel that one Ma ulvi Iqbal Haider had filed 
a constitution petition bearing No. 454 of 2010 wherein he had 
sought trial of the petitioner in view of the judgment of this Court 
in Sindh High Court Bar  Supra . But the said petition was disposed 
of with a direction that the p etitioner should approach this Court. 
Maulvi Iqbal Haider thereafter filed Civil Petition No. 2255 of 2010 
before this Court. It remained pending for 2½ years and no order 
was passed for trial of the petitioner and eventually on 3.7.2013 a 
Bench of three J udges disposed of the petition  whereafter  Special 
Tribunal was constituted to try the petitioner. For two to three 
years, the question of petitioner’s trial in the light of the judgment 
of this Court in Sindh High Court Bar  Supra  remained pending 
either before the High Court of Sindh or before this Court but 
petitioner never filed any application for review of the judgment. 
This conduct is reflective of an element of contumacy  which does CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  19
not warrant indulgence in review jurisdiction.  
22. The reliance of learne d counsel for the petition er on  
two judgments of this Court wherein limitation of many years was 
condoned would be of no avail as the facts and circumstances of 
those cases are distinct. In Federation of Pakistan v. Mia n 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif  (PLD 2009 SC 644), petitioner 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif had sought review of a three Member 
judgment of this Court whereby he was disqualified to contest the 
elections  without hearing him . While condoning the delay  in filing 
the review petitions , the Court had taken note o f the 
circumstances under which initially the said review petitioner  was 
restrained from returning to  this country and thereafter on 
account of removal of Judges of the Supreme Court and High 
Courts pursuant to imposition of State of Emergency 2007, he and 
those of his party men who were contesting General Elections of 
2008 had made a public Oath  that they would  not appear before 
the Supreme Court till the lawful judiciary was restored. The Court 
in the said judgment observed: - 
“The case of the petitioners who happen to be real 
brothers is that as leaders of one of the main stream 
political parties i.e. Pakistan Muslim League (N), they had 
taken a public stand against the Imposition of "State of 
Emergency" on 3rd of November, 2007 by General Pervez 
Musharraf , the arbitrary and unconstitutional removal of 
judges of the superior courts and were party to a public 
and collective oath taken by all the candidates of their 
party in the General Elections held in February, 2008 that 
if elected, they would struggle for  the restoration of 
superior judiciary and till then they had decided to 
abstain from appearing before the court then constituted. 
This stand it was contended was neither directed against 
the judiciary as an institution nor any particular judge 
was targete d but it was more an effort to save the 
Constitution and the institution of judiciary which is the 
third most important organ of the State.  (Emphasis is 
supplied).  
  
24. While rendering the judgments under review, the 
Court did not have the benefit of hear ing the petitioners 
on account of which their stance could not be appreciated. CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  20
The petitioners in their letter to the Chief Election 
Commissioner and  in their public statements had 
expressed great anguish over the imposition of the "State 
of Emergency", th e unconstitutional removal of judges and 
induction of judges through the Provisional Constitutional 
Order. In all fairness, the Court which passed the 
judgment under review, shared this anguish on moral 
plane but opted a course which in their perception wa s in 
institutional interest. In Para -29 of the judgment  (in case 
of Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif) while referring to the 
"Imposition of State of Emergency" on 3rd of November, 
2007 and the issuance of Provisional Constitutional Order 
under which the judges w ere asked to take the oath, it 
was observed, " ……… The Judges who were offered and 
invited to take oath were in an enigma as to take or to refuse 
the oath. In case of refusal, the judicial institution was to 
suffer greatest harm and its fabric which was wov en in a 
period of more than 150 years, was to collapse completely. In 
the event of refusal to take the oath, it was expected that this 
judicial institution might be occupied by such persons who 
had no knowledge and expertise of delivering justice. There 
were many other considerations also in their mind. To save 
the judicial institution, to create hindrance and to prevent the 
spreading of chaos in the country, for the better interest of 
this institution and for the whole betterment of the citizens of 
Pakista n, it was decided that the offer of oath might not be 
declined."  
  
25. Notwithstanding the sharing of moral perception, the 
Court repelled the reasons for non -appearance on the ground 
that the petitioners were by implication attributing personal 
bias to th e judges. It was observed that Judges "are 
assessors of their own conscience, as they knew that they 
are answerable to the Allah Almighty. Why they should feel 
bias in favour of any one? When they are not involved in any 
referred to incident, which has alr eady become a past and 
closed transaction. There are no reasons and grounds to 
possess the bias against petitioners and their candidate." 
However, on a deeper appreciation of the stance taken and 
after hearing their learned counsel, it has been found by us  
that petitioners' non -appearance was not attributable to a 
personal bias against the Court then constituted but on 
account of a public stand that they had taken before entering 
the process of elections i.e. the collective oath which they and 
all the party  candidates had taken on the issues relating to 
the Imposition of "State of Emergency" on 3rd of November, 
2007 and a resolve to launch a movement for the restoration 
of superior judiciary. The restoration of the Hon'ble Chief 
Justice of Pakistan and other  judges who were deposed on 
the imposition of "State of Emergency" and the immediate 
appearance of the petitioners by way of filing these review 
petitions indicate that the stance taken was based on a 
certain moral ground s (sic)  which stood vindicated. The  same 
cannot be dubbed as either contumacious or reflective of 
acquiescence to warrant the impugned findings.  
  
26. There is yet another aspect of the matter. Notice was 
issued to the petitioner Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif (in 
Civil Petition No.905 of 200 8) filed by Khuram Shah but the 
review petitioner did not appear. The Court heard the 
respondent -petitioner and others at some length and after CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  21
conclusion of arguments, the same day on 25 -2-2009 
converted the civil petition into appeal and allowed it which , 
as was candidly argued by learned Attorney General, is not 
in consonance with Order XIII Rule 6, Order XIV, Rule 2 and 
Order XVI, Rule I of the Supreme Court Rules which mandate 
as under: -- 
  
"------------------------------  
------------------------------ - 
-------------------------------  
-------------------------------  
  
Order XIV, Rule 2 .--Where an appeal has 
been admitted by an order of this Court, the 
Registrar shall notify the respondents of the 
order of this Court granting leave to appeal, 
and shall a lso transmit a certified copy of the 
order to the Registrar of the High Court 
concerned.  
  
Order XVI, Rule 1 .--The respondent shall 
enter an appearance within 30 days of the 
receipt of notice from the Registrar regarding 
grant of leave to appeal to the app ellant, 
under Rule 2, Order XIV, but he may enter an 
appearance at any time before the hearing of 
the appeal on such terms as the Court may 
deem fit ." 
  
27. We agree with learned Attorney General for Pakistan that after 
the grant of leave, Order XVI Rule  I provides 30 days' time for the 
respondent to appear. In the instant cases, however, instead of 
waiting for 30 days to enable the petitioner/respondent to appeal, 
the Court allowed the appeal immediately when the petition was 
converted into appeal.  
 
28. No  one should be condemned unheard is an old adage ever 
since the advent of judicial dispensation. In Commissioner of 
Income Tax, East Pakistan v. Syeedur Rehman (PLD 1964 SC 
410), this Court went to the extent of classifying an order passed 
without hearing as a void order. In the afore -referred 
circumstances, we are of the view that non - hearing of petitioners 
is an error on the face of record meriting interference in review 
jurisdiction.”  
 
 
23. Again i n Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. the State  (PLD 
2009 SC 814), the Court condoned the delay in filing criminal 
petition for leave to appeal by observing as follows: - 
16. The period of delay of more than eight years in filing 
the present petition for leave to appeal can be broadly 
divided in two phases; the first is the pe titioner's absence 
from the country for about seven years and the second is 
his abstinence from approaching this Court for almost a 
year and a half after his return. For the purpose of 
condonation of delay for the first phase, the circumstances CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  22
under which  the petitioner left the country are not as 
relevant as the resolution of the issue whether the 
petitioner was prevented from returning to the country. It 
has been the consistent stand of the petitioner that despite 
efforts he had not been allowed to retur n to Pakistan. This 
stand is substantiated by the judgment pronounced by this 
Court in the case of Pakistan Muslim League (N) v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others (PLD 2007 SC 642) (ibid) 
and the ensuing events. It was declared that the petitioner 
was enti tled to enter and remain in Pakistan and that no 
hurdle or obstruction was to be created by any authority to 
prevent the petitioner's return. Pursuant to the said 
direction, the petitioner embarked on a return journey to 
Pakistan and took a flight from Lon don to Islamabad. 
However, after landing at Islamabad, he was not allowed 
to leave the airport and was sent out of the country. In 
view of violation of the order of this Court, an application 
for contempt of Court was filed before this Court. A similar 
abortive attempt was earlier made in the year 2004 by the 
petitioner's brother, Mian Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif, and 
he was not allowed to leave the airport and put  on a flight 
destined for overseas. The above facts clearly demonstrate 
that the petitioner was pr evented from returning to 
Pakistan.  
  
17. The petitioner returned to the country on 27.11.2007 
but did not file the petition for leave to appeal until 
28.4.2009. The explanation for this delay is mentioned in 
Paras  J, K and L of the application of condonat ion of delay 
(Cr. Misc. A. No. 168 of 2009)  w h i c h  are reproduced as 
under: -- 
  
"(j) That it is a matter of record that the petitioner 
had, on his return to Pakistan, publicly pledged, 
at the very outset, neither to accept nor to condone 
the aforesaid const itutional deviation whereby, 
inter alia, 63 hon'ble Judges of the Superior 
Courts had been forcibly restrained from 
continuing to perform their judicial functions. It 
was because  of this reason that all the 
candidates  of the Pakistan Muslim League (N) 
contesting General Election 2008, pledged on oath 
to restore the judiciary to pre November 3, 2007 
position, and this ceremony of collective oath of 
Pakistan Muslim League (N) candidate was widely 
publicized and covered by the media. Moreover, 
the petitioner h ad repeatedly declared that he will 
not appear before the judges of the Superior 
Courts till the entire set  of judges who were 
illegally deposed on November 3, 2007, including 
the hon'ble Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry, were restored.  
  
(k) ----------------  
  
(l) That it was only on March 17, 2009 that, 
pursuant to a long and arduous struggle  of the 
lawyer's fraternity, as well as the indefatigable 
efforts made by, inter alia, the Pakistan Muslim 
League (N), that the illegally and 
unconstitutional ly deposed judges have been 
restored to their original position with effect from 
pre November 3, 2007. there being no longer any 
constraint upon the petitioner for appearance CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  23
before the Hon'ble Judges, he has immediately 
initiated action for challenging th e Judgment 
passed by the Full Bench  of the Sindh High Court 
in the instant case."  
 
 
Admittedly there was no such restraint order against the petitioner 
to come to this country and file review petition. He has failed to 
show a cause or reason sufficient in law to condone such an 
inordinate delay. The petition merits dismissal on this short 
ground alone.  
 
Q. No. 2: Whether while passing the judgment under 
challenge, petitioner was not issued any notice 
and whether the judgment under challenge 
can be interfer ed with on the ground that 
petitioner was condemned unheard ; 
 
 
24. The principle of audi alteram partem  or that nobody 
should be condemned unheard is a time honored principle of 
natural justice . However, facts of each case have to be considered  
before delay ca n be condoned and this principle cannot be made 
an inflexible rule to give license to someone who knowing fully well 
that a lis is pending against him or that a judgment has been 
passed against him refuses to appear and when the judgment is 
passed fails to  challenge it in time. In the instant case, we note 
that the Court had issued a notice to petitioner on his available 
address in Islamabad and when from there it transpired that he 
was abroad , the notice was widely published and televised. In Para 
6 of the  judgment under challenge it has specifically been noted as 
follows: - 
“On 22.7.2009 a notice was issued to General 
Pervez Musharraf (Rtd.) on his available address 
intimating him about the proceedings in this case 
and 29.7.2009 as the date fixed therein be fore 
this Court. The Process Serving Officer reported 
on the same day that he had gone to the CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  24
residential place viz. C -1, B Park Road, Chak 
Shahzad, Islamabad where a person identifying 
himself as Muhammad Hussain son of Amir and 
that on former's offer the  latter refused to receive 
the notice. The factum of issuance of the afore -
referred notice was widely televised through 
National and International T.V. channels. Also, it 
was widely published in N ational and 
International print  media, but, on the date so 
fixed no one entered appearance.”  
 
 
25. Even otherwise, it has never been the case of the 
petitioner , not even in the body of this petition that he was not 
aware of the pendency of proceedings which culminated in the 
judgment of this Court in Sindh High Court B ar (Supra)  review of 
which is sought.  
Q. 3  Whether the judgment under challenge is 
reflective of an element of bias which can be 
considered as a ground in review jurisdiction to 
ensure substantive justice;  
 
 
26. The assertion  of bias against a Judge and whethe r he 
is disqualified to hear a case on that ground has been a subject of 
judicial review in several cases. In Federation of Pakistan v. 
Muhammad Akram Shaikh  (PLD 1989 SC 689), this Court having 
considered the precedent case law, laid down following princi ples 
which the Court may keep in mind while deciding the question of 
bias:- 
“(i) It is fundamental principle that in the absence 
of statutory authority or consensual agreement or 
the operation of necessity, no man can be Judge 
in his own cause.  
(ii) A Judg e who would otherwise be disqualified 
may act in a case of necessity where no other 
Judge has jurisdiction. That the 'necessity' rule is 
a part of the common law is undoubted.  
(iii) The rule of disqualification must yield to the 
demands of necessity, and a  Judge or an officer 
exercising judicial functions may act in a CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  25
proceeding wherein he is disqualified even by 
interest, relationship or the like, if his jurisdiction 
is exclusive and there is no legal provision for 
calling in a substitute, so that his refu sal to act 
would destroy the only tribunal in which relief 
could be had and thus prevent a termination of 
the proceeding.  
(iv) An adjudicator who is subject to 
disqualification at common law may be required 
to sit if there is no other competent tribunal or  if a 
quorum cannot be formed without him. Here the 
doctrine of necessity is applied to prevent a 
failure of justice. So, if proceedings were brought 
against all the superior Judges, they would have 
to sit as Judges in their own cause. Similarly, a 
Judge m ay be obliged to hear a case in which he 
has a pecuniary interest.”  
27. In Gullapalli Negeswararao etc v. The State of Andhra 
Pradesh and others  (AIR 1959 SC 1376) and Ranjit Thakur v. 
Union of India and others  (AIR 1987 SC 2386), the question of bias 
was also  considered. In the former judgment, it was held that “ no 
man shall be a judge in his own cause; justice should not only be 
done but manifestly and undoubtedly see n to be done; if a member 
of a judicial body is subject to a bias (whether financial or other ) in 
favour of, or against, any party to a dispute, or is in such a position 
that a bias be assumed to exist, he ought not take part in the 
decision or sit on the tribunal”.  While in the latter judgment test of 
likelihood of bias was noted as follows: - 
“…tests of the likelihood of bias what is relevant 
is the reasonableness of the apprehension in that 
regard in the mind of the party. The proper 
approach for the Judge is not to look at his own 
mind and ask himself, however, honestly, “am I 
biased?”; but to l ook at the mind of the party 
before him…”  
 
 
28. In Asif Ali Zardari Vs. The State  (PLD 2001 SC 568) , 
the facts are distinguishable . Facts in brief were that the Chief 
Ehtesaab Commissioner filed a reference in the Lahore High Court, CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  26
Lahore against Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto ex -Prime Minister of 
Pakistan and her husband Asif Ali Zardari and some other officials 
inter alia  on the ground that in their authority as holders of public 
office in collusion with each other and with M/s Societe General  
De Surveillance SA  ("SGS") as well as Jens Schlegelmilch , they 
awarded a contract for shipment inspection to M/s SGS after 
accepting illegal gratification in the form of kickbacks and 
commissions resulting in a huge loss to the public exchequer. Vide 
a short order dated 15.4. 1999 both Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto, 
former Prime Minister and Asif Ali Zardari were convicted and 
sentenced to various terms. This conviction was challenged in 
appeal which was allowed by this Court, the convictions were set 
aside and the case was remanded for de novo  trial mainly on the 
ground of bias on the part of the bench headed by Malik 
Muhammad  Qayyum, J. The Court while alluding to the question 
of bias observed as under: - 
 “25. No doubt, the Judges of the Superior Courts are 
blessed with a judicial  conscience  but question nonetheless 
is whether a particular Judge of the Subordinate or the 
Superior Judiciary against whom the allegation of bias is 
alleged is possessed of judicial conscience. This litmus test is  
indeed very difficult but certainly not impossible. The 
circumstances of a particular case wherein bias of a Judge is 
alleged would  themselves speak volumes for the same. In 
other words, the principle  is well settled that a Judge of the 
Superior Court is a keeper of his own consci ence and it is for 
him to decide to hear or not to hear a matter before him.  
However, in the present case we are not inclined to adhere to 
the said settled principle because bias is floating on the 
surface of the record.”  
 
29. The Court in arriving at the conclusion quoted in the 
preceding paragraph had considered the circumstantial and 
documentary evidence which comprised of issuance of red 
passport to the head of the Ehtesab Court (who was not otherwise 
entitled) on the direction of Senator Saif ur Rehman who was CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  27
incharge of the Ehtesab cell; the transfer of Ehtesab Reference 
from Principal Seat at Lahore to Rawalpindi  Bench of the Lahore 
High Court ; the order of the then Chief Justice, Lahore High Court  
to send the same judge of the Lahore High Court  to Rawalpindi 
who was hearing the case at Lahore; the fact that the accused 
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto  was not even examined during trial; the 
appointment of Commission  comprising of the Registrar, Lahore 
High Court to visit Switzerland and ascertain the genuineness and 
authentici ty of certain documents; the manner in which the 
Commission conducted itself ; the production of audio tapes and 
their transcripts in proof of the allegation that the learned judge s 
who convicted the accused had been pressurized and forced by the 
authoritie s in power to oust the appellant s from the arena of 
politics by securing their conviction to hold public office. In the 
case in hand, however, it has never been the case of the petitioner 
that the then Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry ha d 
done any overt act which could warrant an inference that he was 
inimical towards him rather it is petitioner’s case that they were on 
good terms till filing of the reference before the Supreme Judicial 
Council against the said Chief Justice which was challenged by 
him and the same was set aside by a 13-Member Bench of this 
Court against which petitioner never filed any review application 
rather accepted it. As a matter of fact he welcomed the judgment. 
However, a few weeks after the restoration of the former Chief 
Justice, petitioner imposed state of emergency; issued various 
presidential orders and after prescribing a new oath those Judges 
who did not take the oath were stopped from working  which 
included the said former Chief Justice. The events which followed CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  28
and the launching of the people s’ movement leading to the 
restoration of the then Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry on 16.3.2009 have already been narrated above. The 
judgment sought to be reviewed  in the afore -referred 
circumstances does not reflect an y personal bias on his part. First, 
because admittedly after the setting aside of the Presidential 
Reference and restoration of the former Chief Justice when the 
case of General (R) Pervez Musharraf’s disqualification to contest 
the Presidential elections while in Army uniform (as Chief of Army 
Staff) was taken up , the said former Chief Justice constituted a 
Bench and did not include  himself as a member of the said Bench. 
Second, petitioner’s counsel has not referred to any case in which 
after his reinstate ment for the second time on 24.3.2009 the then 
Chief Justice  passed any adverse order against the person of the 
petitioner. Even in the judgment under review, the Bench headed 
by him  did not direct trial of petitioner under Article 6 of the 
Constitution an d in fact this is one of the grounds to seek review 
that though the Bench which delivered the judgment in Sindh High 
Court Bar Association’s case did not direct trial but a 3 Members 
Bench in Moulvi Iqbal Haider vs. Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary  M/o Law and Justice  (2013 SCMR 1683)  directed trial 
under Article 6 of the Constitution.  
30. This brings us to questions No. (iv) and (v) which we 
propose to deal jointly. These are as follows: - 
(iv) Whether the conclusion drawn and the findings rendered in 
the j udgment review of which is sought are patently 
incorrect and something obvious has been overlooked by 
the Court which, if considered, would warrant review of the 
said judgment; and  
(v) Whether the error in the judgment is so apparent and 
material that if the s ame had been brought to the notice of CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  29
this Court before the pronouncement of the judgment, a 
different conclusion could have been drawn?  
 
31. For a proper appreciation of the afore -referred two 
issues, it would be pertinent to first examine the nature of revie w 
jurisdiction. Article 188 of the Constitution provides that subject to 
the provisions of any act of the Parliament and any rules framed by 
the Supreme Court , to review any judgment pro nounced or any 
order made by it;  Order XXVI, rule 1 of the Supreme Cou rt Rules 
lays down that subject to law and practice of this Court, the  Court 
may review its judgment/ order in civil proceeding s on ground s 
similar to those mentioned in Order XLVII, rule 1 of C.P.C. and any 
criminal proceeding on the ground of an error app arent on the face 
of the record. Order XLVII of C.P.C. stipulates that a party may 
apply for review if it is aggrieved by the orders or decrees, or 
decisions mentioned in sub clauses (a), (b), (c) of rule 1 on three 
grounds namely, discovery of new and imp ortant matter or 
evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within 
its knowledge or could not be produced by it at the time when the 
decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake 
or error apparent on the face of the record , or for any other 
sufficient reason.  
32. The scope of review jurisdiction came up for 
consideration before this Court in Lt. Col. Nawabzada Muhammad 
Amir Khan v. The Controller of Estate Duty, Government of 
Pakistan, Karachi and others  (PLD 1962 SC 335),  and this Court 
speaking through its Chief Justice Mr. Justice Cornelius as he 
then was observed as follows: - 
“For the present purpose, the emphasis should, in 
my opinion, be laid upon the consideration that, CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  30
for the doing of "complete justice", the Supreme 
Court is vested with full power, and I can see no 
reason why the exercise of that full power should 
be applicable only in respect of a matter coming 
up before the Supreme Court in the form of a 
decision by a High Court or some subordinate 
Court. I can see no reason why that purpose, in 
its full scope, should not also be applicable for the 
purpose of reviewing a judgment delivered by the 
Supreme Court itself provided that there be found 
a necessity within the meaning of the expression 
"complete justice" to exer cise that power. It must, 
of course, be borne in mind that by assumption, 
every judgment pronounced by the Court is a 
considered and solemn decision on all points 
arising out of the case, and further that every 
reason compels towards the grant of finality in 
favour of such judgments delivered by a Court 
which sits at the apex of the judicial system. 
Again, the expression "complete justice" is clearly 
not to be understood in any abstract or academic 
sense. So much is clear from the provision in 
Article 163 ( 3) that a written order is to be 
necessary for the purpose of carrying out the 
intention to dispense "complete justice". There 
must be a substantial or material effect to be 
produced upon the result of the case if, in the 
interests of "complete justice" th e Supreme Court 
undertakes to exercise its extraordinary power of 
review of one of its own considered judgments.  If 
there be found material irregularity, and yet there 
be no substantial injury consequent thereon, the 
exercise of the power of review to alte r the 
judgment would not necessarily be required. The 
irregularity must be of such a nature as converts 
the process from being one in aid of justice to a 
process that brings about injustice. Where, how -
ever, there is found to be something directed by 
the judgment of which review is sought which is 
in conflict with the Constitution or with a law of 
Pakistan, then  it would be the duty of the Court, 
unhesitatingly to amend the error. It is a duty 
which is enjoined upon every Judge of the Court 
by the solemn oa th which he takes when he 
enters upon his duties, viz., to" preserve, protect 
and defend the Co nstitution and laws of 
Pakistan ". 
 
33. In Abdul Ghaffar -Abdul Rehman v. Asghar Ali  (PLD 
1998 SC 363), this Court after having examined a plethora of case 
law both fr om Pakistan & India laid down principles which a Court 
should consider before exercising review jurisdiction:  CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  31
17. From the above case -law, the following 
principles of law are deductible:  
(i) That every judgment pronounced by the 
Supreme Court is presumed t o be a considered, 
solemn and final decision on all points arising out 
of the case;  
(ii) that if the Court has taken a conscious and 
deliberate decision on a point of fact or law, a 
review petition will not lie;  
(iii) that the fact the view canvassed in th e 
review petition is more reasonable than the view 
found favour with the Court in the 
judgment/order of which review is sought, is not 
sufficient to sustain a review petition;  
(iv) that simpliciter the factum that a material 
irregularity was committed woul d not be 
sufficient to review a judgment/order but if the 
material irregularity was of such a nature, as to 
convert the process from being one in aid of 
justice to a process of injustice, a review petition 
would lie;  
(v) that simpliciter the fact that the conclusion 
recorded in a judgment/order is wrong does not 
warrant review of the same but if the conclusion 
is wrong because something obvious has been 
overlooked by the Court or it has failed to 
consider some important aspect of the matter, a 
review petiti on would lie;  
(vi) that if the error in the judgment/order is so 
manifest and is floating on the surface, which is 
so material that had the same been noticed prior 
to the rendering of the judgment the conclusion 
would have been different, in such a case a 
review petition would lie;  
(vii) that the power of review cannot be invoked 
as a routine matter to rehear a case which has 
already been decided nor change of a counsel 
would warrant sustaining of a review petition, 
but the same can be pressed into service where a 
glaring omission or patent mistake has crept in 
earlier by judicial fallibility;  
(viii) that the Constitution does not place any 
restriction on the power of the Supreme Court to 
review its earlier decisions or even to depart from 
them nor the doctr ine stare decisis will come in its 
way so long as review is warranted in view of the 
significant impact on the fundamental rights of 
citizens or in the interest of public good; - 
(ix) that the Court is competent to review its 
judgment/order suo motu without  any formal 
application;  
(x) that under the Supreme Court Rules, it sits 
in divisions and not as a whole. Each Bench 
whether small or large exercises the same power 
vested in the Supreme Court and decisions 
rendered by the Benches irrespective of their siz e CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  32
are decisions of the Court having the same 
binding nature.”  
 
34. In Justice Sajjad Ali Shah v. Malik Asad Ali  (1999 
SCMR 640), the afore -referred view was reiterated.  
35. In Justice Khurshid Anwar Bhinder v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 483), this Court h eld: 
“A review is by its very nature not an appeal or a 
rehearing merely on the ground that one party or 
another conceives himself to be dissatisfied with 
the decision of the court, but that it should only be 
granted for some sufficient cause akin to those  
mentioned in Order XLVII, Rule 1 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, the provisions whereof 
incorporate the principles upon which a review 
was usually granted by Courts of law in England. 
The indulgence by way of review may no doubt 
be granted to prevent reme diable injustice being 
done by a court of last resort as where by some 
inadvertence an important statutory provision has 
escaped notice which, if it had been noticed, 
might materially have affected the judgment of 
the court but in no case should a rehearin g be 
allowed upon merits.”  
 
 
36. The facts of the case in hand are rather straight i.e. 
the imposition of state of emergency, the promulgation of 
Presidential Order 2007, the requirement of taking fresh Oath by 
Judges and those who did not, ceased to be Judges . The 
appointment of Mr. Abdul Hameed Dogar as Chief Justice after the 
former Chief Justice was held to have ceased to hold office, the 
judgment of Tikka Iqbal’s case whereby a Bench headed by Mr. 
Abdul Hameed Dogar validated the actions taken by the petit ioner  
on 3rd of November , thereafter the turn of events, the movement 
for restoration of judiciary and the ultimate restoration of Chief 
Justice and other Judges and the vires of the actions taken were 
examined by the Court headed by the restored Chief Jus tice, Mr. 
Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and the pronouncement of CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  33
the Sindh High Court Bar ( Supra ). The view taken in Sindh High 
Court Bar ( Supra ) is that the Chief of Army Staff could not have 
imposed emergency as he had no power under the Constitutio n to 
do so; that the former Prime Minister had addressed a letter to the 
President and not to the Chief of Army Staff about the deteriorating 
law and order situation and orders of some of the Judges of this 
Court which according to him were not appropriate  in the given 
circumstances in the country. The full Bench of this Court ha d 
unanimously declared the actions taken to be void ab initio  and 
non est  and held as follows :- 
“60. From the contents of the letter of the Prime 
Minister, it cannot be said that he  issued any 
direction to the Armed Forces in terms of Article 
245 of the Constitution to act in aid of the civil 
power, nor the actions of General Pervez 
Musharraf of 3rd November, 2007 could be said 
to have been taken or done while acting in aid of 
the ci vil power. Even otherwise, the letter was 
addressed to the President of Pakistan and not to 
the Chief of Army Staff. But for the sake of 
argument, it may be stated that even if the letter 
was addressed to the Chief of Army Staff, it could 
not be construed to give to the latter any power to 
take the kind of steps that he took in pursuance 
of the aforesaid letter.  
 
80. Seen in the above perspective, the actions of 
General Pervez Musharraf dated 3rd November, 
2007 were the result of his apprehensions 
regarding  the decision of Wajihuddin Ahmed's 
case and his resultant disqualification to contest 
the election of President. Therefore, it could not be 
said that the said actions were taken for the 
welfare of the people. Clearly, the same were 
taken by him in his own  interest and for illegal 
and unlawful personal gain of maneuvering  
another term in office of President, therefore, -the 
same were mala fide as well. The statement 
made in Proclamation of Emergency that the 
situation had been reviewed in meetings with the 
Prime Minister, Governors of all the four 
Provinces, and with Chairman, Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Committee, Chiefs of the Armed Forces, Vice 
Chief of Army Staff and Corps Commanders of 
the Pakistan Army, and emergency was 
proclaimed in pursuance of the deliber ations and CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  34
decisions of the said meetings, was incorrect. The 
Proclamation of Emergency emanated from his 
person, which was apparent from the words "I, 
General Pervez Musharraf...." used in it.  
 
-----------------------------------------------  
 
85. In the l ight of the above discussion, the 
actions of General Pervez Musharraf dated 3rd 
November, 2007, viz., Proclamation of Emergency, 
PCO No. 1 of 2007 and Oath Order, 2007, etc. are 
held and declared to be unconstitutional, illegal, 
mala fide and void ab initi o. In pursuance of the 
aforesaid declaration, it is further held and 
declared that the Chief Justice of Pakistan, the 
Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, Chief 
Justices and Judges of High Courts who were 
declared to have ceased to hold office by the 
notifications issued by the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, Government of Pakistan in pursuance 
PCO No.1 of 2007 and Oath Order, 2007 shall be 
deemed never to have ceased to be such Chief 
Justices or such Judges, irrespective of any 
notification issued regardi ng their reappointment 
or restoration. The notifications issued by the 
Ministry of Law in this behalf are declared to be 
null and void.”  
 
 
37. The afore -referred declarations and findings could not 
be subject matter of review as neither there is any discovery of new 
or important matter or evidence which after the “exercise of due 
diligence” was not within the knowledge of the petitioner or could 
not be produced by him at the time when the judgment under 
challenge was passed.  As noted in para 16 above, in fact, 
petitioner’s learned counsel frankly admitted, on Court query, first 
that the then Prime Minister Mr. Shaukat Aziz had written a letter 
to the President of Pakistan and not to the Chief of Army Staff; 
second that the Prime Minister had not advised him to i mpose the 
State of Emergency rather “the petitioner acted in his own 
discretion” . This frank admission by his counsel has further 
weakened his case for review. How could petitioner in his capacity CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  35
as Chief of Army Staff or even as President act on his own 
discretion. He had no power under the law to impose State of 
Emergency and make Judges of the Supreme Court and High 
Courts dysfunctional notwithstanding the mandate of Article 48 of 
the Constitution which inter alia  stipulates  that: 
[48. (1) In the exerci se of his functions, the 
President shall act [on and] in accordance with 
the advice of the Cabinet [or the Prime Minister]:  
 [Provided that [within fifteen days] the 
President may require the Cabinet or, as the case 
may be, the Prime Minister to reconsider  such 
advice, either generally or otherwise, and the 
President shall[, within ten days,] act in 
accordance with the advice tendered after such 
reconsideration.] ” 
 
 
38. Yet another argument raised was that although in the 
judgment under challenge, there was no direction  for trial of 
petitioner under Article 6, but a 3 -Member Bench has directed trial 
(2013 SCMR 1683) which is not warranted in law. First this 
argument is no ground to seek review of the judgment under 
challenge because it seems the petitioner’s gri evance is against the 
order of the three Member Bench (2013 SCMR 1683). But the said 
judgment has not been challenged in review. Second, a violation of 
Article 6 has two aspects/consequences i.e. constitutional and 
criminal. In the judgment under review, t he former aspect was 
dealt with and the Court held that the acts of petitioner were 
violative of the constitutional provisions. While in Moulvi Iqbal 
Haider v. Federation of Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 1683), the Court 
dealt with the latter aspect i.e. criminal. B ut while doing so it did 
not give a finding on merit, lest it may prejudice the case of either 
side during trial. Rather the Court disposed of the case on the 
statement of Attorney General for Pakistan who said:  CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  36
(1) The Prime Minister has directed the 
Secretar y Interior to forthwith direct the 
Director -General FIA to constitute a special 
investigative team of senior officers to 
commence an inquiry and investigation in 
relation to the acts of General (R) Parvez 
Musharraf of 3rd November, 2007 that may 
amount to high treason under Article 6 of 
the Constitution and to finalize as 
expeditiously as possible the statement of 
case to be put up by the Federal 
Government before the Special Court to be 
constituted under the Criminal Law 
Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 197 6. 
(2) The Law entrusts the investigation of the 
offence of high treason to the FIA under 
entry No. 14 of the Schedule of the FIA Act, 
1974 read with sections 3(a) and 6 thereof. 
However, in order to ensure expeditious 
completion of the inquiry and investigati on, 
the Prime Minister is also considering the 
constitution of a Commission to oversee 
and monitor the progress of the 
proceedings.  
(3) On the completion of the investigation, the 
Federal Government shall file the requisite 
complaint under section 5 of the Cri minal 
Law Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 1976 
and take steps to constitute the Special 
Court in accordance with section 4 of the 
said Act for the trial of the offence.”  
 
 
39. In Para 3 of Moulvi Iqbal Haider  (supra) , to be fair to 
the petitioner, the Court ob served: - 
“3. We are consciously, deliberately and as 
submitted by Mr. Muhammad Ibrahim Satti, 
learned Senior Advocate Supreme Court for the 
respondent, not touching the question of 
“abrogation” or “subversion” or “holding in 
abeyance the Constitution” or “ any conspiracy in 
that behalf” or indeed the question of suspending 
or holding the Constitution in abeyance or the 
issue as to abetment or collaboration in the acts 
mentioned in Article 6 of the Constitution. This is 
so because any finding/observation or v iew 
expressed by us may potentially result in 
prejudice to the inquiry/investigation or 
subsequent trial should that take place as a 
result of such investigation. ” 
 
 
40. Third the findings rendered and the conclusions drawn CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  37
in Sindh High Court ( Supra ) did not in any manner preclude the 
passing of an order of the kind passed in Moulvi Iqbal Haider’s 
case (2013 SCMR 1683). Because if the Court in an earlier 
judgment held the actions of petitioner Pervez  Musharraf as 
unconstitutional, it did not deter a Bench of t his Court from 
passing an order as a consequence of the findings rendered 
therein. Fourth notwithstanding the Sindh High Court supra , the 
discretion to direct trial under Article 6 of the Constitution lies 
with the Executive as reflected in the Preamble of  the Criminal Law 
Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 1976 which stipulates, “whereas 
it is expedient to provide for the trial by a Special Court of certain 
offences affecting the security, integrity or sovereignty of Pakistan or 
any part thereof, including of fences of high treason and for matter s 
connected therewith….”. It was for the exercise of the said executive 
discretion that petitioners in Moulvi Iqbal Haider ( supra ), had 
prayed that the Federal Government be directed to lodge a 
complaint under Article 6  of the Constitution against General (R) 
Pervez  Musharraf. Fifth in Moulvi Iqbal Haider ( supra ), the 
judgment per se  did not amount to an order rather it is provided in 
the operative part of the judgment that the case would be 
investigated and thereafter f inal report submitted before the trial 
Court. The judgment merely refers to the commencement of 
proceedings by the Federal Government which include, but are not 
limited, to the task of investigation. As indicated earlier the Court 
has been conscious not to  make any expression of opinion on 
merits of the case lest it may prejudice the case of the petitioner 
during trial.  
 CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  38
(vi) Whether the judgment under challenge has the effect of giving 
retrospective effect to Article 6 ? 
 
 
41. To appreciate this argument, a referen ce to 
unamended and amended Article 6 of the Constitution and Article 
12 would be  pertinent :- 
Un-amended Article 6  Amended Article 6  
6. (1) Any person who 
abrogates or attempts or 
conspires to abrogate, subverts 
or attempts or conspires to 
subvert the Con stitution by use 
of force or by other 
unconstitutional means shall 
be guilty of high treason.  
(2) Any person aiding or 
abetting the acts mentioned in 
clause (1) shall likewise be 
guilty of high treason.  
(3) [Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament)] shall by law 
provi de for the punishment of 
persons found guilty of high 
treason.  6. [(1) Any person who 
abrogates or subverts or 
suspends or holds in abeyance , 
or attempts or conspires to 
abrogates or subvert or suspend 
or hold in abeyance , the 
Constitution by use of force or 
show of force or by any other 
unconstitutional m eans shall be 
guilty of high treason.]  
(Emphasis is supplied).  
(2) Any person aiding or abetting 
[or collaborating ] the acts 
mentioned in clause (1) shall 
likewise be guilty of high 
treason.  (Emphasis is s upplied)  
[(2A) An act of high treason 
mentioned in clause (1) or 
clause (2) shall not be validated 
by any court including the 
Supreme Court and a High 
Court .] (Emphasis is supplied)  
(3) [Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) 
shall by law provide for the 
punishment of persons found 
guilty of high treason.  
 
42. The argument of petitioner’s learned counsel is 
grounded on protection against retrospective punishment 
guaranteed under Article 12 which mandates:  
“12. (1) No law shall authorize the punishment of 
a person -------  
 
(a) for an act or omission that was not 
punishable by law at the time of the 
act or omission; or  
(b) for an offence by a penalty greater 
than, or of a kind different from, the 
penalty prescribed by law for that 
offence at the time the offence was CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  39
committed.  
 
(2) Nothing in clause (1) or in Article 270 
shall apply to any law making acts of 
abrogation or subversion of a Constitution in 
force in Pakistan at any time since the 
twenty -third day of March, one thousand 
nine hundred and fifty -six, an offence.”  
 
 
43. Article 6 of the Constitution as it stands today was 
amended by virtue of Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 
2010 (10 of 2010). The amended parts of Article 6 which have been 
highlighted indicate following additions/changes: - 
(i) In Article 6(1), words “or hold in abeyance”;  
(ii) In Article 6(2) words, “or collaborating”; and  
(iii) Article 6(2A): This is a new sub -clause whereby 
it has been mandated that any act of high 
treason within the meaning of Article 6(1) and 
Article 6(2) “shall not be validated by any court 
includi ng the Supreme Court and a High Court”.  
44. The nature of offence, definition and procedure of trial 
substantially remain the same except that another mode of 
suspending the Constitution (hold in abeyance) in the definition 
clause of high treason have been add ed. The major change brought 
is the addition of Article 6(2A). By this newly added sub -clause 
there is prohibition for courts including the High Court and 
Supreme Court to validate it.  
45. The Court is seized of a review petition against a 
judgment wherein ne ither the question of petitioner’s trial or the 
retrospective or prospective effect of Article 6 were moot points. 
The argument qua this is therefore misplaced and is accordingly 
repelled.  CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  40
46. The Court has narrated with a measure of dismay the 
frequent const itutional deviations in the country . The spirit which 
underpins the judgment is a strong realization that we should not 
remain trapped by mistakes in history and turn a new leaf towards 
constitutionalism and the rule of law :- 
“For the first time, Constitut ion of 1956 was 
abrogated on 7th October, 1958 and Martial Law 
was imposed by the then President, Iskandar 
Mirza who dismissed the Central and Provincial 
Governments; dissolved the Parliament and 
Provincial Assemblies and abolished all Political 
Parties an d appointed General Muhammad Ayub 
Khan, the then Commander in Chief as Martial 
Law Administrator. Iskandar Mirza was soon, 
within few days, replaced by the latter. On 25th 
March, 1969, again the then head of Army, 
General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan, 
abrogate d the Constitution of 1962 and by 
Proclamation (PLD 19 77 Central Statutes 42) 
Promulgated Martial Law followed by Provisional 
Constitution Order (Gazette of Pakistan, 
Extraordinary 4th April, 1969). On 5th July, 1977 
once again Martial Law was imposed thro ughout 
the country by the then head of Army Chief viz. 
former General Muhammad Ziaul Haq, who, vide 
Proclamation of Martial Law (PLD 1969 Federal 
Statutes 326) dissolved the National Assembly, 
the Senate, the Provincial Assemblies etc. and put 
the Constitu tion of 1973 in abeyance followed by 
Laws (Continuance in Force) Order, 1977. When 
the Constitution was revived, it was undeniably, 
in a mutilated form by the notorious Eighth 
Amendment.  
10. Later, there was another onslaught on the 
ongoing democratic syst em of governance. On 
12th October, 1999, the then Chief of Army Staff, 
General Pervez Musharraf, now retired, once 
more, put the Constitution in abeyance and the 
whole of Pakistan was brought under the control 
of Armed Forces. The National Assembly, the 
Senate and the Provincial Assemblies were 
suspended, so also, the Chairman and Deputy 
Chairman of Senate, the Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker of the National Assembly and the 
Provincial Assemblies were suspended and it 
was declared that the Prime Minister, Federa l 
Ministers, Parliamentary Secretaries, the 
Provincial Governors, the Provincial Chief 
Ministers and the Advisor to the Chief Ministers 
would cease to hold offices, followed by issuance 
of Provisional Constitution Order and the Oath of 
Office (Judges) Orde r 2000. General Pervez 
Musharraf (Rtd.), self styled himself as Chief CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  41
Executive and started ruling the country under 
the new dispensation. Later, he, 
unceremoniously, occupied the office of President 
and in the coming years revived the Constitution 
with Se venteenth Amendment.  
11. Again, on 3rd November, 2007 the General 
Pervez Musharraf, (Rtd.), in his capacity as Chief 
of Army Staff, in the garb of declaration of 
emergency, put the Constitution in abeyance, 
issued Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 
2007 followed by the Oath of Office (Judges) 
Order, 2007, making as many as sixty one (61) 
Judges of superior judiciary including Chief 
Justice of Pakistan and Chief Justices of three 
Provinces dysfunctional for many of them either 
did not agree to take or we re not given the oath. 
Of them were; from Supreme Court 13 out of 18 
(17 permanent and one ad -hoc) Judges including 
Chief Justice of Pakistan, 18 out of 31 Judges of 
the Lahore High Court, 24 out of 28 Judges 
including Chief Justice of High Court of Sindh,  6 
out of  13 Judges including Chief Justice of 
Peshawar High Court. It is quite saddening that 
all the five Judges including the Chief Justice of 
Balochistan High Co urt took oath under the Oath 
of Office (Judges) Order, 2007.  
-----------------------------  
13. …………… In order to save the judiciary from 
being destroyed, for the first time in the history of 
this Country, a seven member Bench of this Court 
headed by the de jure Chief Justice of Pakistan, 
passed an order, inter -alia, restraining the 
President and Prime Minister of Pakistan from 
undertaking any such action, which was contrary 
to the Independence of Judiciary. So also the 
Judges of this Court and that of the High Courts 
including Chief Justice (s) were required not to 
take oath under the Provisional Constitution 
Order or any other extra Constitutional step and 
on the same day viz. 3.11.2007, the order was 
served on the members of superior judiciary 
through the respective Registrars of the Courts by 
way of Fax. It was also sent to all the relevant 
Executive functionaries. ” 
 
47. The foregoing narration, analysis and observations 
lead us to conclude that the judgment under review does not stand 
vitiated by any bias or error in law or fact to warrant review. The 
petitions having no merit are accordingly dismis sed. These are the 
detailed reasons for our short order dated 30.1.2014  which reads 
as under: - CIVIL REVIEW PETITION NOs. 328 & 329 OF 2013 IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NOs. 8 & 9 OF 2009  42
“For reasons to be recorded later in the detailed 
judgment, we find the review petitions filed by 
petitioner General (R) Parvez Musharraf to be 
barred by time an d the precedent case law cited 
in this behalf to be distinguishable. Even 
otherwise, we have considered the submissions 
made on merits. The grounds urged by the 
petitioner’s learned counsel neither fall within the 
purview of review jurisdiction nor tenable  on 
merit to warrant interference in the judgment 
under challenge. Both the petitions filed by him 
are accordingly dismissed. ” 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE (HJ 1)   JUDGE  (HJ 2)    JUDGE (HJ 3) 
 
JUDGE (HJ 4)   JUDGE (HJ 5)   JUDGE (HJ 6) 
 
JUDGE (HJ 7)   JUDGE (HJ 8)    JUDGE (HJ 10) 
 
JUDGE (HJ 11)  JUDGE (HJ 13)  JUDGE (HJ 14) 
 
JUDGE (HJ 15) 
 
Islamabad, the  
30th of January, 2014  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram Anees  
 
 
 CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
1
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  I have had the benefit of reading the detailed judgment  of 
Honourable the Chief Justice, with which I agree  completely . My aim here is to  highlight  
briefly, some additional aspects relating to  bias and  the contention  advanced on behal f of 
the petitioner  that the former Chief Justice of the Court,  Justice Iftikhar Muh ammad 
Chaudhry  was biased against  the petitioner  General Pervez Musharraf and that in hearing 
the case relating to the Proclamation of Emergency  he was acting as a “ judge i n his own 
cause ”. For this reason, it was urged that the judgment dated 31.7.2009 in the said case (now 
sought to be reviewed) is not sustainable.     
 
2. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, learned Sr. ASC, almost exclusively confined  his 
arguments to  stress the po int that the judgment  under review  should be set aside  as 
averred in the Review Petition, firstly because  “General (Retd) Pervez Musharraf and Mr. 
Justice Iftikhar Muh ammad Chaudhary were  rival  [sic] to each other and were dagger  [sic] drawn 
and they  were party against  each other  in case of R eference against Mr. Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry  . . . 
and on filing the Presidential Reference [the] Supreme Judicial Council had suspended Mr. Justice 
Iftikhar Muh ammad Chaudhry, Chief Justice of Pakistan and. . . that  [sic] again ceased to hold office 
for about ½ years  [sic] which show  [sic] that by  no stretch of imagination Mr.  Justice Iftikhar 
Muh ammad Chaudhry CJP was qualified to constitute and preside over the Ben ch” which 
rendered th e aforesaid judgment . And secon dly because the Proclamation  of Emergency 
was due to “ the deed  [sic] and mis -deed of the  [sic] Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muh ammad Chaudhry CJP 
and therefore he was not supposed to be Judge of his own cause as it violates the basic maxim 
(NEMO DEBATE SSE JUDEX I N PROPRIA SUA CAUSA  [sic]) and other principles of 
administration of justice ”. 
 
3.   In relation to the lea rned counsel’s first argument, t he Honourable  Chief Justice has 
already  noted the counsel’s  inability in providing evidence  of any act of  the former  Chief 
Justice which establish es his bias against the Petitioner . On 29.1.2014 Mr. Pirzada Sr. ASC 
was asked to go through the Review Petition (spanning 34 pages and settled by three ASCs)  
and advert to that paragraph or sentence where a fact had been asser ted which, if accepted, 
would demonstrate bias on the part of the former Chief Justice. Mr. Pirzada took some time 
thumbing through and shuffling papers in his file but could not point to any such factual 
assertion. He, therefore, sought time (which was al lowed) till the following day. The next 
day also he failed to show that any fact had been pleaded in support of the allegation of 
actual bias. The reason for setting out, in some detail this aspect of the case, will be evident 
from the discussion below.  
 
4. The assertion  of bias against a Judge can take two forms recognized by our law  viz. 
'actual ' bias and 'reasonable perception ' of bias  even though there may be no  actual bias . 
Actual bias is alleged  on the basis of one or more specific incident s showing partiality or 
animosity amounting to bias . In order to demonstrate such bias, a factual averment  has to 
be made in the pleadings of the party allegin g it. The question as to whether  the factual  CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
2
allegation is true or not,  will not arise if the relevant fact  has not been pleaded. As has been 
noted above, the review petition was settled by three eminent Advocates of our Bar and the 
petitioner himself had the occasion to meet with and instruct the learned counsel. In these 
circumstances, in the absence of any f actual assertion of actual bias, we can only say that 
there was in fact no basis for such  allegation. We may, however, advert to certain assertions  
made in the review petition  (as noted above)  and arguments advanced on behalf of the 
petitioner inviting the  Court to infer bias of the former Chief Justice against the petitioner. 
It was submitted  that bias arose  on account of  the unlawful removal of the former Chief 
Justice and his house arrest and also on account of a reference having been filed by the 
petiti oner against the former Chief Justice under Article 209 of the Constitution , wherein 
the Supreme Judicial Council had stopped the former Chief Justice from performing the 
duties of his office . This submission on its face is irrational and with out lawful ba sis, as 
these events may show a bias harboured by the petitioner against the former Chief Justice 
but not the other way round. This aspect of the case has been further elaborated later in this 
opinion . Learned counsel for the petitioner argued  that at the very least,  we should accept 
the allegation of bias on the ground that there was the possibility of a 'reasonable 
perception ' of bias . This argument appears to be based on the ratio in the case of 
Metropolitan Properties , Ltd. v. Lannon  [(1968) 3 All E.R. 304].  The perception  of bias , without 
there being actual bias , as noted  above is also recognized by our law but again it has to  be 
founded on a more solid footing  than allegations which are  imaginary  or which are based 
on a subjective opinion divorced from  objective reality . The main thrust of the argument  of 
Mr. Pirzada, Sr. ASC  was that our judgment of 31.7.2009 must be reviewed because of 
actual bias on the part of the former Chief Justice  or in the alternate , on account of  a 
reasonabl e perception that t here could have been bias which must, without more, be 
inferred from the events noted above .      
 
5. The above  aspect of the case may become clearer and the attitude of the petitioner in 
levelling allegations of bias against the former Chief Justice could  become more 
comprehensible if looked at in the context of the petitioner’s career leading up to his 
appointment as the Chief of Army Staff. We can only try to understand the motivation 
behind such allegations of bias. The inference, if any, to be drawn is  not in relation to the 
Court or the alleged bias of its former Chief Justice, it is to be drawn in relation to the 
petitioner himself. It appears that the petitioner, perhaps on account of his long service in 
the armed forces, may not have encountered dis sent, disagreement or resistance to orders 
issued in a chain of command, necessary for a cohesive fighting force. He may, therefore, in 
his own mind, have considered the resistance to his unconstitutional Proclamation of 
Emergency, by the Judiciary of the country including the former Chief Justice, as a 
manifestation of disobedience or insubordination and thus ill will or animus  against him.  
The imperious tenor of the Proclamation of Emergency brooks no dissent and says it all : "I, 
General Pervez Musharraf , Chief of the Army Staff , proclaim emergency throughout Pakistan … I CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
3
hereby order  and proclaim … ( emphasis supplied). With such thinking, it may not have 
crossed his mind that he may actually have missed the reality that the Court and its Judges 
were only  doing their job in accordance with the law and the Constitution. His logic, 
perhaps not so strange to him can be best explained by referring to the wisdom of Hafez 
who recognized the elements of ' zarf' and ' nafs', and while doing so, understood the 
extrem es of subjective opinion which may be contrary to accepted norms and which may 
lead a person bedevilled by subjective standards into an irrational persecution complex. As 
the sage of Shiraz said:  
                                                       
 
     
However, as noted above, Courts are required to proceed on the basis of objective /rational  
standards and not on the basis of unfounded subjective opinions or on the basis of assumed 
perceptions of bias which may border on paranoia.  
 
6. Judges, it may be  noted, do encounter allegations of bias and also receive criticism 
some of which may be expressed in civil language while others may be through hate speech  
or outright vilification based on malice. In either event , the Judge by training does not 
allow suc h vilification to cloud his judgment in a judicial matter. Even extremely 
derogatory language used against Judges does not , by itself create bias , as is evident from 
the negligible number  of contempt cases  based on scandalisation of Judges,  (none leading 
to a sentence) cited in the case titled Baz Muhammad Kakar vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2012 SC 923). Courts, therefore, cannot decide questions of perceived bias by accepting the 
individual and personal  views  of an aggrieved petitioner and thus recuse f rom a case. It 
was pointed out to Mr. Pirzada, Sr. ASC that if a subjective perception of bias could be 
made a basis for recusal of a Judge  merely because the petitioner had done things or had 
taken unconstitutional steps against the former Chief Justice, it would be very simple for 
any litigant not wanting his case to be heard by a particular Judge to start hurling abuses at 
such Judge and thereafter to claim that the Judge was biased against him. For litigants  and 
their Advocates it is important to bear t his in mind while urging 'percepti on of bias ' against 
a Judge.   
 
7. The submissions of learned counsel are clearly not tenable  in law . In the present 
case there is not even an allegation of actual bias  pleaded in the Review Petition  let alone 
proof of the same . As for perception of bias, this has been discussed above and will be 
further dealt with later.  The acts of the petitioner to which learned counsel drew our 
attention, if anything, only serve to demonstrate a sense of bias harboured by the petitioner 
against the former Chief Justice. T he actions and conduct of the former Chief Justice on the 
contrary, de monstrate a dignified restraint  such that even after being twice unlawfully 
prevented from performing his constitutional duties , orders (including the judgment under 
review) were not passed by him or by this Court which could be considered  as having been CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
4
made in respect of the petitioner in a personal capacity . However, even if the perception of 
bias is  for a moment said to exist , it is quite impossible to hold that the same has any 
relevance to the present review petition.  
 
8. Mr. Pirzada cited a number of precedents to define the contours of bias  as 
recognized in law  and the effect which these may have on the validity of a judgment. The 
Hon’ble Chief J ustice in the lead judgment has already discussed in some detail the ratio of 
these precedents. It may be added  that the time -honoured principles of natural justice 
which call for vitiating a judgment as a result of bias in a Judge, are reasonably well def ined 
in law and cannot be disputed . The purpose of these principles is to ensure that the rights 
of litigants are adjudicated upon by an impartial Court . This is an established rule and the 
Supreme  Court would be the first to uphold  it. We, however, are no t engaged in  an 
academic e xercise, to determine generally  the law relating to bias. Our endeavour is to see 
if, in the facts and circumstances of the case before us, there was bias sufficient to justify 
review of our judgment dated 31.7.2009.  Learned couns el failed to advert to a single right of 
the petitioner which was the subject matter of adjudication in the case  under review  and 
which could, by extension, be prejudiced on account of the alleged bias of the former Chief 
Justice.     
 
9. The cases cited b y the learned Sr. ASC involve some personal right of a party which  
is in danger of being prejudiced because of the bias of the  presiding  judge. Indeed, in the 
Pakistani cases cited by him , the liberty of a party  alleging bias  was at stake. Ghulam Rasool 
v. Crown  (PLD 1953 Federal Court 62)  concerned  an appellate  ruling by M. R. Kayani, J 
where he had convicted  and sentenced, as judge of the Lahore High Court,  the appellants 
therein for murder. However , prior to being elevated to the Bench , Kayani, J had, as  Legal 
Remembrancer to the Government of Punjab, advised the government on the same murder 
case. On appeal, the Federal Court held that the judgment of Kayani, J was vitiated due to 
the 'possibility ' of him being biased  against the appellants  on account of  him having 
expressed an opinion on the same case in favour of the prosecution and thus pre -judged the 
case. Anwar v. Crown  (PLD 1955 Federal Court 185)  also concerned  a sentence passed 
against the appellant therein on a charge of murder. The Sessions Cour t had acquitted the 
appellant, but the deceased’s father filed a criminal revision petition before the Lahore 
High Court which was accepted and re -trial was ordered. The appellant challenged this 
decision before the Federal Court  on the ground  that the lan guage used by the High Court  
in its findings  was so strong that the Sessions Court would be influenced by  it and therefore  
he would not get a fair trial. The Federal Court  however  held that there was no danger of 
bias and upheld the order of re -trial. In Asif Ali Zardari v. State  (PLD 2001 Supreme Court 
568) Mr. Zardari , who was the spouse of a former Prime Minister  was convicted by a 
Division Bench of the Lahore High Court headed by Malik Muhammad Qayyum, J  under 
the Ehtasab Act, 1997. The appellant  Mr. Za rdari  contended that Qayyum, J was biased 
because he had purportedly accepted a diplomatic passport for himself and his wife  (which CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
5
they otherwise were not entitled to)  in exchange for  a ruling against  Mr. Zardari. 
Recordings of t elephonic  conversations we re also adduced in evidence where Qayyum, J 
was heard to be receiving directions from functionaries of the Federation . The Supreme 
Court found that bias was “ floating on the surface of the record ” and decided to set aside the 
judgment. This, it may be note d, was an instance of actual bias.  
 
10.  Unlike the above mentioned cases, the judgment under review makes no 
determination with respect to the personal right s of the Petitioner. The  Court in the  case of  
Sindh High Court Bar A ssociation  was instead  primari ly tasked with determining the 
constitutional validity of  the Proclamation of Emergency  made  on November 3rd, 2007  and 
certain acts and other instruments  following the said Proclamation. While  determining this 
issue, the Court struck down and declared unco nstitutional  inter alia  the Proclamation  of 
Emergency, the Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 2007 and the Oath o f Office 
(Judges) Order of 2007.  These  were all indeed actions taken by  the p etitioner,  but the Court 
did not comment on the criminal  or civil consequences which could  flow against  the 
petitioner  as a result  of this determination . The p etitioner has conceded this much in 
paragraph 30 of the Review Petition in the following words : 
 
“30. That it is also pertinent to mention that though this Hon ’ble Court after 
declaring that the Acts of 3rd November, 2007 were un -Constitutional yet in 
the operative part of the judgment this Hon’ble Court did not mention the 
prosecution of the petitioner under the High Treason Act… ” 
 
11.  The actions of the  Petit ioner  on 3.11.2007 , may have  well been taken for his personal 
benefit, as the judgment under review holds, but it cannot be held on this basis that the 
petitioner’s act  of appoint ment /removal of judges of the superior courts, attempts at 
making unilateral amendments to the constitution, declaring a state of emergency, and so 
forth were  personal right s of the petitioner the adjudication of which showed bias of the 
former Chief Justice  against the petitioner . The judgment under review was rendered by 14 
Judge s of this Court who held the aforesaid acts of the petitioner to be unconstitutional.  
The Court , it may be noted, was called upon to decide  constitutional questions concerning 
the affairs of the State. These questions were much bigger  than  the person of th e petitioner  
and the same were decided in accordance with the Constitution . If the petitioner’s 
contention is accepted  it would be akin to saying that a judge who decides against the 
constitutionality of actions taken by a State functionary, thereby demons trates 
impermissible bias against such functionary  rendering the Judge incapable of hearing cases 
involving such functionary . It is the very essence of the judicial function to adjudicate 
matters coming before a Court. To illustrate this point one  can, for instance , well imagine a 
situation  where  on the advice of the Prime Minister,  the President files a reference under 
Article 209 of the Constitution against a judge of the superior courts and the judge is 
cleared of all charges by  the Supreme Judicial Coun cil.  C an it be  conte nded that the said CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
6
judge will be incapacitated  from questioning the validity of any subsequent act of the Prime 
Minister or of the President  because of a purported bias ? If such a position is accepted, it 
would lead to the absurd situa tion that despite being cleared by the Supreme Judicial 
Council, the Judge would become non -functional in respect of cases against the President  
or the Prime Minister . In other words, such a Judge would stand accused of bias without 
having done anything to  invite such an accusation and simply because he had been 
unsuccessfully proceeded against earlier through a Presidential reference to the Supreme 
Judicial Council. Moreover, this position would provide the Executive an impermissible 
means of control over the Judiciary which is neither provided for by the Constitution nor 
ever believed to have been so provided. Reading this novel check on the Judiciary into the 
Constitution would distort and obfuscate the carefully designed system of checks and 
balances alr eady made part of the Constitutional structure.  Judges, because of the nature of 
their work , at times do encounter  invective, and at times malicious tirades, including 
abnoxious  hate speech  from litigants and sometimes even from members of the Bar. But 
they are able to disregard the same  on account of their experience and training,  when 
hear ing cases involving  such persons  in Court . 
 
12. Even otherwise , in observing that the actions taken by the p etitioner on November 
3rd 2007 were unconstitutional, the Co urt did l ittle more than  state what the p etitioner 
admitted before  the national and international media. Within a few  days after the 
Proclamation of Emergency , the petitioner  himself, in an interview to a foreign TV news 
channel (BBC) admitted that he had taken unconstitutional steps. Relevant portion s from 
his inter view, as reported in the Daily ‘ DAWN ’ of 18th November, 2007 , are reproduced 
below:  
 
The daily DAWN, Islamabad, 18th November, 2007  
NO ILLEGAL S TEP TAKEN BEFORE NOV. PRESIDENT  
"Before March, I w as very good. Suddenly did I go mad after March or 
suddenly my personality changed, am I Doctor Jekyll and Mister Hyde or what 
is it?" He said.   
"Am I such a person?  
"Please go into the details, the causes. What I am doing?  Have I done anything 
unconstitut ional, yes, I did it on Nov. 3.  
"Did I do it before? Not once."  (Emphasis Added)  
It is difficult in these circumstances, to hold  that the p etitioner could have been prejudiced 
by the purported bias of the former Chief Justice, as the observations made in the judgment 
under review  appear to be in line with the public pronouncement of the petitioner noted 
above.  It is also important to note here that the  said interview was  within the knowledge  of 
the B ench which rendered the judgment under review  and was quo ted in the said CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
7
judgment . There is no denial of the said interview from the petitioner  whether in the 
Review Petition or otherwise.   
 
13. This brings me to the p etitioner’s other argument i.e. the former Chief Justice acted 
as a “ judge in his own cause”  in deciding a matter related to the Proclamation of Emergency. 
The p etitioner contends that it was the “ deed and mis -deed”  [sic] of the former Chief Justice 
which led to the Proclamation of Em ergency and therefore he was biased in deciding this 
case against the petitioner . This argument is both fallacious and fails to recognize the 
objective reality of Constitutional rule .  
 
14.  The Proclamation  of E mergency , it will be seen,  did not target the former Chief 
Justice alone,  it targeted  the Judiciary of the cou ntry. This much is clear even from a 
cursory reading of the text of the Proclamation  of Emergency and the advice of the Prime 
Minister  quoted below  which was purportedly relied upon b y the p etitioner in taking his 
actions  of 3.11.2007 . The grounds of the P roclamation of Emergency are reproduced at 
para graph 47 of the judgment  under review  and the aforementioned letter of the Prime 
Minister is reproduced at para graph 58 of the same judgment . These two documents , on 
account of their relevance to the petition in hand,  are reproduced hereunder in extenso : 
 
Text of the Proclamation of Emergency  
 
“WHEREAS there is visible ascendancy in the activities of extremists and 
incidents of terrorist attacks, including suicide bombings, IED explosions, 
rocket firing and bom b explosions and the banding together of some militant 
groups have taken such activities to an unprecedented level of violent intensity 
posing a grave threat to the life and property of the citizens of Pakistan;  
 
WHEREAS there has also been a spate of atta cks on State infrastructure and 
on law enforcement agencies;  
 
WHEREAS some members of the judiciary  are working at cross purposes with 
the executive and legislature in the fight against terrorism and extremism 
thereby weakening the Government and the natio n's resolve and diluting the 
efficacy of its actions to control this menace;  
 
WHEREAS there has been increasing interference by some members of the 
judiciary  in government policy, adversely affecting economic growth in 
particular;  
 
WHEREAS constant interfe rence in executive functions, including but not 
limited to the control of terrorist activity, economic policy, price controls, 
downsizing of corporations and urban planning, has weakened the writ of the 
government; the police force has been completely demo ralized and is fast losing 
its efficacy to fight terrorism and Intelligence Agencies have been thwarted in 
their activities and prevented from pursuing terrorists;  
 
WHEREAS some hard core militants, extremists, terrorists and suicide 
bombers, who were arre sted and being investigated were ordered to be released. 
The persons so released have subsequently been involved in heinous terrorist 
activities, resulting in loss of human life and property. Militants across the 
country have, thus, been encouraged while l aw enforcement agencies subdued;  
 CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
8
WHEREAS some judges  by overstepping the limits of judicial authority have 
taken over the executive and legislative functions;  
 
WHEREAS the Government is committed to the independence of the judiciary 
and the rule of law an d holds the superior judiciary in high esteem, it is 
nonetheless of paramount importance that the Honourable Judges confine the 
scope of their activity to the judicial function and not assume charge of 
administration;  
 
WHEREAS an important Constitutional i nstitution, the Supreme Judicial 
Council, has been made entirely irrelevant and non est by a recent order and 
judges have, thus, made themselves immune from inquiry into their conduct 
and put themselves beyond accountability;  
 
WHEREAS the humiliating treat ment meted to government officials by some 
members of the judiciary  on a routine basis during court proceedings has 
demoralized the civil bureaucracy and senior government functionaries, to 
avoid being harassed, prefer inaction;  
 
WHEREAS the law and order situation in the country as well as the economy 
have been adversely affected and trichotomy of powers eroded;  
 
WHEREAS a situation has thus arisen where the Government of the country 
cannot be carried on in accordance with the Constitution and as the 
Const itution provides no solution for this situation, there is no way out except 
through emergent and extraordinary measures;  
 
AND WHEREAS the situation has been reviewed in meetings with the Prime 
Minister, Governors of all four Provinces, and with Chairman Jo int Chiefs of 
Staff Committee, Chiefs of the Armed Forces, Vice -Chief of Army Staff and 
Corps Commanders of the Pakistan Army;  
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the deliberations and decisions of the 
said meetings: - 
 
1. I, General Pervez Musharraf, Chief of  the Army Staff, proclaim Emergency 
throughout Pakistan.  
 
2. I hereby order and proclaim that the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan shall remain in abeyance.  
 
3. This Proclamation shall come into force at once .” 
  (emphasis added)  
      ………… …..  
 
Text of the letter of Prime Minister  
 
“SUBJECT:  NATIONAL SECURITY SITUATION . 
Dear Mr. President,  
I am writing to you to share my thoughts on the current national security 
situation and the risks that it represents for the future of Pakistan.  
2. The G overnment has made serious and sincere efforts to revive the 
economy, maintain law and order and to curb extremism and terrorism in the 
country. In the last few months, however, militancy, extremism and terrorist 
activities have been in ascendance, particu larly in some districts of NWFP 
where the writ of the government is being eroded and non -State militants are 
apparently gaining control. There have been a number of bomb blasts and CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
9
suicide attacks in other parts of the country including the recent suicide attack 
on a political rally in Karachi on 18th October, 2007. During the last ten 
months, 1322 precious lives have been lost and 3183 persons have been injured. 
Details of such incidents between April – October, 2007 are enclosed. The 
executive measures ta ken against extremist elements to contain militancy and 
terrorist activities have, on a number of occasions, been called into question by 
some members of the judiciary making effective action impossible .  
3. There has been increasing interference by some m embers of the 
judiciary in government policy , adversely affecting economic growth, in 
particular. The cornerstone of the economic policies of the government is 
privatization, liberalization and deregulation which create economic growth 
and investment. Both  local and foreign investment has been negatively affected.  
4. It cannot be disputed that the legality of executive measures is open to 
judicial scrutiny. The wisdom or necessity of a policy or a measure is an 
executive function and not open to judicial r eview, however, in the recent past, 
some members of the judiciary have, nevertheless, departed from these norms . 
While we all are committed to the independency of the judiciary and the rule of 
law and hold the superior judiciary in high esteem, it is nonet heless of 
paramount importance that the Honourable Judges confine the scope of their 
activity to the judicial function. While judges must adjudicate they must 
neither legislate nor assume the charge of administration.  
5. Most importantly, constant interfe rence in executive functions, 
including but not limited to the control of terrorist activity, economic policy, 
price controls, downsizing of corporations and urban planning, has weakened 
the writ of the government. This has increased the incidents of terro rist attacks 
thereby posing grave threat to the life and property of the citizens of Pakistan 
and negatively impacting the economy. Wide -ranging suo motu actions of the 
courts negate the fundamentals of an adversarial system of justice. The police 
force ha s been completely demoralized and is fast losing its efficacy to fight 
terrorism. Intelligence Agencies have been thwarted in their activities and 
prevented from pursuing terrorists.  
6. A large number of hard core militants, extremists, terrorists and 
suicide bombers, who were arrested and being investigated have been released. 
The persons so released are reported to be involved in heinous terrorist 
activities, resulting in loss of human life and property. Militants across the 
country have, thus, been enco uraged while law enforcement agencies subdued.  
7. There is a widespread perception of overstepping the limits of judicial 
authority and taking over of executive functions . Privatization is at a standstill 
while domestic and foreign investors are being com pelled to reconsider 
investment plans thus adversely affecting the economy.  
8. On the other hand, an important constitutional institution, the 
Supreme Judicial Council, has been made entirely irrelevant by a recent order. 
Detailed reasons for this order a re still awaited despite a lapse of three months. 
Judges have, thus, made themselves immune from inquiry into their conduct 
and are now beyond accountability.  
9. The law and order condition in the country as well as the economy 
have been adversely affecte d and tric hotomy of powers eroded. A situation has 
thus arisen where the routine and smooth functioning of government CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
10 
machinery is becoming increasingly difficult and causing grave concern among 
ordinary citizens about their security. As evident from the a ttached list, there 
has been an unusual increase in security related incidents highlighting the 
gravity of the situation.  
10. Mr. President, the contents of this letter reflect my views and public 
opinion about the current scenario. For any State to funct ion, all the three 
pillars of State must act in harmony in the best national interest. Pakistan is a 
country that achieved independence after immense sacrifices and has 
tremendous potential to develop prosper and be recognized among the comity of 
nations a s a country with an exciting future.  
                                          Yours sincerely,  
      
            Sd/-
 (Shaukat Aziz)  
General Pervez Musharraf  
President  
Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
Aiwan -e-Sadr, Islamabad.”   (emphasis supplied)  
 
15.  Nowh ere in the above quoted texts is the former Chief Justice mentioned as the 
cause for declaring the emergency and  he was  certainly  not the only one affected by it. In a 
narrow context, all judges of the superior courts in office on November 3rd, 2007 were 
directly affected by the Proclamation of Emergency . The majority of these judges suffered 
from this act, as they were unlawfully prevented from performing the duties of their 
Constitutional office . The remaining judges in the minority  who decided to take th e 
unconstitutional oath of office , on the other hand,  could be perceived as  beneficiaries of the 
aforesaid act of the petitioner . Therefore, a t the time the  case of  Sindh High Court Bar 
Association was being heard , the 14 Hon'ble Judges on the  Bench  (other  than  myself ) had 
been Judges in the Supreme Court and/or a High Court on 3.11.2007 and were thus direct 
'affectees ' of the unconstitutional Proclamation of Emergency made that day by the 
petitioner. Yet, as per Mr. Pirzada only the former Chief Justice ac ted as a judge in his own 
cause. The argument of the learned counsel is therefore clearly fallacious : if the Chief 
Justice acted in his own cause by hearing this case, then so did  12 other Judges on the 
Bench. If the petitioner seeks to draw a distinction between the former Chief Justice and the 
12 other Judges simply on the basis of the reference he filed against the former Chief 
Justice, the distin ction would be illogical and quite misleading.  Such reference (as noted 
earlier) can raise an inference that it was the petitioner who was biased against the former 
Chief Justice and not the other way round.   
 
16.  Having observed as above, the submission of Mr. Pirzada also fails on another 
ground. If indeed there were no Judges  who could satisfy the  impartialit y litmus test  the 
petitioner proposes for the former Chief Justice , could the Court justifiably stand back  and 
ignore the  crucially important  constitutional questions of national importance raised in the  
case of the Sindh High Court Bar Association . Such o ption was not available to the Court  and 
it, therefore,  had to assume jurisdiction since no one else could . This position finds support CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
11 
from numerous precedents such as Federation of Pakistan v. Muhammad Akram Sheikh  (supra ) 
which has been cited in the lea d judgment  as well and which holds in relevant part  that, “a 
judge who would otherwise be disqualified may act in a case of necessity where no other judge has 
jurisdiction. ” I ther efore find no merit in the  argument  of Mr. Pirzada, Sr. ASC  even on this 
score.   
 
17. Before concluding this opinion, I  must  take note of the statements of  the Quaid -e-
Azam that Mr. Pirzada elaborated on.  He cited the following speech  of the Quaid from his 
book “The Collected Works of Quaid -e-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah ” (Vol. II) p ages 308 -
309: 
  
   Excerpt from the book  by S. Sharifuddin Pirzada  
“On 17  February 1925 Sir Hari Sin gh moved a resolution for the 
establishment of a Supreme Court in India for the quick disposal of civil suits, 
previously disposed of by the Judicial Commit tee of the Privy Council, and for 
the disposal of appeals in serious criminal cases. Colonel Sir Henry Stanyon 
opposed on the grounds that it would involve heavy expenditure; considerably 
lower the prestige of the provincial High Courts; the disposal of ap peals would 
not be more quick  than those of the privy Council; and the provincial advocates 
to be taken to conclude the struggle in the Supreme Court would not be less 
costly than those obtained in England.  
The Home Member, Hon. Sir Alexander Muddiman, and  Pandit Motilal 
Nehru also spoke against the resolution. Supporting the resolution, Mr. M. A. 
Jinnah refuted the arguments advanced by the Members opposing the motion ”.  
   ……………..  
 
Excerpt from Quaid -e-Azam’s speech  
“… My Honourable friend, Sir Henry Stan yon, said that it will lower the 
prestige of the provincial High Courts. Why? I really fail to see it. How is it 
going to lower the prestige of the provincial High Courts? Then you find in the 
Privy Council for which I have great respect, although I have n o hesitation in 
saying that the Privy Council have on several occasions absolutely murdered 
Hindu law, and slaughtered Muhammadan law – with regard to common law, 
the English law, of which they are the masters, undoubtedly they command the 
greatest respect  of every practitioner and of every Judge in this country …”.      
 
18. Although in these statements I could see  no direct relevance to the present case, it 
must be said that as an indomitable  constitutionalist and  parliamentarian, the Quaid -e-
Azam would h ave been severely disappointed with the long list of constitutional 
deviations that this country has been subject to.  Perhaps, with the sounding of the death 
knell (in the judgment under review) for the  concept of constitutional deviations and CRPs 328 & 329 of 2013                                                                                     
                                   
12 
martial law,  we have now started on the path to becoming the nation  founded on 
constitutionalism  that our Founder envisioned.  
 
19. Lastly, we must remain cognizant of a central tenet of the rule of law, that the l aw 
must be widely accessible to the public. It is parti cularly important for the public to 
understand the aspects of law elaborated upon in this note. I refer to Articles 28 and 251 of 
the Constitution and the imperative highlighted therein of promoting languages other than 
English. To fulfil this need, the no te has also been written in the national language to make 
it accessible to a wider section of those who are unable to understand the alien language of 
this note.  It is hoped that this will free the people  from reliance on pontificating pundits (to 
whom the y are currently beholden) who themselves, at times, donot have a good grasp of 
the English language. It is a result of the initiative of the former Chief Justice that a 
translation department has been set up in the Court and judgments in cases of 
Constitut ional and pub lic importance are being written or translated in the national 
language.  
   
 
(Jawwad S. Khawaja)  
Judge  

 (bias) 

  
 31-7-2009  

 2




 3

 29-1-2014 
 34



13 2013329328    4
    (actual bias)  
 (perception of bias) 









 209




  Metropolitan Properties v. Lannon [(1968) 3 All E.R. 304] 

14 2013329328  5







 (COAS)
 (COAS)  
 

 ... 


 (COAS)
: 


15 2013329328 


     6


 (PLD 2012 SC 923)  








   7



16 2013329328 

 8






31-7-2009 


 9

 (PLD 1953 FC 62)  



        
 (PLD 1955 FC 185) 17 2013329328 



       
 (PLD 2001 SC 568)



 

 10
3-11-2007   


 2007I  2007 


 30 18 2013329328  .."
2007  3 
  
  6  ... 
"... 
 20073 11
 

  14   






 209 



19 2013329328 
 







 3-11-2007   12

 (BBC) 

2007  18  "



  

 
3

20 2013329328 "   
        13



    14
 
 


    15


 3-11-2007

   16
 20073
21 2013329328 14   
 2007 3 


 12
 12


  17

  

  
 

 

    18
 1925 
 (Privy) 22 2013329328 

 31-7-2009 

 19




23 2013329328 