IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood, HACJ  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
 
Constitutional Petition No .47/2023  
 
Gohar Ali  Khan             ...Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan , etc.     …Respondent(s)  
 
For the petitioner(s):  Mr. M. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC.  
    Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi, ASC.  
    Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
On Court’s call:   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, Attorney General.  
    Mr. Zafa r Iqbal Hus sain, Spl. Secy. ECP/D.R.  
    Mr. M. Arshad, D.G. (Law) ECP  
    Mr. Falak Sher, Legal Consultant, ECP.  
Date of Hearing:   22.12.202 3 
ORDER  
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. -  Through this petition under Article 184 (3) 
of the Constitution of t he Islamic Republic of  Pakistan,  Gohar Ali Khan, 
the Chairman of Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaaf (“PTI”) , has approached  this 
Court praying that the Election Commission  of Pakistan (“ECP”)  has to 
ensure free and fair elections in the country by  providing a level playing 
field for the leaders and workers of the PTI. It is alleged that members of  
PTI, upon filing their nomination papers under the announced Election 
Program me, are being arrested, harassed and their nomination papers 
are being snatched from them  which is blatant abuse of a fair and free 
electoral process.  Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in this 
regard they have approached the Election Commission of Pakistan under 
the Elections Act, 2017 (“Act”)  by filing complaints, however , there  has 
been no response on behalf of the ECP. 
2. On Court’s call , the learned Attorney General for Pakistan and the 
Representative s of ECP are present before the Court. The said 
Representative s at the very outset submit that certain complaints have 
been rece ived by the ECP this morning, which will be immediately 
attended  to. Both the Attorney General for Pakistan and the 
Representative of the ECP have assured the Court that elections will be 
held freely and fairly as mandated under the Constit ution. They furt her 
assured the Court that the grievance of the m embers of the PTI or any 
other political party received by the ECP will be decided  and resolved  on 
urgent basis and  in accordance with  law and where any action is Constitution Petition No.  47 of 2023 . 
 
 2
required to be taken such an action will be taken so that every political 
party in the country enjoys  a level playing field and that the elections are 
conducted freely and fairly.  
3.  The ECP plays a crucial role in the democratic process, especially 
in co nducting elections. Under Article 218(3) of the Constitution, ECP  
enjoys the constitutional responsibility to conduct elections honestly, 
justly, fairly and in accordance with law and to guard against corrupt 
practices. While under Article 220 of the Const itution all the executive 
authorities in the country shall assist the ECP in the discharge of its 
functions. ECP is to ensure that elections are conducted in accordance 
with the democratic principles  and that elections are free from undue 
influence, coerci on, and corruption . ECP is also to ensure that all 
political parties and candidates have an equal opportunity to participate 
in the election process. The importance of free and fair elections, and 
maintaining a level playing field during elections, cannot be overstated. 
Free and fair elections provide legitimacy to the elected government and 
maintain the trust of the public in the democratic process. A level playing 
field is essential for the healthy competition, ensuring that elections are a 
true reflectio n of the people's choice, rather than the result of 
manipulation or coercion.  It is important to remember that “organizing 
free and fair elections is more important than the results itself”1.  
4. The petitioner or for that matter any person representing any other 
political party in the electoral process may approach the ECP today at 
03:00 p.m.  for the redressal for their grievance relating to the elect ions. 
ECP  shall attended to these grievances on urgent basi s  and  resolve  
them  expeditiously  in order to ensure that the electoral process remains 
smooth, open, transparent, free and fai r. Let this exercise be completed 
by ECP promptly  without disturbing the timelines given in the Election 
Programme  because voters must have faith in the electoral process for 
our democracy to succeed.   
5.  This petition is disposed of in the above terms.  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
22nd December, 2023.  
Approved for reporting  
Iqbal/*                             ACJ 
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
                                                
1 Fatos Nano , An Albanian socialist politician.  