Qazi Faez Isa, J :  
 
Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 1379 of 2017:  This 
application has been submitted under section 345 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (“the Code ”) by the petitioners/convicts stating 
that the legal heirs of the deceased, who were  murdered by the 
petitioners, have “forgiven” them. Therefore, they have prayed that, 
“the petitioners may kindly be ordered to be released .” 
 
2. The petitioners  were convicted by the Additional Sessions 
Judge, Chiniot , under section 302(b) of the Pakistan  Penal Code 
(“PPC”); Mureed Sultan was convicted for the murder of 
Muhammad Ameer and Nazeer Sultan for the murder of Allah Yar , 
and both of them were sentenced to death. The Trial Court sent the 
Murder Reference to the Lahore High Court for confirmation u nder 
section 374 of the Code whilst the petitioners /convict s preferred 
an appeal under section 410 of the Code. The High Court 
maintained their convictions but altered their sentence s from 
death to imprisonment for life . The petitioners then preferred a 
criminal petition for leave to appeal before this Court  and during 
the pendency of th is petition  a compromise was effected by the 
petitioners /convict s with the legal heirs of both the deceased  and 
the application mentioned above was submitted . A report was 
sought from the District and Sessions Judge, Chiniot on August 
28, 2017 to verify the legal heirs of the deceased and the 
genuineness of the compromise. The said Judge has confirmed the 
genuineness of the compromise and that all the legal heirs have 
affirme d it. Both the petitioners have remained incarcerated for 
about eight years and four months, which period excludes the 
remissions in sentences that they have respectively earned.  I 
therefore agree with my learned brother that the said application Crl. M. A. No. 1379 /2017  2
be accept ed, however, I most respectfully cannot bring myself to 
agree that the conviction of the convicts/petitioners be “set aside” 
and they should be “acquitted of the charge”.  
 
3. Section 345 of the Code enables compounding of offences 
and sets out the methodol ogy thereof.  It mentions the offences 
punishable under the PPC which can be compounded either before 
or after an accused is convicted. The table contained in subsection 
(1) of section 345 specifies, “persons by whom offences may be 
compounded”. But, s ubsec tion (5) of section 345 stipulates that 
once an accused has been convicted, “no composition for the 
offence shall be allowed without the leave of the Court before which 
the appeal is to be heard”.  Undoubtedly, the prescribed offences 
can be compounded, but  the composition of such offences has to  
be in terms of subsection (6) of section 345 which stipulates that  it 
“shall have the effect of an acquittal”  and not that it will be an 
acquittal or that an acquittal ensues . Subsection (6) of section 345 
of the Co de provides:  
“(6) The composition of an offence under this 
section shall have the effect of an acquittal of the 
accused with whom the offence has been 
compounded. ” 
 
 
4. In my opinion “ the effect of an acquittal ” is different from an 
acquittal. The guilt of an accused , that  is ascertaining whether the 
accused has committed the offence for which he is charged , is 
determined by the Trial Court . Once the guilt of the accused has 
been determined the judgment is delivered by the Court . The 
judgment has two compon ents, conviction, which means he is 
guilty, and the sentence, which is the punishment awarded to him . 
If the legal heirs of the deceased compound the offence it does not 
mean that the person who was convicted for murder  was no t Crl. M. A. No. 1379 /2017  3
guilty of it, which would b e the case if, as a consequence of 
allowing the composition, he is “acquitted”.  Subsection (6) of 
section 345 also avoids creating such a fiction as it provides that 
the “ composition of an offence  … shall have the effect of an 
acquittal ”, which means that the punishment (sentence) part of the 
judgment is brought to an end ; neither this subsection states, nor 
it could,  that the convict is “acquitted of the charge”.  The verdict of 
guilt ( the conviction  part of the judgment) that the Trial Court had 
recorded c ould only have been undone by the High C ourt, failing 
which by this Court;  it can not be undone by the legal heirs of the 
murdered person s. 
 
5. The law permits the legal heirs of a murdered person to 
compound the offence with the convict , with or without re ceiving 
badal -i-sulh/d iyat (section s 310 and 323 PPC). If the legal heirs 
compound the offence they elect not to seek retribution or the 
enforcement of the sentence . The very premise of compounding the 
offence is the acknowledgment  of guilt by the accused  who is then 
forgiven  by the legal heirs; the affidavits filed by the legal heirs 
clearly also state that they have forgiven the petitioners . In the 
application too the petitioners simply seek their release, and not 
their acquittal.  
 
6. Section 338 -F of th e PPC stipulates that in the interpretation 
and application of Chapter XVI (“Offences Affecting the Human 
Body”) “ and in respect of matters ancillary or akin thereto, the Court 
shall be guided by the Injunctions of Islam as laid down in the Holy 
Qur’an and  Sunnah ”. The aforesaid interpretation  of subsection (6) 
of section 345 is in conformity  with a number of verses of the Holy 
Qur’an: surah Al -Baqarah  (2) verses 178 -9, surah Al -Maidah  (5) Crl. M. A. No. 1379 /2017  4
verse 45, surah Al -Isra (17) verse 33 and surah Ash -Shura  (42) 
verse  40. In these verses Almighty Allah our Merciful Creator 
suggests that forgiveness and reconciliation is preferable to 
revenge or retaliation. A person can only be forgiven if he is guilty . 
The cited verses neither state nor imply that the finding of guilt , 
which is recorded by a court of law,  is effaced.  
 
7. Some may question the significance of this entire discussion, 
and enquire , if a court has accepted the application under section 
345 of the Code and the convict has been released from jail what 
differe nce would  his acquittal make. There are grave 
repercussions. A man who has committed murder but is 
“acquitted” merely because the legal heirs of the murdered person 
compound the offence, would enable the murderer, for instance , to 
honestly declare on a job  application that he is not and has never 
been a convict; he could thus be eligible to apply for government 
employment, be employed as a teacher, be inducted into the Armed 
Forces, enter the judicial service or even be appointed as a judge of 
the superior courts. There is then the religious aspect to the 
discussion. The person who has committed the sin of murder if he 
professes his guilt or is convicted in this world , and serves out his 
sentence or is released as a consequence of the legal heirs forgiving 
him, may be spared the agony of punishment in the Hereafter.   
 
8. Therefore, I  agree with the conclusion reached by my learned 
brother that leave be granted and the application under section 
345 of the Code for compounding the offences be accepted  and the 
petitioners/convicts be released from jail forthwith, unless 
required in any other criminal case . Consequently , the appeal be 
allowed to such extent. However, I do not agree that upon Crl. M. A. No. 1379 /2017  5
accept ance of the application it follows that they be “acquitted of 
the c harge” or that this outcome is mandated by section 345 of the 
Code . Convicted murderers can only be acquitted by a court of 
competent jurisdiction and after application of mind by judges. 
Acquittal can not be secured, or granted for that matter, whilst 
accepting an application under section 345 of the Code.   
 
Criminal Petition No. 1616 -L of 2016 : This petition was filed by 
the complainant seeking enhancement of the sentence s of the 
convicts from imprisonment for life to death. However, since the 
heirs of th e deceased have entered into the aforesaid compromise, 
which has been accepted by this Court, the petition is dismissed.  
 
Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 508 of 2017 : This 
application has sought the suspension of the sentences awarded to 
the petiti oners/convicts, however,  in view of the aforesaid 
compromise, which has been accepted by this Court , the 
application has become infructuous and is accordingly dismissed.   
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
(Farrukh)  
Approved for Reporting  