IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
     
PRESENT:  
        Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry,HCJ  
 Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
 Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
        Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
        Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Kh an 
 
Suo Moto Case No. 16 of 2011  
(Implementation proceedings of Judgment 
of this Court reported as PLD 2011 SC 997)  
 
   A/W 
 
Civil Misc. Application No.1652/2013  
(Action taken on news item dated 
23.03.2013 published in daily “The Express 
Tribune” regardin g “No Go Areas” in 
Karachi)  
AND 
 
Crl.O.Petition No.96 of 2012  
(Senator Haji Adeel v. Raja M. Abbas, etc.)  
 
   AND 
 
Crl.O.Petition No.29 of 2013  
(Wattan Party etc. v. Federation of Pakistan etc.)  
 
   AND 
 
Suo Moto Case No.14 of 2009  
(Action taken on Press C lippings dated 
05.09.2009 the Daily “The News”)  
 
   AND 
 
Civil Petition No.506 -K of 2009  
(Shaukat Hussain and another v. Muhammad Younas)  
 
AND 
 
Const. Petition No.60 of 2010  
(M. Tariq Asad v. Prime Minister of Pakistan & others)  
 
 
For the petitioners:  Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, AOR (in Crl.O.P.96/12)  
    Mr. Abrar Hassan, Sr. ASC with  
Mr. A.S.K Ghori, AOR (in CP 506 -K/09)  
Nemo (in Crl.O.P 29/13 & Const.P.60/10 )  2 
 
Applicants:    Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi  
    Mr. Ismail Shaheedi  
      
For the respondents:  Mr. Rash eed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. K.A. Wahab, AOR  
(on behalf of Ghulam Mustafa Memon in SMC 14/09)  
 
 
On Court notice:  
 
For Federation:   Mr. Syed Mohsin Imam DAG.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh:  Mr. Abdul Fatah Malik, AG. Sindh.  
    Mr. Shahadat Awan, PG, Sindh  
Mr. Adnan Karim, AAG, Sindh  
Raja Ghulam Abbas, Chief Secretary  
Syed Hashim Raza, Commissioner Karachi  
Mr. Imran Ata Soomro, Addl. Secy. Home  
 
For Sindh Police:   Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC  
    Mr. Shahid Nadeem Baloch, IGP  
Mr. Ghulam Shabbir Shaikh, Addl.IGP  
Mr. Zakir Huss ain, Addl. IGP  
Mr. Zafar Abbas Bukhari, DIG, West  
    Capt (R) Tahir Naveed, DIG East  
    Mr. Shahid Hayyat, DIG, South  
    Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG Legal  
     
Syed Irfan Bahadur,  
    SP Anti -Encroachment Force  
 
    Mr. Najam Tareen S.P,  
Inspector Abid Ansari  
(in FIR No.23/2013 PS Kalakot)  
 
 
For DG Rangers:   Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, ASC  
Mr. K. A. Wahab, AOR with  
    Major Ashfaque Ahmed, DA JAG,  
 
For Board of Revenue:  Mr. Yawer Farooqui, ASC  
& Land Utilization   Mr. Mohammad Ahmed Pirzada, ASC with  
Depar tment   Mr. Nazar Mohammad Leghari Consultant  
Syed Zulfiqar Ali Shah Member.  
Mr. Saqib Soomro Member L.U.  
    Qazi Jan Muhammad D.C. Malir  
    Mr. Afaq Shah Nawaz, D.C. Hyderabad  
    Mr. Javed Ahmad Shar, Asstt. Commissioner  
    Mr. Umar Farooq, Director Se ttlement  
 
For Forest Deptt:   Mr. Muhammad Wasim, Secretary  
 
Alleged occupants:  Dr. Muhammad Akram Qureshi  
(on Forest land)   Mr. Fida Ali Khawaja   3 
         
 
 
Date of hearing:   04.04.2013  
 
 
ORDER  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ .- On 22.03.2013 and 
29.03.2013 this Court passed order to the following effect: - 
   
Order dt.22.03.2013  
(a) In the Watan Party’s case (ibid), it has already 
been directed that “there must be no, ‘No Go Area’ at all 
but despite the probe made by us during hearing, heads 
of both the funct ionaries were not agreeable on the 
existence of ‘No Go Areas’ in Karachi but it has been 
established on record by means of credible information 
that No Go Areas do exist in Lyari, therefore, in 
pursuance of our earlier judgment, the IGP himself and if 
necessary the DG, Rangers shal also personally lead the 
operation into such areas to make Karachi free of No Go 
Areas and peaceful city to protect and also provide them 
a congenial atmosphere free from hold of the criminals so 
that they may live peacefully and  also participate in 
forthcoming general elections, polling of which has been 
schedule to be on 11th May, 2013. They have to complete 
the task within a period of two weeks and report 
compliance shall be submitted to the Registrar for our 
perusal in Chamber s, if in the meanwhile instant case is 
not listed for further hearing.   
 
Order dated 29.03.2013:  
“3. Therefore, we direct to the Additional Advocate 
General to hand over copy of this order along with story 
published in the Express Tribune dated 23rd March,  2013 
for its onward circulation to the DG Rangers as well the 
Inspector General of Sindh Police. It is the duty of the 
Police to provide protection to the citizens and take them 
out of the fearful influence of the criminals in the different  4 
pockets of the  Karachi. Therefore, we direct the I.G. 
Police that to testify firstly the SHO, DSP and SP of each 
police station even DSP or SP, who are supervising more 
than one police station, the contents of the news items or 
otherwise. If they accept the same, then s hall explain as 
to why this dismal state of affairs exists and also to 
disclose that why the police force is not controlling the 
law and order situation. The Additional Advocate General 
would also hand over copy of his order and appended 
news items to the DG, Rangers so that he may also make 
a categorical statement in respect of the partial or 
complete existence of ‘no -go areas’. The learned 
Additional Advocate General would also remind him that 
earlier he had emphatically taken a stance that there is 
‘no-go’ area in Lyari but also in other parts of the Karachi 
which correspond with the sketch appended above. The 
DG Rangers shall explain that despite availability of 
resources and command as to why the law and order 
situation is not improved not only in Lyari  but also in the 
rest of the areas of Karachi for the last so many years. In 
the meanwhile, both the Agencies if desired, may take 
necessary steps to abolish all ‘no -go’ areas for which 
purpose we have already given two weeks’ time to the 
concerned agencie s. The learned Additional A.G. shall 
hand over copy of this order to the incumbent Chief 
Secretary Sindh.”  
 
CMA No.226 -K/2013 signed by Inspector General of Police has been 
filed, containing certain documents including the certificates purported 
to have be en issued in compliance of the order dated 29.03.2013. In 
these documents/certificates it has been certified that no “No Go 
Areas” exist in district Malir Karachi. All the certificates are stereotype 
as the same computer font and the language has been used . 
Reference may be made to the certificates pertaining to district East, 
copy of which has been placed on record.  
  5 
2.   It is to be noted that order dated 29.03.2013 we have 
passed on the basis of the report appeared in daily “The Express 
Tribune”. Direct ions were also issued to Police and DG, Rangers in the 
orders dated 22.03.2013 and 29.3.2013, noted hereinabove.  
 
3.   With reference to both these orders a report (CMA No.228 -
K/2013) has been submitted by the DG, Rangers. In respect of the 
later order, re ference of which finds mention in the report, except 
mentioning the names of area , date of operation  and details , like 
at serial No.1, “Safoora Goth, Gulshan -e-Iqbal Town”  in the 
column under the heading “Area Dominate”  operation success or 
failure and cle aring the ‘No Go Areas’ or about its existence, no 
statement has been given in this regard. The concluding para of the 
report is also irrelevant with reference to the ‘area dominate’ noted 
hereinabove as the contents of the same speak for itself, which rea ds 
as under: - 
“It is most respectfully submitted that as per the directions of 
the Honourable Court, Terrorists whether belonging to TTP or 
banned SSP or LeJ are being kept under constant vigilance, and 
sustained and repeated operations are and will be con ducted to 
eradicate this menace from Karachi. It is submitted that all such 
areas will cleared as soon as possible.”  
4.   It is equally important to note that a list of persons 
declared “black” in JIT has also been appended wherein 71 names of 
the culprits  involved in heinous crimes including murders etc. have 
been noted. Surprisingly, despite declaring them “black” in JIT 
(comprising of law enforcing agencies including the members of 
Rangers) like accused Munir Ahmed @ Anjum, Sohail Ahmed @ Kala, 
Muhammad Kashif @ Shakeel Burger etc. purportedly charged for 
murders of about 115, 47 and 6 persons respectively have been 
booked vide FIRs under sections 353/324/34 PPC and 13 -D etc. 
instead of putting the challan against them under the commission of  6 
crime of mur der etc. For reference three entries are reproduced 
hereinbelow from the said list: - 
LIST OF PERSONS DECLARED BLACK IN JIT  
Ser Name/Father’s 
name  JIT Grading/ 
Confessions  Handed 
over/ Date  Progress of 
Prosecution  
1. Munir Ahmed @ 
Anjum s/o 
Muhammad 
Bakhsh  Black  
 115x murders  
 5xinjured  
 Forceful 
collection of 
Fitrana/Chanda/
Hides  PS New 
Town 
17.9.11   FIR no 335/11, 
352/11, 352/11 u/s 
353/324, 13 -D, PS 
New Town  
 Challan has been 
submitted in 1xFIRs,  
 Released on bail  
2. Sohail Ahmed @ 
Kala Munna s/o 
Muhammad 
Khalil Black  
 47xmurders  
 10xinjured  CID 11.9.11   FIR No.423/11, 
424/11, 429/11, 
430/11, u/s 
353/324/34, 13 -D, 
4/5 Explosive Act, 
CID dated 16.9.11  
 Challan has been 
submitted in 4xFIRs  
 Jail Custody  
3. Muhammad 
Kashif @ 
Shakeel Burgar 
s/o Muhammad 
Shafiq  Black  
 6xmurders  
 1xInjured  CID East 
16.9.11   FIR No.423/11, 
425/11, 426/11, u/s 
353/324/34, 13 -D, 
4/5 Explosive Act, 
CID dated 16.9.11  
 Challan has been 
submitted in 3xFIRs  
 Jail Custody  
 
There is also names of accused persons like Danyal Hussain @ Mota 
(at Sr. No.2 7), who allegedly has confessed his involvement for 
murder of 24 persons but despite it, he has also been booked under 
section 353, 324/34 PPC 13 -D of the Arms Ordinance etc. We are not 
ready to accept the authenticity/credibility of such information passe d 
on to the Court because if a person is involved in capital crime/offence 
i.e. for murder of 115 or less persons and challan has been submitted 
under section 353, 324/34 PPC etc. as it has been noted hereinabove, 
obviously, the court seized with the matte r would not go beyond the 
record, which has been placed before it. And if he is shown involved in 
such a crime, which entails sentence for a period ranging between 7 to 
12 years, he could conveniently make out a case for grant of bail  7 
because in such situa tion following the due process of law, the court 
cannot deny such concession to the accused.  
 
5.   It seems that by means of placing such record an attempt 
has been made to give impression to the Court that law enforcing 
agencies, i.e. Police and the Rang ers, are successfully causing the 
arrest of the criminals, involved in serious/heinous crimes but the 
Courts before whom the matter is put up, are releasing them, although 
they were involved in capital offences etc. The impression, in fact, has 
been given to shift the responsibility upon the courts instead of 
establishing that if such accused is involved in the commission of 
offence, he has to be dealt with under the law without extending any 
concession or showing any leniency to him. Therefore, the impress ion, 
which has been created in the minds of ordinary citizens that such 
accused persons are being released on bail or acquitted is absolutely 
incorrect as it has been explained hereinabove. However, under the 
circumstances, we direct the DG, Rangers that h e should produce all 
the files of all 71 persons before us by tomorrow with FIR wherein they 
are involved in the commission of offence and also offering explanation 
made by him as well as by IGP as to why the accused were challaned 
under sections 353, 324/ 34 PPC, instead of under section 302 PPC etc.  
 
6.   We, while realizing our commitment to the Constitution, do 
insist upon both the agencies i.e. Rangers and the Police that as per 
their authority conferred upon them under the law, to deal with the 
crimina ls strictly, who are committing crimes against the society and 
have put the lives of citizen in danger, thereby creating atmosphere of 
insecurity in Karachi. We have also noted some activities on behalf of  8 
Rangers and Police after hearing of the case have started but without 
any successful result because the citizens invariably claim non -
protection to their life and property which has been granted under the 
Constitution.  
 
7.   As far as second report of D.G. Rangers in compliance of 
order dated 22.03.2013 is concerned, it is not specific one. As we have 
noted in our order dated 29.03.2013 that the information brought 
forward by the renowned newspaper has either to be accepted or 
rejected in view of the undergoing exercise, reference of which has 
been made i n the relevant paras of the orders, reproduced 
hereinabove. Similarly, in our earlier order dated 22.03.2013, 
somehow identical directions were given but we have noted that both 
the agencies have failed to provide data, as required in terms of the 
directio ns. Rangers and Police have been deputed in the city to restore 
the law and order situation so that the crime is controlled and the life 
and property of the citizens is protected but when both the law 
enforcing agencies put up reports like the ones which h ave been filed 
today, we feel that efforts are not being made with full commitment 
vigorously and attempts are being made just to satisfy the Court 
during the period when hearing of the case of such nature commence. 
Therefore, under the circumstances, we h ereby direct the IGP and the 
DG, Rangers in pursuance of earlier orders and subsequent order 
dated 22.03.2013 that to ensure full protection to the life and property 
to the citizens, they should lead operation and clear all the No Go 
Areas including Lyari etc. The Chief Secretary, the Government of 
Sindh shall be kept into picture fully, who on expiry of seven days’  9 
period shall submit report, certifying under his signatures that there is 
no area under “fearful influence of criminals’ in the city of Karachi .  
 
8.   Mr. Najam Tareen, SP Lyari is present and stated that after 
passing of the orders dated 22.03.2013 and 29.03.2013 situation has 
improved in Lyari. Indeed, such statement is surprising for us, which 
has been given by the Superintendent of Police, w ho instead of saying 
that in compliance of the directions of this Court the police as well as 
the Rangers had fully established the writ of the government and there 
is absolutely no area of fearful influence of the criminals and all the 
persons involved in  the heinous crimes etc. have been dealt with 
according to the Constitution and the law, has made such statement. 
When we inquired from him that as to whether all culprits/accused 
persons involved in the crimes in all the four police stations of Lyari 
have been arrested, he stated that about 30% were arrested. In such 
view of the matter, we have directed him to file, by tomorrow, total 
numbers of the FIR registered in all the four police stations along with 
the details of the accused and whether he has succ eeded to cause 
their arrest, if not so, what are the reasons for the same.  
9.   Mr. Shahid Hayat DIG Police stated that he is conducting 
investigation of the case of Arshad Pappu and FIR No.23/13 has also 
been registered on the complaint of Mst. Asma Arsh ad widow of 
Arshad Pappu and out of ten accused, three accused namely Zubari, 
Zakir Dada and Shahjahan Baloch as well as Yousaf Baloch, a Police 
Inspector have been arrested. As far as remaining accused are 
concerned, for their arrest, he requested for som e time. Request is 
allowed.   10 
10.   It has been informed by Mr. Adnan Karim, Assistant 
Advocate General that government of Sindh has created a post of 
Project Director, IT (B -18) in the office of IGP, Karachi in pursuance of 
order dated 22.3.2003 passed by this Court. He has placed on record 
two letters of Government of Sindh. Learned Advocate General Sindh 
has confirmed that a letter for allocating budget for the said post has 
also been received by him.  
11.  This Court vide judgment in the case of Watan Par y v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 997) in respect of punishment to 
land grabbers and encroachers, made following observations: - 
 
“Further observe that there is a need for a fresh comprehensive 
law to eliminate and punish land grabbers and encroachers . This 
is one of Karachi’s greatest problems. The Court has already 
dealt with some cases Suo Motu and otherwise, and will 
continue to do so whenever necessary or appropriate. 
Sometimes this Court is the last hope of the citizens or a 
community which turns  to it for redress when all other avenues 
are denied to them. But overall it is the duty of both 
Governments to formulate such law and initiate it in the 
appropriate assembly; and thereafter to implement it fully 
without showing any favour or immunity to a ny person whether 
a political favourite, ally or for any other personal or party 
consideration.”  
 
Although hearing of the implementation proceedings of the above 
judgment continued from time to time but it appears that the issue of 
encroachment of the land  and their removal has not been dealt with 
firmly. In as much as allegedly head of the Force, meant for removing 
the encroachment etc. under the Sindh Public Property (Removal of 
Encroachment)Act, 2010 prima facie,  failed to discharge his function 
despite providing police contingents as per the requirements and  11 
instead of registering the cases under the Act, 2010, cases has been 
registered under Pakistan Penal Code.  
 
12.   Syed Irfan Bahadur, who is Superintendent of Police  
himself is party in litigation,  wherein serious allegations were leveled 
against him by the aggrieved persons by invoking constitutional 
jurisdiction of the High Court or instituting suites against him but still 
there are so many victims, who, though succeeded in getting lodged 
reports,  which have been registered under section 448 PPC etc. 
instead under the Act, 2010, yet their cases were not Challaned in the 
Court mainly for the reasons that for want of evidence no case is likely 
to be proceeded against the accused persons. On 22.03.201 3 in this 
context we passed following order: - 
 
“24. Mr. Shahadat Awan, learned Prosecutor General 
Sindh stated that from the date of promulgation of the Act, 
2010, 145 FIRs were registered and put up before the 
Special Court, out of which 62 are pending de cision 
whereas the remaining have been disposed of as ‘A’ Class 
or ‘C’ Class. We could not understand as to how such like 
cases can be disposed of in A or C class. The SP 
Encroachment Cell shall submit details of each case, which 
was disposed of either as ‘A’ or as ‘C’ class during 
investigation. He shall also submit report about the cases, 
which were quashed. The learned Prosecutor General may 
also submit the details of such cases with his comments 
separately as to whether any further action in this behalf  
has been taken or not and if the cases have failed in Court 
for want of sufficient evidence, he would fix responsibility 
on the investigation team or other concerned. He would 
further point out whether the properties in possession of  12 
encroachers/land -grabbers have been retrieved or are still 
in their unlawful possession along with its complete 
details.”  
 
“(e) The SP Encroachment Cell is directed to submit his 
report within 7 days as to whether the 
encroachments by the land -grabbers have been 
cleared withi n the Karachi area and land has been 
retrieved.  
 
 
(f) The Prosecutor General, Sindh is directed to submit 
the details of the cases, which were filed before the 
Tribunal or the Special Court under the Sindh Public 
Property (Removal of Encroachment) Act, 201 0  and 
state the reasons for their failure of the cases by 
fixing responsibility upon the officers involved in 
these cases and action, if taken against any one of 
them. He would further state as to whether the 
properties encroached/grabbed have been retrie ved 
or not?”  
 
13.   In response to the notice we have been informed that the 
Revenue Department, Government of Sindh vide notification No.104 -
11-3-2013 has appointed two Assistant Commissioners and 
Mukhtiarkars as authorized officers. Mr. Shahadat Awan, le arned 
Prosecutor General in compliance of the order placed on record CMA 
No.221 -K/2013. He has referred to its various parts of it including 
page 173 under caption “Disciplinary Action Against 36 Following 
Officials/Complainants Mentioned in Letter Dated 0 1.04.2013, 
Issued By Learned Deputy District Public Prosecutor Posted At 
Special Court, Sindh Public Property (Removal of 
Encroachment) Karachi ”. At the same time, he has placed on record 
details of 25 cases, wherein despite registration of the cases the l and 
has not been retrieved. Besides it, he has also drawn our attention 
that against 36 persons, action has been taken for not conducting the 
prosecution. Reference made, to some extent seems to be correct as  13 
in one of the cases, in which Muhammad Yousaf, Mukhtiarkar is 
involved, in a case FIR No.04/2010. In this case investigation was 
conducted by Muhammad Hussain, ASI, who failed to point out any 
illegality in the FIR and kept the file with him for a long time. He was 
issued show -cause notice and finally penalty of stoppage of one years 
increment was imposed upon him. Perusal of the file shows so many 
examples of the same nature. On our query about the compliance of 
directions contained in para 24 above, Syed Irfan Bahadur has also 
placed on record CMA No. 230-K/2013, which supports our 
observations noted hereinabove that instead of exercising power under 
the Act, 2010, he has registered the cases under the provision of PPC 
and ultimately despite of registration of the cases allegedly they failed 
to get retr ieved the property and case was declared as “A Class” or it 
was quashed by the Court because no accused, involved, was available 
for the purpose of trial. We fail to understand that once an offence 
under section 448 PPC allegedly has been registered, the a ccused 
person against whom allegation is made, is bound to be identified and 
arrested but it seems that such devices are being used by the SP or 
his party to pressurize the parties for same consideration, known to 
them or functionaries of the Board of Reve nue. It is not the only case 
against the Anti -Encroachment Force to remove the encroachments or 
restoration of the properties etc. but staff of the Board of Revenue, as 
reference of 36 Mukhtiarkars has been made, have joined hands 
reportedly with the encro achers, as a result whereof instead of 
creating the deterrence to the encroachers, they are committing such 
crimes because of the implied assurance of either of the authorized 
officers or the force headed by Syed Irfan Bahadur, SP to provide  14 
protection as a result thereof in a good number of cases either FIR is 
cancelled or Superior Courts quash the FIRs. CMAs No.204 -K/2013 and 
205-K/2013 have also been filed by Syed Irfan Bahadur before filing of 
CMA NO.230 -K/2013. In such view of the matter, we direct Sye d Irfan 
Bahadur SP to place on record for our perusal detail of the cases 
pending against him before the Civil Court or High Court by tomorrow 
for our perusal and passing orders if need be. If there is any case 
pending before the High Court, the Registrar of this Court shall inform 
the Registrar of the said High Court that the matters pertaining to the 
encroachment, are required to be disposed of expeditiously in view of 
the observations made hereinabove.  
 
14.   Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi stated that there are so 
many serious allegations against Irfan Bahadur, SP as according to 
him few days before he had assisted to one of the encroachers/land 
grabbers in taking over the property of about 15 acres in the area of 
Qayyum Abad, Korangi and one Maqsood SP of Si ndh Police, on having 
information about this fact had approached to the victims, recorded 
their statements and took photographs, which fully establish about the 
allegations against Irfan Bahadur. In such view of the matter, we 
direct the learned Deputy Att orney General, present in Court that he 
should accompany to Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi and Irfan Bahadur as 
well as SP Maqsood, visit the place of incident today in the evening 
and put up report by tomorrow.  
 
15.   We have asked Syed Irfan Bahadur being a polic e officer of 
the rank of SP that he should not involve in such like activities because 
once the allegations are prima facie established then machinery of law  15 
will come into motion and he has to be dealt accordingly and if such 
exercise is undertaken, likel ihood of taking strict action against him by 
this Court or the department cannot be ruled out.  
 
16.   Mr. Nazar Muhammad Leghari, Consultant BOR has also 
informed that despite direction of this Court Government of Sindh has 
not appointed so far the Presid ing Officer of the Tribunal under the Act, 
2010. In this context Mr. Shahadat Awan, learned Prosecutor General 
stated that he has placed on record letters/correspondence in CMA 
221-K/2013. It seems that despite of the order, except sending a 
letter to the Registrar of High Court on 28.03.2013 no step so far has 
been taken in this behalf. Learned Advocate General as well as the 
Registrar of the High Court of Sindh may bring this issue in the notice 
of learned Chief Justice enabling him to recommend the perso ns 
having the qualification according to law for the purpose of 
appointment and on receipt of such recommendation, the notification 
of the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal shall be issued within three 
days.  
 
17.  Mr. Muhammad Ahmed Pirzada, ASC appeared on behalf of 
Board of Revenue and in response to our earlier order dated 
22.03.2013, filed CMA No.220 -K/2013 and stated that he has collected 
information about pendency of a Writ Petition before the High Court in 
No.D-1608/2 wherein after hearing the argum ents judgment is 
reserved which is likely to be announced at any time. It would be in 
the interest of justice, the learned High Court may announce the 
judgment as early as possible. A copy of the judgment be sent to the 
Registrar of this   Court  for   our    perusal   in  Chamber.  Mr.  Ismail  16 
Shaheedi is present and stated that his suit being No.762/1995 is still 
pending for adjudication from 1995 and is not being allowed to be 
proceeded and is adjourned for one or the other reason. It would be in 
the inte rest of justice if the learned High Court may take up this 
matter as early as could be possible and decide the same expeditiously 
preferably within a period of two months from the receipt of order.  
 
18.   Mr. Nazar Muhammad Leghari requests for time to fil e 
reply of CMA No.164 -K/2013. In this CMA serious question about the 
alleged misappropriation of the Government revenue, etc. has been 
raised. The allegation in respect of the irregularity and illegality in the 
Police Department, Revenue Department and the  Treasury / Finance in 
respect of the payment of the revenue dues has been highlighted. 
However, it would not be possible to file its reply by the Board of 
Revenue, therefore, we direct that the reply should also be filed by the 
Inspector General Police, F inance Secretary and Sr. Member, Board of 
Revenue with reference to each item stated therein. At this stage Mr. 
Nazar Muhammad Leghari has stated that as far as portion of the 
application relating to non -depositing of the fee or prices of the land 
through challan is concerned, same has already been filed through 
CMA No.218 -K/13. Let the authority noted the above also file the reply 
thereto thereafter we will take up CMA No.218 -K/13 and pass order if 
need be.  
 
In respect of the reconstruction of the revenue  record, which has 
allegedly been burnt, CMA No.208 -K/13 has been filed. On our query it 
is informed by Mr. Nazar Muhammad Leghari that the complete  17 
reconstruction had not taken place, except some portion in respect of 
only 83 Dehs, which, according to him , are situated in Taluka Kotri, 
Qambar, Miru Khan, Warah, Shahdadkot and Qabu Saeed Khan. 
However, he stated that the record of Thana Bula Khan has also been 
completed. When it was inquired from Mr. Jawed Shar, Assistant 
Commissioner, he stated that record  of this Taluka has been 
completed and the record of 23 Dehs has been handed over to Board 
of Revenue, where Muhammad Qasim Lashari, Member (Judicial), 
Board of Revenue, is undertaking exercise to review the whole record 
of Thana Bula Khan and Thatta Distr ict.  
 
Be that as it may, on the next date of hearing Senior Member, 
Board of Revenue shall put up a complete report in this behalf.  
 
19.  CMA No.208 -K/2013 along with appendix on behalf of the 
Board of Revenue has been filed, indicating that the claims o f the 
burnt record, except Deh 83 has been finalized, which shall be 
examined in the meanwhile.  
 
20. In pursuance of contentions raised in CMA.No.183 -K/2013, 
following directions were issued in the order dated 22.03.2012: - 
 
(j)  Notice of CMA. No.183 -K/2013 be issued to the Senior 
Member Board of Revenue, Member Land Utilization as 
well as the Secretary Forest.  
 
(k) The District & Sessions Judge Hyderabad is directed to 
appoint a judicial officer not below the rank of Senior 
Civil Judge along with Presiden t District Bar Association 
Hyderabad to visit Deh Shah Bukhari, Taluka Qasimabad  18 
and prepare a report indicating as to whether on the 
land, which is meant for reserved forest, who is in the 
possession and whether any construction work is going 
on, on the s aid land.  
 
21.   Mr. Mohammad Wasim, Secretary Forest has filed CMA 
No.215 -K/2013 and stated that the status of 1446 -24 acres of Deh 
Shah Bukhari has wrongly been de -notified by the Land Utilization 
Officer vide letter dated 22.01.2012, therefore, the same  deserves to 
be cancelled/ de -notified. The Secretary and Member Land Revenue 
placed on record letter dated 03.04.2013 and stated that earlier order 
dated 23.01.2012 regarding de -notifying forest land admeasuring 
1446-24 acres of Taluka Qasimabad in favour  of Government of Sindh 
Land Utilization Department has been withdrawn/cancelled. In addition 
to the above stand taken by Member Land Utilization, Board of 
Revenue and the Secretary Forest, a Commission appointed by this 
Court as it is noted hereinabove ha s also submitted report being 
No.CMA 206 -K/2013. Concluding Paras of the report signed by 
President Hyderabad District Bar Association and Senior Civil Judge, 
are reproduced herein below: - 
  “In view of our inspection of the site, we have found that: - 
 
1. In Part-1 of the Forest Reserved land a Builder, namely, 
Fida Ali Khawaja, is in possession of about 20 to 30 acres 
of Forest Reserved Land, who has illegally announced a 
Housing Scheme in the name of “Indus River View City” . 
There are villages, houses and sh ops of villagers in Forest 
Reserved land, who claim to be in possession of the land 
since their forefathers. However, they do not have any 
title documents of the land in support of their claim.  
  19 
2. The Part -2 of the land is mostly barren and un -cultivated 
land. Only about 150 acres is developed land and from 
the Dhal Receipts (Revenue Tax Receipts), it appears that 
the cultivating part of the land admeasuring 90 Acres is in 
possession of only one person, namely, Kashif Ali Shoro 
s/o Deedar Hussain Shoro, who h ad paid the Revenue Tax 
for the Kharif Season 2012 -13.  There is only one pacca 
house in the said land and the concerned Supervising 
Tapedar told the names of occupants of the said house as 
Urs Shoro and Khadim Shoro.  
 
22. Member Land Utilization Department in compliance of the above 
order has filed a compliance report (CMA. No.217 -K/2013), concluding 
Para reads as under: - 
“As per report of Deputy Commissioner Hyderabad where 
he has stated that there are two villages Goth Saleh 
Mohammad Shoro and G oth Khamiso Mallah and houses of 
Khadim Shoro & Urs Shoro consisting on 4 & 5 rooms with 
compound wall is existing there in N.C.No.215. An area 
about 85 -00 to 90 -00 acres of the Forest land was 
cultivated by the grantees in the Kharif Season 2012 -13 
and th ey have also paid local fund and abiana, while the 
remaining area of the land is barren.  
 
23.  Before finally disposing of this matter, Mr. Fida Ali Khawaja 
and Dr. Akram Qureshi appeared and claimed that they and their 
family members have purchased this p roperties in the year 1979 from 
one Major Hanif and Abid Khanzada in the names of their family 
members, which also finds mentioned in the report of Land Utilization 
Department, therefore, they stated that to the extent of their 
property, neither the Forest  Department nor Board of Revenue could 
raise any claim. Although no application has been filed nor any 
document has been placed on record, except on our query, a  20 
photocopy of Form -VII has been placed on record. We feel that no 
prejudice should be caused on  account of instant proceedings to them 
and the same parties cannot be pushed to further litigation particularly 
when according to the report submitted by Senior Civil Judge, the 
President High Court Bar Association as well as the Member Land 
Utilization D epartment, who have visited the site in company of the 
Deputy Commissioner stated that a Housing Scheme is being 
constructed on a portion of land in respect whereof claim has been 
raised by them. Therefore, to resolve the controversy a simple and 
possible solution is that the property should be demarcated separating, 
if any, piece of land owned by Fida Ali Khawaja, Dr. Akram Qureshi 
and their family members. At this stage, it would also not be out of 
context to note that according to the Report of Assistant  Commissioner 
Qasimabad this land has been demarcated with the technical 
assistance of Survey Staff of Director Settlement Survey and Land 
Record Sindh Hyderabad and the Tapedar of Beat, which shows that 
the area under encroachment is 33 -00 acres out of    88-09 acres of 
NA-Class -115 and on which they have also constructed a site office 
main gate at the front of the scheme and also constructed 
Katcha/Pacca roads. Goth Ghulam Rasool is also existing there and 
rest of the land is lying vacant, but it seems th at this technical 
assistance by the Survey Staff has not taken place in presence of 
claimants Fida Ali Khawaja and Dr. Akram Qureshi, therefore, in all 
fairness we provide another opportunity to the Forest Department, 
Board of Revenue as well as to both of  them that they should conduct 
a joint survey in their presence. The survey of the land shall be carried 
out subject to verifying their title documents. Demarcation of the  21 
property shall be carried out by the Member Land Utilization 
Department, Director La nds, Deputy Commissioner along with Mr. 
Zulfiqar Shah Member Board of Revenue (Record & Survey) and any 
representative of Fida Ali Khawaja and Dr. Akram Qureshi in presence 
of the Senior Civil Judge, Hyderabad to whom directions shall be 
issued by the Dist rict & Sessions Judge, Hyderabad to ensure that no 
injustice is caused to anyone. This report must be prepared within a 
period of 10 days. Copy of the same shall be sent to the Register for 
our perusal in Chambers.  
 
 As the Court time is over, the further proceedings will be taken 
up tomorrow i.e. 05.04.2013.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
4th April, 2013  
Nisar/*  
 