 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Justice Yahya Afridi  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
 
REFERENCE NO. 1 OF 2011  
 
[Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan under Article 186 
of the Constitution]  
 
In Attendance : 
 
On behalf of President  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan  with 
Mr. Javed Iqbal Weins,  
Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 
On Court Notice   : Mr. Hassan Akbar, Advocate -General, Sindh.  
Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl . AG, Balochistan.  
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan,  Addl AG, 
Khyber Pakhtunk hwa. 
 
For Applicant   : Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC  with 
(In CMA No.8622/2018)    Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari.  
 
Amicus Curi ae  : Mr. Ali Ahmed Kurd, ASC.  
 
Complainant   : Mr. Ahmed Raza Kasuri.  
 
Date of Hearing   : 12.12.2023 . 
 
ORDER  
1. Reference No. 1 of 2011 was filed by the President of Pakistan under 
Article 186 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
(‘Presidential Reference ’) with regard to the late Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto’s 
(‘Mr. Bhutto ’) criminal trial and convicti on, and it was entertained by this 
Court . A number of hearings took place  till 12 November 2012 , but 
thereafter the Presidential Reference was not fixed in Court . A number of 
other president ial references , filed later under Article 186 of the 
Constitution,  were taken up for hearing and decided by this Court , but this  Reference No. 1 of 2011  
 
 
 2
Presidential Reference remains pending , therefore, it merits determination 
as early as possible.  
 
2. Learned Mr. Farooq H. Naek  referred to  an application  (CMA 
No.8622 /2018)  filed on behalf of Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari , the grandson 
of the late Mr. Bhutto  and states he wants to be represented  herein . We are  
inform ed that there is only one surviving daughter of the late Mr. Bhutto 
and he has eight grandchildren . The application is a llowed and learned Mr. 
Naek may represent Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari  and assist this Court . If 
Mr. Bhutto’s daughter and any of his grandchildren also want to be 
represented they may engage counsel. Mr. Naek states that he has also filed 
an application (CMA No. 10492/2023) seeking live telecast of these 
proceedings, however, the committee constituted in this regard had before 
filing of the application already made requisite arrangements and 
recommended that the Presidential Reference be broadcast , and 
proce edings are being broadcast ,1 therefore, this application has become 
infructuous and is disposed of .  
 
3. Learned Mr. Naek refer s to the report of Justice Shafi -ur-Rehman, 
who was then a Judge of the Lahore High Court, regarding the  investigation 
into the  murder of Mr. Mohammad Ahmed Khan, the father of the 
complainant, Mr. Ahmed Raza Khan Kasuri. He requested that he be 
provided its copy. A Tribunal of inquiry was constituted by the Government 
of Punjab in exercise of its powers conferred by section 3 of the West 
Pakistan Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 1969 .2 The Report of the Tribunal  
is dated 22 February 1975 and comprises of 30 pages, and is mentioned in 
the judgment of the Lahore High Court3 and also in the appeal therefrom.4  
 
4. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘AG’) was asked whether 
any of the successive President s or the Federal Government sought to 
withdraw the Presidential Reference or want s to do so now , and the learned 
AG stated that this was not done nor is this sought to be done now.  
 
5. Learned AG  was asked to  read the Presidential Reference , which he 
did. He also read some of the order s of this Court , including order dated 21 
                                                
1 https://www.youtube.com/live/fnsKtf1yM78?si=Wnye57Er_IJ39zB0 . 
2 Notification No.SOG -III-6-309/74, dated 13 November 1974, published in the Punjab Gazette on 11 
December 1974.  
3 State v Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  PLD 1978 Lahore 523.  
4 Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto v State , PLD 1979 Supreme Court 53, p. 61, para 9.  Reference No. 1 of 2011  
 
 
 3
April 20115 which formulated questions for the opinion of this Court.  A 
number of amici curiae  were app ointed , some of whom have passed away 
and others we are told are indisposed . Learned  Mr. Ali Ahmed Kurd , an 
amicus appointed by this Court , states that he will be rendering assistance. 
We are also informed that learned Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan , another amicus  
appointed by this Court, will also be rendering assistance.  Notice had also 
been issued to the Supreme Court Bar Association (‘ SCBA ’) and the late Ms. 
Asma Jahangir represented SCBA; if SCBA want to be represented before 
this Court they may nominate a cou nsel to assist us. We also appoint 
learned Messrs Khalid Javed Khan, Salahuddin Ahmed and Zahid F. 
Ebrahim as amici curiae . Mr. Yas ser Kureshi, an academic working at 
Oxford University, United Kingdom, and Ms. Reema Omer of the 
International Commission of Jurists  are also appointed as amici curiae . 
They are appointed to particularly attend to the constitutional and legal 
aspect s of the matter.  
 
6. The first and foremost constitutional  and legal points , in addition to 
those recorded in order dated 21 April 2011, that require consideration are:   
 
(1) Whether the Presidential Reference is maintainable under  Article 186 
of the Constitution ;  
(2) Whether the Presidential Reference requires a factual inquiry, and if 
so, whether under Article 186 of the Constitution an opinion can be 
given in this regard;   
(3) The constitutional -legal position of the trial and appeal, and its 
credibility/legitimacy when the person being tried was removed from 
power by a usurper who himself assumed power  and then launched 
the prosecution of Mr. Bhutto in a criminal case which was filed as 
‘untraced’; and  
(4) Were certain judge(s) removed from  the trial and/or hearing the 
appeal to secure a particular result.  
 
7. If the aforesaid aspect is successfully attended to then we will need to 
consider the trial and appeal which will require expertise in criminal law 
and procedure.  Justice Manzoor Ahmed Malik, former Judge of the 
Supreme Court , and Justice Assadullah Khan Chamkani, a former Judge of 
the Peshawar High Cour t, have vast experience and we want to benefit from 
their knowledge in this regard , therefore, they are  appoint ed as amici 
curiae , who may either submit a written brief and/or address us in person. 
We not e that learned Mr. Khawaja Haris Ahmed was the Advocate -General, 
                                                
5 In re: Reference No. 1 of 2011 , 2011 SCMR 962 . Reference No. 1 of 2011  
 
 
 4
Punjab and was associated w ith the Presidential Reference when it was 
earlier heard  and is also a criminal law expert , therefore, he  is also 
appointed as  amicus curiae  to assist with the criminal law and procedure . 
 
8. With regard to the criminal law aspects the  learned amici curiae  may 
assist on the following :  
(1) If, and when, can a murder trial be conducted by the High Court , and 
to cite local and  international precedent s; 
(2) Was the murder -trial being conducted by the High Court objected to , 
and if it was , how was the objection attended to ; 
(3)  The consequences, if any, of departing from the usual mode of trial ;  
(4) The admissibility or otherwise of a confessional statement of an 
approver and to what extent can it be used agains t a co-accused ;  
(5) Was there any legal bias, and if so its effects; and  
(6) What were the facts leading to reopening the investigation, and  was it 
because fresh evidence had been  discovered  or was it on account of 
the usurper securing his position.  
 
9. The Presidential Reference refers to an interview , which we are told 
was given to Mr. Iftikhar Ahmed of Geo television by Justice Nasim Hassan 
Shah, who was on the Bench of the Supreme Court which decided the 
appeal and review .6 Mr. Ahmed Raza Kasuri also refers to his application 
(CMA No. 5788/2011) and states that he has filed extracts from a book 
written by the same learned Judge - Constitution, Law and Pakistan Affairs . 
Mr. Naek  states that Justice D orab Patel had also given an interview  about  
the case.  
 
10. Office is directed to send cop ies of th e Presidential Reference , all 
orders and the Report of the Tribunal  to the learned amici curiae  who may 
attend to the questions noted above , in order dated 21 April 2011  and in 
the Presidential Reference. The learned amici  may submit their respective 
written opinion s on all or any of the said matters , and on any other aspect 
which they consider relevant , by Friday, 5 January 2024 . 
 
11. Notice be issued to Geo television to provide unedited -complete 
recordin g of the interview of Justice Nasim Hassan Shah  conducted by Mr. 
Iftikhar Ahmed , and any other interview which it may have with any other 
Judge who had conducted the trial or the appeal of Mr. Bhutto ’s case . 
                                                
6 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto v State,  PLD 1979 Supreme Court 741 . Reference No. 1 of 2011  
 
 
 5
Learned Mr. Naek  has also undertaken to provide such recordings with 
their transcripts  by or before Friday, 5 January 2024.  
 
11. To come up on  Monday, 8  January 2024  at 11:30 am.  
 
 
 
 
                    Qazi Faez Isa , CJ.
                
    
 
             Sardar Tariq Masood, J.  
 
 
 
           Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J.  
             
 
 
                                                       Yahya Afridi, J.  
 
 
 
                Amin -ud-Din Khan, J. 
              
 
 
                  Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J.  
 
 
 
         Muhammad Ali Mazhar, J.                    
   
 
 
         Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi, J.  
 
 
 
             Musarrat Hilali, J.  
 
 
  
 
 
                       
 
      
                                  
Islamabad:  
12.12.2023  
(M. Tauseef , Hassan  K.W. ) 
Approved for Reporting  