 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
     (Original Jurisdiction)   
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Faisal Arab  
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.17 & 19 OF 2019 
& C.M.A. NO.7417 OF 2019 IN CONST. P. 19 OF 
2019 & CONSTITUTION PETITION S NO.20 -30,  
32 & 34 OF 2019.  
 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.17/2019)  
  
Supreme Court Bar Association thr.  
its President  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.19/2019)  
  
Abid Hassan Minto & another  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.20/2019)  
  
Pakistan Bar Council thr.  
its Vice Chairman  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.21/2019)  
  
Abdul Basit, President High Court  
Bar Association, Quetta.  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.22/2019)  
  
Muhammad Asif Reki, President  
Quetta Bar Association  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.23/2019)  
  
Sindh High Court Bar Association  
thr. its President  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.24/2019)  
  
Balochistan Bar Council thr. its  
Vice Chairman Haji Atta Ullah Langove  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.25/2019)  
  
Sindh Bar Council thr. it Secretary  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.26/2019)  
  
Hafiz Abdur Rehman Ansari, ASC  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.27/2019)  
  2 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Karachi Bar Association through  
its President & other  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.28/2019)  
  
KPK Bar Council through  
its Vice Chairman  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.29/2019)  
  
Peshawar High Court Bar Association  
thr. its President  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.30/2019)  
  
Shahnawaz Ismail, Vice Chairman  
Punjab Bar Council  … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.32/2019)  
  
Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists  
(PFUJ) thr. its President   … Petitioner(s)  
(in Const.P.34/2019)  
  
VERSUS  
 
The President of Pakistan and others  …Respondent(s)  
 (in Const.P.17, 19, 21 -25, 
27-30, 32 & 34 of 2019)  
  
The Supreme Judicial Council thr.  
its Secretary and others  … Respondent(s)  
(in Const.P.20&26/2019)  
  
Const. P. No.17 of 2019.   
For the petitioner(s)  : Mr. Munir A. Malik, Sr. ASC.  
a/w Mr.  Justice Qazi Faez Isa (appeared 
in-person  on 17.06.2020 ) 
Mrs. Qazi Faez Isa (appeared through 
video link  on 18.06.2020 ) 
Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC.  
Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC.  
Ch. Atif Rafiq, ASC.  
assisted by : 
Barrister Kabir Hashmi &  
Barrister Rabi -bin-Tariq.  
 
Mr. Babar Sattar, ASC.  
assisted by: Miss Shohan Karimi, 
Advocate.  
 
Syed Kazim Hassan, ASC.  
Mr. Kassim Mir Jat, AOR.  
 
 
Const. P. No.19 of 2019.   
For the petitioner(s)  : Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Naseebullah Tareen, ASC.  
Mr. Munir Kakar, ASC.  
Mr. Ajmal Ghaffar Toor, Advocate.  3 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
  
Syed Qalb -e-Hassan, ASC.  
Mr. Amanullah Kanarani, ASC.  
 
Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Abbas Rasheed Rizvi, Advocate.  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR.  
 
Const. P. No.20 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Bilal Hassan Minto, ASC.  
Ms. Hina Jillani, ASC.  
 
Const. P. No.21 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Sardar Muhammad Aslam, ASC.  
Syed Amjad Ali Shah, ASC.  
Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC.  
Mr. Azam Nazeer Tarar, ASC.  
Mr. Abid Saqi, ASC.  
 
Hafiz M. Idrees, ASC.  
Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Asad Ladha, Advocate &  
Malik Ghulam Sabir, Advocate.  
 
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
 
Const. P. No.22 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Naseebullah Tareen, ASC.  
Syed Amjad Ali Shah, ASC.  
   
Const. P. No.23 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Naseebullah Tareen, ASC.  
Mr. Munir Kakar, ASC.  
Mr. Ajmal Ghaffar Toor, Advocate  
Mr. Asif Reki, Advocate.  
  
Sh. Ahsan -ud-Din, ASC.    
Mr. Khushal Kansi, ASC.  
 
Const. P. No.24 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Abbas Rasheed Rizvi, Advocate.  
Mr. M. Aqil, ASC.   
Mr. Kassim Mir Jat, AOR.  4 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
Const. P. No.25 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Naseebullah Tareen, ASC.  
Mr. Munir Kakar, ASC.  
Mr. Ajmal Ghaffar Toor, Advocate  
 
Mr. Rashid A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  Mr. Abbas Rasheed Rizvi, 
Advocate.  
 
Const. P. No.26 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mian Raza Rabbani, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Zeshan Abdullah, Advocate.  
Mr. Saalim Salim Ansari, ASC.  
   
Const. P. No.27 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Hafiz Abdul Rehman Ansari, ASC.  
Mr. Taufiq Asif, ASC.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
 
Const. P. No.28 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Abbas Rasheed Rizvi, Advocate.  
Syed Haider Imam, ASC.  
 
Const. P. No.29 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Barrister Saad M. Buttar  
Barrister Jibran Gillani &  
Miss Ramsha Hayat, Advocate.  
 
Mr. Abdul Latif Afridi, ASC.  
Mr. Tariq Khan Hoti, ASC.  
 
Const. P. No.30 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Barrister Saad M. Buttar  
Barrister Jibran Gillani &  
Miss Ramsha Hayat, Advocate.  
 
Mr. Abdul Latif Afridi, ASC.  
Mr. Tariq Khan Hoti, ASC.  
 5 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Const. P. No.32 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Naseebullah Tareen, ASC.  
Mr. Munir Kakar, ASC.  
Mr. Ajmal Ghaffar Toor, Advocate.  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR.  
 
Const. P. No.34 of 2019.   
For the petitioner (s)  : Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
assisted by:  
Mr. Abbas Rasheed Rizvi, Advocate.  
 
   
For respondents (2&8)  : Dr. Farogh Naseem, Sr. ASC a/w  
Ch. Ishtiaq Ahmed Khan, Addl. AG  
Mr. Sajeel Sheryar Swati, ASC.  
assisted by:  
Barrister Maleeka Ali Bukhari  
Ch. Hassan Murtza Mann, Adv.  
Mr. Shahid Naseem Gondal, Adv.  
   
For respondent No. 1  : Mr. Sohail Mehmood, DAG.  
   
For respondent No.3  : Mr. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AG.  
   
For respondent No. 4  : Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC  
   
For respondent No.9  : Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC a/w  
Mr. Sajeel Sheryar  Sawati, ASC.  
   
For respondent No.10  : Abdul Waheed Dogar (in-person).  
   
For respondent No.11  : Waheed Shahzad Butt (in-person).  
   
For Supreme Judicial 
Council  : Mr. Arbab Arif, Secretary, SJC/  
Khawaja Daud Ahmad, Secretary SJC.  
   
Dates of hearing  : 17.09.2019; 24.09.2019; 08.10.2019; 
14.10.2019; 15.10.2019; 21.10.2019; 
28.10.2019; 29.10.2019; 04.11.2019; 
05.11.2019; 06.11.2019; 11.11.2019; 
12.11.2019; 13.11.2019; 18.11.2019; 
19.11.2019; 27.11.2019; 28.11.2019; 
02.12.2019; 03.12.2019; 04.12. 2019; 
16.12.2019; 17.12.2019; 18.12.2019; 
19.12.2019; 20.01.2020; 21.01.2020; 
22.01.2020; 27.01.2020; 28.01.2020; 
29.01.2020; 03.02.2020; 17.02.2020; 
18.02.2020; 19.02.2020; 24.02.2020; 6 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
02.06.2020; 03.06.2020; 04.06.2020; 
11.06.2020; 12.06.2020; 15.06.2020 ; 
16.06.2020; 17.06.2020; 18.06.2020 
& 19.06.2020.  
   
JUDGMENT:  
   UMAR ATA BANDIAL J. -  
786 
“Surah An Nisa, Verse 135: O YOU who have 
attained to faith! Be ever steadfast in 
upholding equity, bearing witness to the 
truth for the sake of God, even though it be 
against your own selves or your parents and 
kinsfolk.  Whether the person concerned be 
rich or poor,  God's claim takes precedence 
over [the claims of] either of them. Do not, 
then, follow your own desires, lest you swerve 
from justice:  for if y ou distort [the truth], 
behold, God is indeed aware of all that you 
do.” 
Translation by Muhammad Asad  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Justice is an article of faith in our religion, whether that may 
be against our kith and kin or against the rich or poor. 
However, justice is an abstract concept attainable only where 
the scales of justice are held by persons (the Judges) who 
balance these  equitably without regard to their personal 
desires. Indeed, the latter is the duty of the Superior 
Judiciary by virtue of their Oath to dispense justice without 
any fear or favour, affection or ill -will (ref: Third Schedule to 
the Constitution, Oath for J udges of the Superior Courts). 
This serves as proof that Judges of the Superior Courts are 
bound to be impartial and are entitled to be independent in 
the dispensation of justice.  7 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
2.   In fact, a n impartial and  independent judiciary  is 
universally recogni sed as  a core value of any civilised 
democracy. This is evidenced by  the international conventions 
that protect this value as a fundamental right of the people  
(ref: United Nations Basic Principles on the Independence of 
Judiciary and The (Montreal) Univer sal Declaration on the 
Independence of Justice) . The significance of an independent 
judiciary is also deeply embedded in Pakistan with the 
Constitution itself guaranteeing in its Preamble that:  
“…the independence of the judiciary shall be 
fully secured ;” 
 
Even this Court in its pronouncements on the meaningful 
working of the Constitutional scheme of trichotomy of powers 
has many a times reaffirmed that the judiciary must enjoy the 
confidence of the litigants and the general public in its 
impartiality and co mmitment to dispense justice in 
accordance with law. A prerequisite for these attributes is the 
guarantee of the independence of the judiciary, a fact which 
this Court acknowledged in the case of Muhammad Aslam 
Awan Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (2014 SCMR 12 89). The 
relevant portion which can be found at para -2 is produced 
below:  
“2: Judicial independence both of the 
individual Judge and of the Judiciary as an 
institution is essential so that those who 
bring their causes/cases before the Judges 
and the public in general have confidence 
that their cases would be decided justly and 
in accordance with law.  Judicial 8 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
independence is one of the foundational 
values of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan which is based on trichotomy of 
powers in whi ch the functions of each organ 
of the State have been constitutionally 
delineated. The very Preamble of the 
Constitution pledges "wherein the 
independence of judiciary shall be fully 
secured". The Constitution makers conferred 
this independence because the y wanted the 
Judges to "do right to all manner of people, 
according to law, without fear or favour, 
affection or ill -will" (Oath of office of Judges). 
The fundamental rights guaranteed under the 
Constitution cannot be secured unless 
Judiciary is independen t because the 
enforcement of these rights has been left to 
Judiciary in terms of Articles 184(3) and 199 
of the Constitution and the relevant law.  
Judiciary has not been made part of the 
Executive or the Legislature (Article 7). The 
separation of Judiciary  from the Executive 
was made a Constitutional mandate (Article 
175(3)) .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
It is  in this context that Justice Qazi Faez Isa ( “the 
petitioner” ) submits that he has filed the  present 
Constitution Petition No. 17 of 2019  (“petition” ) seekin g to 
protect this basic fundamental right of the Pakistani people 
from unlawful interference by the Executive authorities. To 
our minds, the primary duty of the Bench in all matters, 
including the present petition, is to do justice impartially in 
accordanc e with law without compromising our 
independence.  
FACTS  
3.   In the above background, we may now set out the 
events which led to the filing of this petition. The petitioner is 
a serving Judge of the Supreme Court. Prior to this he was 9 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
appointed directly as  Chief Justice of Baluchistan High Court 
on 05.08.2009, following which he was elevated to the 
Supreme Court on 05.09.2014. The petitioner has thus been 
holding public office since the later part of 2009. On 
10.04.2019, Respondent No. 4, Mirza Shahzad Akba r, 
Chairman Assets Recovery Unit ( “ARU” ), received a letter 
from a journalist, one Mr. Abdul Waheed Dogar ( “Mr. 
Dogar” ). The letter alleged that the petitioner had certain 
properties in the United Kingdom owned in the name of his 
wife, (“Mrs. Isa” ), which he had not declared. Attached with 
this letter was a document detailing one of the properties, 40 
Oakdale Road , London, E11 4DL. However, the respondents 
only produced this document once they commenced their 
arguments on 02.06.2020. Thereafter, the Chairma n ARU met 
with the Law Minister on 16.04.2019 who authorised the ARU 
to investigate into the matter on the basis of the above 
mentioned information. This is recalled in the former’s letter 
dated 10.05.2019 addressed to the Law Minister.  
4.   After the gran t of the aforenoted authorisation on 
16.04.2019, certain inquiries were made by ARU to confirm 
the veracity of the allegations levelled against the petitioner 
by Mr. Dogar: firstly, the legal expert of ARU, Barrister Zia Ul 
Mustafa Nasim, was asked to find  out whether the petitioner 
owned any properties in the United Kingdom in the name of 
Mrs. Isa and secondly, the Chairman of Federal Board of 
Revenue ( “FBR” ) was approached for examining the tax 10 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
records of the petitioner and Mrs. Isa to determine whether 
any foreign properties had been declared in their wealth 
statements.  
5.   On 08.05.2019, the legal expert of ARU conveyed 
to the Chairman ARU that there were three properties in the 
United Kingdom belonging to Mrs. Isa and her children. Their 
details are as follows:  
i. 50 C oniston Court which was 
originally leased to the petitione r’s 
wife in 2004 for a sum of £236,000 
and was later renewed in October 
2011 with the daughter added as a 
co-lessee ; 
ii. 40 Oakdale Road which was 
purchased by the wife and daughter 
on 27.03.2013 for a sum of 
£245,000 ; and 
iii. 90 Adelaide Road which was 
purchased by the wife and son on 
28.06.2013 for a sum of £270,000 
(“London P roperties” ).  
 
Subsequently, on 10.05.2019 the Assistant Commissioner 
(Inland Revenue ) confirmed  to the Commissioner (Inland 
Revenue)  that neither the petitioner nor Mrs. Isa  had declared 
these properties in their wealth statements. Additionally, he 
revealed that Mrs. Isa had stopped filing her tax returns from 
the tax year 2015 and onwards.  
6.   On receipt of this information, the Chairman of 
ARU wrote a memorandum to the La w Minister on 
10.05.2019 apprising him about the recent findings. On the 
basis of this material, claimed to demonstrate the petitioner’s 11 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
ownership of undeclared foreign assets, the Ministry of Law 
and Justice on 17.05.2019 prepared a summary for the Prime 
Minister ( “PM” ). This summary recommended the PM to 
advise the President to file a Reference under Article 209(5) of 
the Constitution before the Supreme Judicial Council ( “SJC” ) 
alleging misconduct against the petitioner. On 20.05.2019 the 
President approv ed and signed the Reference (this was later 
numbered as SJC Reference No. 1 of 2019) which was filed 
with Secretary SJC on 23.05.2019. The primary allegation in 
the Reference against the petitioner was that he had violated 
Section 116 of the Income Tax Ord inance, 2001 ( “the 
Ordinance” ) by not declaring the London Properties of Mrs. 
Isa and his children in his wealth statements. The Reference 
also alleged that the source of funds for purchasing these 
properties was not accounted for which meant that the aspe ct 
of money laundering could not be ruled out.  
7.   Consequent to the Reference being filed, the SJC 
by a formal intimation dated 14.06.2019 directed the 
petitioner to respond to the three allegations contained in the 
Reference (ref: Const. P. No. 17 of 2 019, Part II), particularly:  
“Page106: …the factum of ownership  of 
the relevant properties mentioned in the 
Reference, the source of funds  utilized for 
their acquisition and the mode of transfer 
of such funds. ”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 12 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
The petitioner filed hi s Preliminary Response on 28.06.2019 
in which he admitted that the London Properties were owned 
by his wife, who he claimed was a financially independent 
taxpayer, and his adult children (ref: page 128, Const. P. No. 
17 of 2019, Part II). However, no expla nation was provided for 
the other two questions posed by the SJC. As a result, the 
SJC by its order dated 02.07.2019 asked the former learned 
Attorney General ( “AG” ) to assist the Council on the next date 
of hearing on 12.07.2019. Consequently, the AG file d a 
Rejoinder before the SJC on 11.07.2019. After considering the 
Preliminary Response of the petitioner and the Rejoinder and 
documents filed by the AG, on 12.07.2019 the SJC ordered 
the issuance of a Show Cause Notice ( “SCN” ) to the 
petitioner. The SCN w as issued on 17.07.2019. In his Interim 
Reply to the SCN dated 31.07.2019, the petitioner 
categorically rejected being the owner, both actual and 
ostensible, of the London Properties and further denied all 
knowledge of their particulars. Thereafter, he fil ed the present 
petition bearing the number Const. P. 17 of 2019 under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution on 07.08.2019 with the 
following prayer:  
A. Declare that Reference No. 1 and 
Reference No. 427 are not maintainable 
and non -est dismiss the same;  
B. Declare that Reference No. 1 and 
Reference No. 427 are mala fide , filed 
with malice aforethought, filed for 
ulterior motives and to achieve a 
collateral purpose and therefore are not 
maintainable and liable to be 
dismissed;  13 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
C. Declare that proceeding any furt her 
with Reference No. 1 and Reference No. 
427 undermines the independence of 
the judiciary, which independence is 
secured under the Constitution;  
D. Declare that as Reference No. 1 has 
been filed by proxy it is not 
maintainable and cannot be 
entertained;  
E. Declare that as there is every likelihood 
for this petition succeeding the Hon’ble 
Supreme Judicial Council be restrained 
from proceeding in the matter of 
Reference No. 1 and Reference No. 427 
till the disposal of this Petition;  
F. Declare that in camera proc eedings of 
the Hon’ble Council in the context of 
this case are without lawful authority 
and in breach of fundamental rights;  
G. Grant any other, further or better relief 
to which the Petitioner may be entitled 
to and which this Hon’ble Court deems 
fit and pro per to grant under Article 
184 (3) of the Constitution.  
 
8.   The above noted prayer in the petition is preceded 
by fifty -four questions of law. The main contentions 
formulated by the learned counsel for the petitioner are as 
follows:  
i. There was no legal ob ligation on the petitioner to 
disclose the London Properties of his wife and children;  
ii. The alleged misconduct has no nexus with the office of 
the petitioner;  
iii. The Reference is a mala fide and colourable exercise of 
power;  
iv. The petitioner and his family were subjected to covert 
State surveillance;  
v. The evidence against the petitioner was collected 
illegally;  14 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
vi. The ARU was constituted without any legal authority;  
vii. There was no authorisation from the President to collect 
material in support of the complaint;  
viii. The President did not form his opinion in terms of 
Article 209(5) of the Constitution;  
ix. No approval of the Federal Cabinet was taken prior to 
the filing of the Reference before the SJC;  
x. There is no substance to the allegations levelled against 
the petitioner i n the Reference; and  
xi. The members of the SJC harbour bias against the 
petitioner (however, learned counsel for the petitioner 
did not press this argument during oral submissions).   
 
On the factual plane, learned counsel for the petitioner 
repeatedly contended that because the London Properties are 
held in the names of the petitioner’s financially independent 
taxpayer wife and adult children, the tax authorities should 
question them about the source of funds and the mode of 
their transfer, instead of h arassing the petitioner through a 
Presidential reference filed under Article 209 of the 
Constitution.  
9.   Subsequent to the filing of Const. P. No. 17 of 
2019 before this Court, the following Constitution Petitions 
were also filed by the Bar Councils and Associations and 15 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
concerned citizens of Pakistan to defend the integrity of the 
petitioner:  
i. Supreme Court Bar Association V s. President of 
Pakistan and others (Const. P. No. 19 of 2019);  
ii. Abid Hassan Minto and another V s. Supreme Judicial 
Council through its  Secretary and others  (Const. P. No. 
20 of 2019);  
iii. Pakistan Bar Council V s. President of Pakistan  (Const. 
P. No. 21 of 2019);  
iv. Abdul Basit President Hig h Court Bar Association 
Quetta V s. President of Pakistan  (Const. P. No. 22 of 
2019);  
v. Muhammad Asif Reki Pr esident Quetta Bar Association 
Vs. President of Pakistan (Const. P. No. 23 of 2019);  
vi. Sindh High Court Bar Association Vs.  President of 
Pakistan  (Const. P. No. 24 of 2019);  
vii. Balochistan Bar Council V s. President of Pakistan  
(Const. P. No. 25 of 2019);   
viii. Sindh Bar Council V s. Supreme Judicial Council 
through its Secretary  (Const. P. No. 26 of 2019);   
ix. Hafiz Abdur Rehman Ansari V s. President of Pakistan 
(Const. P. No. 27 of 2019);  
x. Karachi Bar Association V s. President of Pakistan 
(Const. P. No. 28 of 2019);  
xi. KPK Bar Council V s. President of Pakistan  (Const. P. 
No. 29 of 2019);   16 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
xii. Peshawar High Court Bar Association Vs. President of 
Pakistan (Const. P. No. 30 of 2019);  
xiii. Punjab Bar Council V s. President of Pakistan (Const. P. 
No. 32 of 2019); and  
xiv. Pakistan Federal Union  of Journal ists Vs. President of 
Pakistan (Const. P. No. 34 of 2019).  
These connected petitions primarily raised similar 
contentions as those agitated by the petitioner, namely, the 
non-application of mind by the President, mala fides on the 
part of the re spondents in the framing and preparation of the 
Reference, the precise nature and scope of Article 209(5) of 
the Constitution, the unlawful creation of the ARU and the 
necessity of protecting the independence of the judiciary. In 
the interests of justice, these petitions were clubbed together 
and were heard along with the main petition filed by the 
petitioner.  
10.   In rebuttal to the petitioner’s pleas and without 
assailing his integrity, the respondents submitted the 
following objections and contentions:   
i. The petition is not maintainable for failing to cross the 
bar under Article 211 of the Constitution both in 
respect of the pre -reference proceedings and the 
unchallenged SCN issued by the SJC;  17 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
ii. The term misconduct is an inclusive term which 
includes not o nly conduct which violates the law but 
also conduct which is unbecoming of an officer;  
iii. The conduct of the petitioner has to be viewed in light of 
the obligations laid out in the Code of Conduct;  
iv. There is no ulterior purpose behind the filing of the 
Refere nce; 
v. There has been no covert surveillance of the petitioner 
or his family or any breach of their right to privacy;  
vi. There has been no illegal collection of evidence;  
vii. The ARU has been properly constituted;  
viii. The President has formed his opinion in accordance 
with law; and  
ix. There is merit in the allegations levelled against the 
petitioner in the Reference.  
11.   At the outset, we would like to mention that the 
first hearing for this petition commenced on 17.09 .2019 in 
front of a seven member Bench. However, learned counsel for 
the petitioner filed an objection application against two 
learned Judges of the Bench, namely, Justice Sardar Tariq 
Masood and Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan. He submitted that an 
adverse outcome for the petitioner, i.e. removal from office, 
would benefit both the learned Judges in the following 
manner: Justice Sardar Tariq Masood would become Chief 
Justice for six months in the year 2023 while Justice Ijaz ul 18 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Ahsan would thereafter see his tenure as Chief Justice 
increase from ten months to seventeen months. Accordingly, 
he requested the two learned Judges to recuse themselves 
from hearing this petition. The remaining five members of the 
Bench unanimously disapproved of this application of the 
learned counsel in their order dated 17.09.2019 reported as 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa Vs. The President of Pakistan  (2019 
SCMR 1875):  
“5: …  The submissions made by the learned 
counsel, however, do not disclose such an 
interest. On the other hand, the suggestion is 
that a tangible interest may accrue four years 
later. It involves a contingent, prospective 
and speculative interest. No precedent to hold 
such a future contingency to be a 
disqualifying factor for a Judge has been 
cited by the learned co unsel. His plea is 
accordingly laden with contingencies and 
possibly fails the test of a "real likelihood" of 
prejudice  from any Member of this Bench 
[Asif Ali Zardari v. State (PLD 2001 SC 568 at 
p.592)]. As such the submissions made by 
learned counsel pr ima facie do not carry 
weight. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
However, Justice Sardar Tariq Masood, immediately, and 
Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, with strong reservations, recused 
themselves from the Bench to maintain the purity, dignity 
and sanctity  of this Court. For co nvenience, a portion from 
the note penned by Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan is reproduced below:  
“2: However, in view of the reservations,  
unfortunately expressed on behalf of the 
petitioner,  who is a brother Judge of this 
Court, which are neither justified nor hav e 
any basis whatsoever in fact,  I do not 
consider it appropriate to hear these 19 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
petitions, lest the petitioner entertain the 
remotest possibility of even a notional 
element of partiality or bias on my part.”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
It was in these circumstance s that the file of this case was 
placed before the (then) Chief Justice to constitute a Full 
Court of eligible Judges who were neither members of the SJC 
nor were objected to by the petitioner.  
12.   As a result, a Bench comprising of ten learned 
Judges was formed which heard this petition for 
approximately 10 months, during which period learned 
counsel for the petitioner argued their case across 18 
hearings, learned counsel in the connected petitions argued 
their cases across 10 hearings and learned coun sel for the 
respondents argued his case across 13 hearings. 
Subsequently, this Court passed a short order on 19.06.2020 
which is reproduced below for convenience:  
“O R D E R  
For detailed reasons to be recorded later and 
subject to any orders made or directions 
given therein (if any), these petitions are 
allowed and disposed of in the following 
terms:  
1. Subject to what is stated below, the 
Order of the Court is that Reference No. 1 of 
2019 is declared to be of no legal effect 
whatsoever and stands qua shed, and in 
consequence thereof the proceedings pending 
in the Supreme Judicial Council (“Council”) 
against the Petitioner in CP 17/2019 
(including the show -cause notice dated 
17.07.2019 issued to him) stand abated.  
2. Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi dismisses C P 
17/2019 and disposes of the other petitions 
in terms as stated in para 1 herein above.  20 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
3. Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, Mr. 
Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik, Mr. Justice 
Faisal Arab, Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan 
Miankhel, Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah, Mr. 
Justice Munib Akhtar and Mr. Justice Qazi 
Muhammad Amin Ahmed make the following 
orders as the further Order of the Court 
(paras 4 to 11 herein below):  
4. Within 7 days of this Order, the 
concerned Commissioner of Inland Revenue 
shall himself (and not some oth er officer 
exercising delegated powers) issue 
appropriate notices under the Income Tax 
Ordinance, 2001 (“2001 Ordinance”) to the 
spouse and children of the Petitioner to offer 
an explanation regarding the nature and 
source of the funds (separately for each  
property) whereby the three properties in the 
United Kingdom (viz., No. 40, Oakdale Road, 
London E11 4DL; No. 90, Adelaide Road, 
London E10 5NW; and No. 50, Coniston 
Court, Kendal Street, London W2 2AN) that 
are in the names of the spouse and the 
children  were acquired. For purposes of this 
Order the Commissioner Inland Revenue 
having jurisdiction over the spouse of the 
Petitioner (who must be a Commissioner 
exercising jurisdiction and performing 
functions at Islamabad) shall be deemed also 
to be the Commi ssioner having jurisdiction 
over the children. (The spouse and children 
are herein after referred to as “the 
respondents”.) Any notices issued or 
proceedings taken (or proposed to be issued 
or taken) under the 2001 Ordinance in 
relation to any of the respo ndents in respect, 
or on account, of the properties aforesaid 
prior to the date of this Order stand 
terminated forthwith.  
5. The notices shall be served at the 
official residence of the Petitioner at 
Islamabad through courier service and such 
other means a s may be considered 
appropriate and shall be deemed served on 
the respondents when received at the said 
address.  
6. The respondents shall furnish their 
replies to the notices along with such 
material and record as is deemed 
appropriate. In case any of them  is outside 
the country, it shall be the responsibility of 
such person to timely file a response, and the 
proceedings before the Commissioner shall 21 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
not be adjourned or delayed for the reason of 
non-availability in Pakistan of such person.  
7. Upon receipt o f the replies (and of such 
additional material/record as may be filed in 
response to such clarification or explanation, 
if any, as the Commissioner may, in writing, 
have sought), the Commissioner shall give an 
opportunity of hearing to the respondents in 
person or through an authorized 
representative/counsel and shall thereupon 
make an order in accordance with the 2001 
Ordinance.  
8. The proceedings shall be concluded 
before the Commissioner within 60 days of 
the date of receipt of the notices as aforesaid, 
and the order shall be issued by him within 
75 days of the said date of receipt, and no 
adjournment or extension in time whatsoever 
shall be given as affects or extends the 
aforesaid periods.  
9. Within 7 days of the issuance of the 
order by the Commissione r, the Chairman, 
Federal Board of Revenue (“FBR”) shall 
submit a report (to be personally signed by 
him) to the Council through its Secretary (i.e., 
the Registrar of the Supreme Court) regarding 
the proceedings as aforesaid, appending 
thereto the entire re cord of the said 
proceedings. The Secretary shall forthwith 
place such report before the Chairman of the 
Council (i.e., the Hon’ble Chief Justice of 
Pakistan) who shall, in such manner as is 
deemed appropriate, have the report laid 
before the Council for s uch perusal, 
consideration, action, order or proceedings, if 
any, in relation to the Petitioner as the 
Council may determine. The receipt of the 
report, the laying of it before the Council and 
the action/proceedings, if any, or orders or 
directions, if any , as may be taken, made or 
given by the Council thereon shall be 
deemed, for purposes of Article 209 of the 
Constitution, to be in exercise of the suo 
moto jurisdiction as is conferred by that 
Article on the Council.  
10. If, within 100 days from the date o f this 
Order, no report as aforesaid is received by 
the Secretary from the Chairman, FBR, he 
shall inform the Chairman of the Council 
accordingly and shall, if so directed by him, 
write to the Chairman, FBR requiring an 
explanation as to why the report has  not been 
received. If in reply the report is filed, then 22 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the matter shall proceed in terms of para 9 
herein above. If a reply is received without 
the report or no reply is received, then the 
Secretary shall bring such fact to the 
attention of the Chairman  of the Council who 
may direct that the matter be placed before 
the Council for such perusal, consideration, 
action, order or proceedings, if any, in 
relation to the Petitioner (or any other person 
as deemed appropriate) as the Council may 
determine. The a ction/proceedings, if any, or 
orders or directions, if any, as may be taken, 
made or given by the Council shall be 
deemed, for purposes of Article 209 of the 
Constitution, to be in exercise of the suo 
moto jurisdiction as is conferred by that 
Article on th e Council. Without prejudice to 
the foregoing, if at any stage the report is 
received from the Chairman, FBR, then the 
matter shall in any case proceed (or be 
deemed to proceed, as the case may be) in 
terms of para 9 herein above.  
11. For the removal of an y doubts, it is 
clarified that any of the proceedings under 
the 2001 Ordinance as herein contemplated 
on the one hand, and before the Council in 
terms of paras 9 or 10 herein above on the 
other, are distinct and separate from each 
other. Accordingly, nothi ng contained in this 
Order shall affect or prejudice the right(s) of 
appeal of any of the respondents under the 
2001 Ordinance, if they feel aggrieved by the 
order made by the Commissioner or (as the 
case may be) any order made or decision 
taken at any app ellate stage. Any such 
appeal(s) shall be decided on the merits, in 
accordance with the 2001 Ordinance. At the 
same time (and needless to say), the 
consideration by the Council of any matter 
placed before it under either paras 9 or 10 
herein above shall no t be affected by the filing 
or pendency of any appeal as aforesaid. But 
the Council may, if it deems appropriate, 
notice such appellate proceedings or 
orders/decisions and may (for purposes only 
of the matter before it) make such orders or 
give such direct ions in relation thereto as it 
deems appropriate.  
12. Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar, Mr. Justice 
Mansoor Ali Shah and Mr. Justice Yahya 
Afridi join in the Order of the Court only to 
the extent of para 1 herein above, and also 
make their own order.  23 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Order per Ma qbool Baqar, Syed Mansoor Ali 
Shah and Yahya Afridi, JJ.  
13. For the reasons to be recorded later and 
without limiting our jurisdiction in any 
manner to appropriately enlarge the scope of 
or make appropriate declarations and 
directions in the detailed judg ment, subject 
to para 15 hereunder, we hold the above 
petitions maintainable and allow the same. 
One of the outcomes of such declaration is 
that the Reference filed by the President of 
Pakistan against the Petitioner (Mr. Justice 
Qazi Faez Isa) is quashed,  and as a result the 
proceedings alongwith the Show Cause Notice 
issued by Supreme Judicial Council stand 
abated.  
14. One of our pivotal Constitutional values 
is that the independence of judiciary shall be 
fully secured.  The same Constitution also 
ordain s that to enjoy the protection of law 
and to be treated in accordance with law is 
the inalienable right of every citizen. 
Therefore, it is reiterated that in our 
constitutional democracy, neither the 
petitioner judge, nor any other judge, or any 
individual  or any institution, is above the law. 
The doors of the constitutional forum i.e., 
Supreme Judicial Council are always open, 
either on its own motion or for anyone who 
has a genuine and a bonafide grievance, 
amenable to the jurisdiction of the Council 
against a Judge of the Constitutional Court. 
At the same time, it is equally important, that 
a Judge like any other citizen of Pakistan 
enjoys the inalienable constitutional right to 
be treated in accordance with law. These 
fundamental values are to be protect ed at all 
cost in order to uphold the majesty and 
supremacy of the Constitution and to honour 
the people of Pakistan who have adopted and 
given to themselves this Constitution.    
15. Yahya Afridi, J. has however found 
Constitutional Petition No. 17/2019 a s non -
maintainable.    
 
Herein below are the detailed reasons for this short order.  
MAINTAINABILITY  
13.   The first matter which requires our consideration 
is the issue of maintainability of this petition under Article 24 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
184(3) of the Constitution. Although no objection has been 
raised by the learned counsel for the respondents in this 
regard, it is still the bo unden duty of this Court to establish 
the requisite jurisdictional facts under Article 184(3) 
regardless of whether the said point has been agitated or not. 
An examination of the jurisprudence of this Court makes it 
clear that in order to invoke its origin al jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, the impugned action must 
be shown to involve a matter of public importance arising 
from the breach of a fundamental right which affects the 
public at large. These Constitutional criteria have been 
reiterated in the case of Al-Jehad Trust and another Vs. 
Lahore High Court  (2011 SCMR 1688) in which this Court 
held:  
“11: … unless the matter is of public 
importance relating to the enforcement of any 
of the fundamental rights conferred by Part 
II, Chapter 1 of the Constitution (Articles 8 to 
28), the jurisdiction of the Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, cannot be 
invoked. The mere importance of a matter, 
without enforcement of any fundamental 
right or reference to a fundamental right 
without a ny public importance, will not 
attract the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution .” 
 
14.   The fundamental right of the general public which 
is claimed by the petitioner to be under threat is the 
derivative right of the indepen dence of the judiciary. This 
right is an essential prerequisite for the enjoyment of, inter 
alia, the principal fundamental right to access justice which 25 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
is guaranteed to the people of Pakistan by Articles 4, 9 and 
10-A of the Constitution. This Court in Sh. Riaz -Ul-Haq Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2013 SC 501) observed that:  
“28: It is to be noted that the right of "access 
to justice to all" is a well recognized inviolable 
right enshrined in Article 9 of the 
Constitution and is equally found in the 
doctrine of "due process of law". It includes 
the right to be treated according to law, the 
right to have a fair and proper trial and a 
right to have an impartial court or tribunal .” 
 
15.   It will be useful at this stage to consider in  greater  
detail the independence of the judiciary, in the absence of 
which all other facets of the right to access justice are 
essentially rendered null and void. Indeed, the  constitutional  
necessity of an independent judiciary for providing  such  
access to justice to the public has been elaborated succinctly 
in the case of Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry Vs. President of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 
SC 61):  
“60: I would, therefore, conclude and hold 
that access to justice was a Fundamental 
Right which the  Constitution had guaranteed 
to the people; that the existence of an 
independent and vibrant judiciary was 
indispensable and crucial for the enjoyment 
of the said constitutional assurance and in 
the absence thereof, this right would be a 
mere illusion; tha t without security to the 
Judges of the Superior Courts vis -a-vis, inter 
alia, their service and the tenure thereof, the 
independence of judiciary would be a mere 
delusion and a chimera;…”  
 
 26 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Two crucial points emerge from the above quoted passage:  
i. Firstly , it holds that any unlawful interference 
with Article 179 of the Constitution (which fixes 
the tenure of the Judges of the Supreme Court 
and sets the retiring age at 65 years), and any 
illegal bypass of the mechanism set out in Article 
209 of the Constitu tion (which provides the 
procedure for the removal of Superior Court 
Judges) is an interference with the right to access 
justice. This is because such breaches erode the 
independence of the judiciary.  
ii. Secondly, it affirms that although each individual 
Judg e is guaranteed the right to be independent 
by the Constitution, it is in essence the judiciary 
as a whole whose independence has to be secured 
and protected.  
Learned  counsel for  both the petitioner and the Bar Councils 
and Associations were at pains to s tress this  last point. It was 
emphasised by the latter that the ir principled stand was not 
just for the petitioner rather it was for the institution. It was 
the assault and targeting of the judiciary and the grave 
dangers which this posed to the right to a ccess justice that 
compelled  the Bar Councils and Associations to file the 
connected petitions.  27 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 16.   However, in focusing on protecting Judges from 
the clutches of the Executive, learned counsel  have failed to 
notice that the counter poise of this fundam ental right is  
judicial accountability. This  necessarily  follows from the 
indisputable fact that the independence of the judiciary is not 
primarily for the benefit of the Judges , but exists  instead to 
secure the interests, rights and benefits enjoyed by  the whole 
of society. Therefore, if one were to focus only on the 
protection of the judiciary from the depredations of the organs 
of the State (howsoever vitally important and crucial that may 
be), it will not be the independence of judiciary that will resul t 
but rather it would be the rule of Judges without any checks 
and balances. Accordingly, it is only fitting that judicial 
independence and accountability are treated as being 
complementary to each other. With that being said, it has to 
be kept in mind tha t the petitioner has alleged that there ha ve 
been serious  violations of Article 209(5) of the Constitution in 
the preparation of the Reference against him. As we have 
already observed, unlawful infringements of Article 209 erode 
the independence of the jud iciary which is directly connected 
with the right to access justice. Therefore, the present petition 
satisfies the two -fold requirement of Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution.  
17.   Be that as it may, learned counsel for the 
respondents has objected to the maintainability of the petition 
on the ground that the SJC has taken cognizance of the 28 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Reference by issuing a SCN to the petitioner. This happened 
after SJC took into consideration the petitioner’s Preliminary 
Response dated 28.06.2019 and Interim Reply dated 
31.07.2019 on the merits of the Reference. However, as our 
short order dated 19.06.2020 has declared the Reference to 
be of no legal effect, this contention of the learned couns el is 
misplaced. The SCN issued by the SJC to the petitioner is 
premised on grounds given in the Reference. These have been 
held by us to suffer from serious illegalities. Notwithstanding 
the fact that the veracity and substance of the underlying 
factual i nformation of ownership of the London Properties is 
not denied and remains intact, the SCN cannot survive on its 
own. This is for two reasons: firstly, although the factual 
matrix set out in the Reference attributes misconduct to the 
petitioner, the inform ation contained in it without more is 
insufficient to sustain a reference for the removal of a Judge 
of the Superior Courts. Secondly, the allegations in the SCN 
that are derived from the Reference are discredited by the 
same illegalities that invalidate t he grounds of the Reference. 
Therefore, the SCN stands abated.  
18.   Learned counsel for the respondents has 
countered this line of reasoning by invoking the ouster clause 
contained in Article 211 of the Constitution. For ease of 
reference, this provision  is produced below:  
“211. Bar of Jurisdiction. The proceedings 
before the Council, its report to the President 
and the removal of a Judge under clause (6) 29 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
of Article 209 shall not be called in question 
in any court .” 
 
He has submitted that Article 211 ibid mandates that 
proceedings before the SJC are to be accorded a high degree 
of respect. He urged that such deference was confirmed in the 
CJP case ( supra ) which limited a challenge to the proceedings 
before the SJC to the following grounds:  
“102: Having thu s looked into the question of 
jurisdiction of this Court vis -a-vis the 
Supreme Judicial Council, I would conclude 
as under :-- 
………………………………………………………….  
(c) that the ouster clause of Article 211 of the 
Constitution would not protect acts which 
were mala fide or coram non judice or were 
acts taken without jurisdiction ;” 
 
19.   He argued that because learned counsel for the 
petitioner did not press any of the three grounds mentioned 
in the CJP case (s upra), namely, coram non judice or actions 
that are mala fide or without jurisdiction, against the SJC 
during oral submissions, this Bench could not quash the SCN 
issued to the petitioner. While we are in complete agreement 
with the learned counsel’s submission so far as it deals with 
the degree of respect to be affo rded to the SJC and the 
sanctity attached to its proceedings, we cannot accept the 
conclusion that he has drawn from this argument. Such 
reasoning fails to grasp the crucial point that we have neither 
adjudicated upon the process of the SJC nor quashed its  SCN 30 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
issued to the petitioner. In fact, in view of the findings 
recorded in this judgment, we have simply abated the SCN. It 
is true that the factual information underlying the Reference 
casts a smear on the petitioner’s name and cannot be 
ignored; however , without confronting the owners of the 
London Properties the information is at present inchoate to 
form the basis of proceedings under Article 209 of the 
Constitution. In these circumstances, we have agreed with 
the petitioner’s plea that the same must be  verified to test the 
veracity of the inference drawn in the Reference about the 
source of funds. Nevertheless, as the latter has been quashed, 
the SCN issued by the SJC has no foundation except for the 
preliminary factual information contained in the Refe rence. In 
this situation, the SCN has rightly been abated because it 
also lacks the factual and legal material on which the 
Reference was based. Accordingly, Article 211 has no 
application to the available facts of the present case.  
20.   Before parting w ith this area of discussion, we 
would like to clarify a very crucial aspect of this case that we 
believe has led to some confusion: namely, what standard of 
review ought to be applied by the Court for determining 
whether a reference filed before the SJC is  legal or not. 
During oral submissions, learned counsel for the petitioner 
relied upon the CJP case ( supra ) to argue that pre -reference 31 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
proceedings can be struck down on judicial review grounds. 
The relevant portion from the judgment is produced below:  
“70: Having thus examined all aspects of this 
question, I would conclude and would 
consequently declare: -- 
………………………………………………………....  
(d) that the said matters not hit by the 
mischief of Article 211 and mentioned 
above, would be subject to examination, 
scrutiny an d judicial review like any other 
executive or administrative act. ” 
 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
21.   However, learned counsel’s reliance on the CJP 
case (s upra) for this point is of minor significance. In that 
case the Full Bench quashed the reference against the (then) 
Chief Justice on the ground of malice in fact. Nowhere does 
the judgment use any of the judicial review grounds to set 
aside the reference. None theless, out of respect for the Larger 
Bench hearing the CJP case (s upra), we can only convey our 
reservations and not our disagreement with the aforesaid 
observation.  
22.   Be that as it may, it is by now well -settled that 
SJC is a unique (and the only) body which can examine the 
conduct of a Superior Court Judge and decide whether the 
said Judge is fit to complete his tenure. Reliance in this 
regard is placed on the case of Khan Asfandyar Wali and 
others V s. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2001 SC 607 ):  
“Page 946: The Supreme Judicial Council is a 
unique institution,  which comprises the 
senior most Judges in judicial hierarchy  and 32 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
entrusted with the onerous responsibility of 
deciding complaints that are referred to it 
through references by the President alone. It 
is an essential prerequisite of the 
independence of judiciary that there is put in 
place a system of accountability.  It should, 
therefore, be the endeavour of the Judges of 
the Superior Courts to make the Code fully 
applicable and ensure that it is strictly 
adhered to. As held in the case of Zafar Ali 
Shah (supra), the Judges of the Superior 
Courts are not immune from a ccountability. 
They are accountable only in the manner laid 
down under Article 209 of the Constitution. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
It may be noticed from the above quoted passage that the 
sanctity and uniqueness of the SJC is enhanced by its 
composition. It is comprised of the three senior most Judges 
in the country and the two senior most Chief Justices of the 
High Courts (ref: Article 209(2) of the Constitution). Indeed, 
the significant impact of the SJC’s composition on the 
removal process of Judges was ackno wledged in The 
President Vs. Mr. Justice Shaukat Ali  (PLD 1971 SC 585) :  
“Page 602: … The forum  [SJC]  consists of 
Judges of superior Courts who also belong to 
the same profession. To be tried by one's 
peers is a protection because they 
understand one's diff iculties, problems and 
the situation in which one was .” 
 
This dictum was subsequently approved in the CJP case 
(supra ) at para -98. However, if we hold today that a reference, 
which is an executive action under the Constitution, 
forwarded to the SJC can be struck down on ordinary judicial 
review grounds such as unreasonableness and proportionality 
we will be belittling it s status, ignoring its competence and 33 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
pre-empting its decisions based on appreciation of the record. 
We should endeavour to avoid taking any such step which 
goes against the spirit and intent of the Constitution. But this 
is precisely the course of action we will be choosing if the 
standard of judicial review is adopted to examine the legality 
of pre -reference proceedings.  To exemplify this standard 
reliance is placed on the decision in Sabir Iqbal Vs. 
Cantonment Board, Peshawar  (PLD 2019 SC 189):  
“5: …  The court can examine and judicially 
review  the executive discretion exercised by 
the authorized officer on the ground of 
proportionality.  Alongside reasonableness, 
proportionality is now a central standard 
directing the action of the executive branch … 
Propo rtionality is a standard that examines 
the relationship between the objective the 
executive branch wishes to achieve, which 
has the potential of infringing upon a human 
right, and the means it has chosen in order 
to achieve that infringing objective. The 
fiduciary duty, from which the administrative 
duty of fairness and administrative 
reasonableness are derived, demands 
administrative proportionality as well … An 
administrative measure must not be more 
drastic than necessary or to sum up in a 
phrase - not ta king a sledgehammer to crack 
a nut . According to De Smith's Judicial 
Review, the standards of proportionality and 
unreasonableness are inextricably 
intertwined. Unreasonableness contains two 
elements of proportionality  when it requires 
the weight of releva nt considerations to be 
fairly balanced and when it forbids unduly 
oppressive decisions. Under the first element, 
proportionality is a test requiring the 
decision - maker to maintain a fair balance. 
Under this category the courts evaluate 
whether manifestly  disproportionate weight 
has been attached to one or other 
considerations relevant to the decision. The 
second element is that the courts consider 
whether there has been a disproportionate 
interference with the claimants rights or 
interests. A more sophist icated version of 
proportionality provides for a structured test. 34 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Here the courts ask first whether the 
measure, which is being challenged, is 
suitable to attaining the identified ends (the 
test of suitability). Suitability here includes 
the notion of "rat ional connection" between 
the means and ends. The next step asks 
whether the measure is necessary and 
whether a less restrictive or onerous method 
could have been adopted (the test of necessity 
- requiring minimum impairment of the rights 
or interest in qu estion). ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
23.   It may be noticed from the above quoted passage 
that the scope of judicial review is not only vast but may also 
be intertwined with the merits of a case. We have already 
observed that SJC is the only constitutional authority which 
can examine the conduct o f a Judge of the Superior Courts. 
Therefore, giving the power of judicial review to this Court to 
set aside pre -reference proceedings will be tantamount to 
rejecting the capacity and jurisdiction of the SJC to 
adjudicate upon any question of unreasonablene ss, 
proportionality or suitability raised in relation to the merits of 
the President’s actions. It will also open the floodgates of 
litigation by Judges who are the subject of a Reference. This 
prima facie appears to be contrary to the meaning of Article 
209 of the Constitution which entrusts all matters regarding 
the merits of a case to a high powered Constitutional 
domestic forum within the judiciary. It is also pertinent to 
mention here that even learned counsel for the petitioner 
challenged the pre -Reference proceedings in the present case 
on the grounds of mala fides and not judicial review.  35 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
THE CASE AGAINST THE PETITIONER  
24.   Before examining the questions of law raised in 
this petition, it will be useful to consider the provisions of 
Article 209 o f the Constitution under which the present 
Reference has been filed:  
“209. Supreme Judicial Council.  
(1) There shall be a Supreme Judicial Council 
of Pakistan, in this Chapter refer red to as the 
Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of,  
(a) the Chief Justice of Pakistan;  
(b) the two next most senior Judges of the 
Supreme Court; and  
(c) the two most senior Chief Justices of High 
Courts.  
Explanation: - For the purpose of 
this clause, the inter se seniority of 
the Chief Justices of the High 
Courts shall be  determined with 
reference to their dates of 
appointment as Chief Justice  
[otherwise t han as acting Chief 
Justice] , and in case the dates of 
such appointment are the same, 
with reference to their dates of 
appointment as Ju dges of any of 
the High Courts.  
(3) If at any time the Council is inquiring into 
the capacity or conduct of a Judge who is a 
member of the Council, or a member of the 
Council is absent or is unable to act due to 
illness or any other cause, then  
(a) if such member is a Judge of the Supreme  
Court, the Judge of the Supreme Court who 
is next in seniority below the Judges referred 
to in paragraph (b) of clause (2), and  
(b) if such member is the Chief Justice of a 
High Court; the Chief Justice of another High 
Court who is next in seniority among st the 
Chief Justices of the remaining High Courts, 
shall act as a memb er of the Council in his 
place.  36 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
(4) If, upon any matter inquired into by the 
Council, there is a difference of opinion 
amongst its members, the opinion of the 
majority shall prevail, an d the report of the 
Council to the President shall be expressed in 
terms of the view of the majority.  
(5) If, on information from any source, the 
Council or the President is of the opinion that 
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court - 
(a) may be in capable of proper ly performing 
the duties of his office by reason of physical 
or mental incapacity; or  
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct,  
the President shall direct the Council to, or 
the Council may, on its own motion, inquire 
into the matter.”  
(6) If, after inquiring into the matter, the 
Council reports to the President that it is of 
the opinion,  
(a) that the Judge is incapable of performing 
the duties of his office or has been guilty of 
misconduct, and  
(b) that he should be removed from office, the 
President may remove the Judge from office.  
(7) A Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court shall not be removed from office exce pt 
as provided by this Article.  
(8) The Council shall issue a code of conduct 
to be observed by Judges of the Supreme 
Court  and of the High Courts. ” 
(emphasis supplied)  
 
25.   It may be noticed from the above quoted sub -
Article 209(5) that proceedings by the SJC may be initiated on 
grounds of misconduct or physical or mental incapacity of a 
Superior Court Judge. In the present  case, the Reference has 
alleged misconduct on the part of the petitioner to seek his 
removal from office. It is specifically alleged that the petitioner 
has committed a violation of Section 116 of the Ordinance. 37 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
This has led to the question of source of f unds, the violation 
of the money laundering regime and the provisions of Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 ( “FERA” ).  
26.   Although seemingly straightforward, the word 
‘misconduct’ has drawn extensive arguments from both sides. 
Moreover, despite the s ignificance of this term, it has so far 
escaped a comprehensive definition. Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution, which is the primary provision dealing with the 
removal of Superior Court Judges, does not define it. Even 
the Code of Conduct ( “CoC” ) issued un der Article 209(8) of 
the Constitution to regulate the conduct of Superior Court 
Judges does not attribute any meaning to this term. However, 
it does prescribe the norms and standards of good judicial 
and personal behaviour expected of Judges. Therefore, a ny 
conduct which conflicts with the mandated norms in the CoC 
can attract scrutiny for possible misconduct. For instance, 
the CoC observes that the prime duty of a Judge of the 
Superior Courts ‘ is to present before the public an image of 
justice of the nat ion’ (ref: Preamble of CoC). It also makes 
reference to the Oath of the Judges and their solemn duty to 
uphold and submit to the Constitution and the law (ref: 
Preamble of CoC). Therefore, simply put the CoC expects that 
Judges will conduct themselves with  integrity, propriety and 
dignity both in their public and private lives and will not 38 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
engage in controversy. It would be useful at this stage to set 
out what these generic terms actually entail:  
“Chambers Dictionary  
Page 471: Dignity: elevation of mind or 
character;  
Page 869: Integrity: uprightness; honesty; 
purity.  
Page 1376: Propriety: conformity with good 
manners; conformity with convention in 
language and conduct;”  
 
It thus becomes clear that the CoC primarily provides 
guidance to Judges of Superior Cou rts on the exemplary 
qualities they must possess. Therefore, conduct that diverges 
from these qualities would constitute misconduct. However, 
ultimately the CoC is silent about the meaning of misconduct. 
Be that as it may, the Supreme Judicial Council Proc edure of 
Enquiry, 2005 ( “2005 Rules” ), framed by the SJC, has drawn 
wisdom from case -law and the CoC to state certain general 
standards for Judges of the Superior Courts, namely:  
“3. Definitions:  
In the present Procedure, unless the context 
provides otherwise, the following expressions 
used in the Procedure will  have the meaning 
as assigned to them 
hereunder; ……………………………………………
…………….  
(l) “Misconduct”, includes,  
(i) conduct unbecoming of a Judge,  
(ii) is in disregard of the Code of Conduct 
issued under Article 209(8) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan,  
(iii) is found to be inefficient or has ceased 
to be efficient.”  
 39 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
27.   In practical terms, Rule 3(l)(i) succinctly 
encapsulates the normati ve standards of misconduct 
provided in the CoC whilst Rule 3(l)(iii) includes an objective 
criterion that relates to a Judge’s professional performance. 
Both criteria are consistent with the CoC and are primarily 
explanatory rather than definitional. The s anctity of the 2005 
Rules can be traced to their Constitutional origin as these 
have been framed by the SJC in the exercise of its implied 
power to facilitate its own proceedings. Such status of the 
2005 Rules has been affirmed by this Court in Justice 
Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
2018 SC 538) at para -60 which is produced below:  
“60: The aforesaid leaves no manner of doubt 
that where the Constitution creates a forum 
(SJC) vested with the jurisdiction of 
accountability of the Judges of the Superior 
Courts and holders of other high Offices as 
mentioned in the Constitution or the law, 
such forum (SJC) has implied and ancillary 
power to give effect to the mandate of the 
Constitution,  more particularly, by devising 
its own procedure .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Since the 2005 Rules have been framed by the SJC to 
implement its mandate and regulate its own proceedings, 
these carry special force and thus stand on a higher pedestal 
than ordinary laws. These Rules provide guidelines for the 
conduct o f SJC proceedings and the exercise of its 
jurisdiction. Indeed, the SJC as the constitutionally 
empowered body has been utilising the criteria of misconduct 40 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
noted in Rule 3(l) of the 2005 Rules and elaborated upon in 
the CoC to assess the culpability of Su perior Court Judges.  
28.   To assist us on this matter learned counsel for the 
petitioner, Mr. Babar Sattar, submitted that the CoC imposes 
two separate obligations on Superior Court Judges: duties 
that are peculiar to judicial conduct and responsibilitie s that 
are specific to personal conduct. It was his case that it is only 
conduct which is connected with the office of a Judge that 
can form the basis of a Reference against the petitioner under 
Article 209(5) of the Constitution. Any other wrong committed  
by the petitioner in his personal life which has no connection 
whatsoever with his office can only be visited upon by 
penalties provided for the wrong committed under the 
relevant law. He further argued that only such misconduct of 
the petitioner is cogni zable by the SJC that is committed 
during the former’s current service as a Supreme Court 
Judge. Any misconduct committed previously by the 
petitioner during his tenure as the Chief Justice of 
Baluchistan High Court stands absolved. Next, he canvassed 
the proposition that the petitioner is only responsible for his 
own personal conduct and not that of his independent wife 
and children. On this analysis, learned counsel concluded 
that none of the allegations contained in the Reference 
satisfied the test of mi sconduct propounded by him. The 
London Properties he stated were owned by the Mrs. Isa and 
her children. Therefore, any justification for an alleged 41 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
violation of the relevant law in Section 116 of the Ordinance 
and any explanation for the source of funds h ad to be sought 
from the petitioner’s family and not the petitioner himself. In 
so far as the allegations of money laundering or FERA were 
concerned, learned counsel stated that there was simply no 
material before the Law Minister, PM and President which 
justified the inclusion of these charges in the Reference 
against the petitioner.  
29.   On the converse, learned counsel for the 
respondents, relying on case -law from Pakistan and India, 
argued that the test for misconduct is not whether it violates 
any pr escribed law or rules, rather the test is whether the 
conduct alleged is wrong, or improper or fails to conform with 
the standards and norms expected of a Judge. This he 
submitted would include not only the professional conduct of 
a Judge but also his cond uct in private life (whether that be 
his own conduct or the conduct of his family members). 
Furthermore, he stated such a test is concerned only with the 
gravity of the alleged misconduct and not the era in which 
such misconduct is said to have been commit ted. Therefore, 
in his opinion the factual matrix narrated in the Reference 
prima facie  did disclose a case of misconduct against the 
petitioner. He stated that the London Properties were 
acquired in the names of the petitioner’s family members at a 
time w hen the petitioner was the Chief Justice of Baluchistan 
High Court i.e. he was a public office holder. Moreover, 42 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
neither Mrs. Isa nor the petitioner had declared these 
properties in their wealth statements filed with the Inland 
Revenue authorities. Proof o f this could be found in the 
Assistant Commissioner’s (Inland Revenue) letter dated 
10.05.2019. However, he argued the evidence which called for 
a Reference of misconduct to be filed were the tax returns of 
Mrs. Isa and the petitioner. The former’s returns  showed that 
she did not have sufficient funds for the purchase of these 
properties (the children have not filed any tax returns), while 
the latter’s returns disclosed that he in fact did possess 
surplus funds. As a result, he submitted that such non -
decla ration of the London Properties on the part of the 
petitioner and Mrs. Isa coupled with their respective financial 
position, and the plain meaning of Section 116(1)(b) of the 
Ordinance supported the presumption that it was actually the 
petitioner who had f inanced these properties. Accordingly, an 
answer had to be provided by the petitioner about the source 
of funds to rule out any violation of Section 116 of the 
Ordinance and the money laundering regime. Such an answer 
could only be sought by the SJC which is why the Reference 
was filed against the petitioner.   
30.   In our considered view, to determine whether the 
facts of this case warranted the filing of a Reference alleging 
misconduct against the petitioner, the substance of the term 
‘misconduct’ needs to be examined. Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution sets out misconduct as one of the two grounds 43 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
of removal of a Superior Court Judge. Therefore, any meaning 
ascribed to misconduct should be consistent with the object 
of Article 209. Two decisions describe  the purpose of Article 
209 succinctly. The first is the case of Al-Jehad Trust Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 324) in which Justice 
Manzoor Hussain Sial held that:  
“Page 537: Undoubtedly, Article 209 
guarantees the tenure of office of a Judge and  
explicitly secures the independence of 
Judiciary, which is domi nant intent of the 
Constitution…”  
 
The second case is Syed Zafar Ali Shah Vs. General Pervaiz 
Musharraf  (PLD 2000 SC 869) in which this Court observed:  
“Page 1211: Clearly, the Judges of the 
Superior Judiciary enjoy constitutional 
guarantee against arbitrary removal. They 
can be removed only by following the 
procedure laid down in Article 209 of the 
Constitution by filing an appropriat e 
reference before the Supreme Judicial 
Council and not otherwise .” 
 
It thus becomes obvious that Article 209 serves two purposes:  
i. It provid es security of tenure to Superior Court Judges 
by allowing them to be judged by their own peers thus 
insulating the removal process from the clutches of the 
Executive; and  
ii. It also holds Superior Court Judges  accountable for 
their wrongdoings  by providing a mechanism for their 
removal . 44 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
The aforenoted two purposes are e vidence d by Article 209(7) 
of the Constitution which reads:  
“209. Supreme Judicial Council  
……………………………………………… …………. 
(7) A Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court shall not be removed from office except 
as provided by this Article.”  
 
In the above background, Article 209(5) limits the grounds of 
unfitness for the removal of Judges while Article 209(7) 
guarante es that honest, competent and independent Judges 
do not become the target of a hostile Government/Executive. 
Therefore, the threshold that constitutes misconduct for the 
purposes of Judges of the Superior Courts should manifest 
this intent and spirit of Ar ticle 209 of the Constitution. 
Accordingly, the standard for the commission of misconduct 
must not be so high that it is impossible to allege thus 
rendering Judges unanswerable for their conduct. On the 
other hand, the threshold for misconduct must also no t be so 
lenient so as to become a weapon in the hands of disgruntled 
litigants, interest groups or Executive against honest, 
competent and independent Judges.  
31.   Against this background, one can now examine 
the features of misconduct recognised under Ar ticle 209(5) of 
the Constitution. The starting point in this regard should be 
the seminal judgment of this Court in The State Vs. Mr. 45 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Justice Akhlaque Husain  (PLD 1960 SC 26). The relevant 
portion is reproduced below:  
Page 32: “… the word "misbehaviour" mu st be 
understood in its ordinary sense, viz. as 
implying misconduct, that is to say, conduct 
which is unbecoming of a Judge or renders 
him unfit for the performance of the duties of 
his office, or is calculated to destroy public 
confidence in him … We cannot therefore 
accept the respondent's contention that it is 
only on proof of misconduct in respect of a 
judicial proceeding or in respect of office  or 
on proof of conviction that a High Court 
Judge may be removed and that no other 
conduct, however in famous or scandalous, or 
whatever defect of character it might disclose, 
can ever be a ground for his removal. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
This dictum  was followed  and approved  in the Shaukat Ali  
case (s upra) at page 623. Since the formulation is non -
exhaustive, it gives discretion to the SJC to determine 
whether any alleged conduct of a Judge comes under the 
purview of misconduct. It also lays down a high threshold of 
misconduct to ensure that trivial indisc retions or infractions 
of the law by Judges or any minor shortcomings in their 
personal lives do not render them liable to removal 
proceedings. At the same time it protects the integrity of the 
judicial institution by allowing for the removal of Judges 
whose conduct without constituting a violation of a 
prescribed law is so improper that it renders such Judge unfit 
for holding judicial office. In fact, the meaning of misconduct 
gathered from the CoC also exemplifies this construction. As 
noted above, althou gh the CoC does not contain a definition 46 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
of misconduct, it does contain norms, conventions and 
guidance (reflected in its Articles) on the standards to be met 
by Superior Court Judges in their professional and private 
lives. What is notable about such guid ance is that it hardly 
incorporates any legal obligations in the Code. Instead the 
Articles primarily consist of ethical guidelines and traditional 
norms and standards expected of a Judge. For instance, the 
Preamble to the CoC reads as follows:  
“…To be a living embodiment of these powers, 
functions, and obligations calls for 
possession of the highest qualities of intellect 
and character.  Equally, it imposes patterns of 
behavior, which are the hall -mark of 
distinction of a Judge among his fellow -men. ” 
 
Likewise, Article III observes:  
“Article -III: To be above reproach, and for this 
purpose to keep his conduct in all things, 
official and private, free from impropriety is 
expected of a Judge.”  
 
Similarly, Article V states:  
“Article -V: Functioning as he does in full view 
of the public, a Judge gets thereby all the 
publicity that is good for him. He should not 
seek more. In particular, he should not 
engage in any public controversy, least of all 
on a political question, notwithstanding th at 
it involves a question of law.”  
 
Lastly, we have Article VI which requires:  
“Article -VI: A Judge should endeavor to avoid,  
as far as possible,  being involved, either on 
his own behalf  or on behalf of others, in 
litigation  or in matters which are liable  to 
lead to litigation such as industry, trade or 
speculative transactions.  47 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
To employ the influence of his position to 
gain undue advantage, whether immediate or 
future, is a grave fault.  
A Judge must avoid incurring financial  or 
other obligations to priva te institutions or 
persons such as may embarrass him in the 
performance of his functions. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
32.   It may be noticed that the above Articles of the 
CoC are non -legal in nature. A violation of any of these 
Articles would neither sustain a civil lawsuit nor a criminal 
prosecution. However, an infringement thereof may very well 
lead to disciplinary proceed ings under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution. But, this is not the only remarkable feature of 
the CoC. For instance, on a careful examination of Article III, 
it can be observed that it expects Superior Court Judges to 
keep their conduct in all aspects of their lives, including 
private life, free from impropriety. Furthermore, Article VI 
calls upon Judges to avoid litigation and to be diligent in their 
financial affairs to minimise the chance of any 
embarrassment in the performance of their functions. This 
very clearly means that the CoC does not only expect 
impeccable behaviour from a Judge in the courtroom but it 
also expects him to maintain these high standards of 
integrity, propriety and dignity outside the Court. Such 
qualities and conduct are necessary  to preserve not only the 
prestige and honour of the Judge but also the prestige and 
honour of the institution of the judiciary. Therefore, the 
contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the 48 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
allegations against the petitioner pertain to his personal life 
and so cannot become the basis for a Reference has no force. 
Accordingly, there is no doubt in our minds that the 
interpretation of misconduct set out by this Court in the 
Justice Akhlaque Hussain  case ( supra ) reflects the intent 
and spirit of Article 209(5) of the Constitution, the CoC and 
the 2005 Rules.  
33.   Additionally, the threshold of misconduct adopted 
by this Court and approved by the SJC is also similar to the 
tests used by Disciplinary Committees and Parliaments of 
foreign jurisdictions for the removal of Judges. For example, 
the requirement of upholding the confidence of the public is 
not unique to our Courts. In fact, it is a criterion which is 
applied across the world to enforce accountability o f Judges 
and other public office holders. In Lawrence V Attorney 
General of Grenada  (2007 UKPC 18 at para -25) the Privy 
Council approved a passage from Clark V Vanstone  (2004 
FCA 1105) in which the Federal Court of Australia held:  
“Para 85: …F or present pu rposes, the 
important proposition to be drawn from these 
expressions of opinion is that, in a case in 
which the term ‘misbehaviour’ is used with 
reference to the holder of an office, the 
content of its meaning is to be determined by 
reference to the effect  of the conduct on the 
capacity of the person to continue to hold the 
office. In turn, the capacity to continue to 
hold an office has two aspects. The conduct 
of the person concerned might be such that it 
affects directly the person’s ability to carry 
out the office. Alternatively, or in addition, it 
may affect the perceptions of others in 
relation to the office, so that any purported 
performance of the duties of the office will be 49 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
perceived widely as corrupt, improper or 
inimical to the interests of the pe rsons, or the 
organisation, for whose benefit the functions 
of the office are performed .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
This passage was cited again with approval by the majority of 
the Privy Council in Hearing on the Report of the Chief 
Justice of Gibraltar  (2009 U KPC 43 at para -202). Even in 
the United States, where the process of impeachment of 
Judges is initiated by a Resolution of the  House  of 
Representatives ( “House” ), the Report dated 10.05.1989 
accompanying the  Resolution to Impeach United States 
District Judge Walter L. Nixon, Jr  (ref: Report No. 101) stated:  
“Page 12: … thus, from an historical 
perspective the question of what conduct by a 
Federal judge constitutes an impeachable 
offense has evolved to the posi tion where the 
focus is now on public confidence in the 
integrity and impartiality of the judiciary.  
When a judge’s conduct calls into questions 
his or her integrity or impartiality, Congress 
must consider whether impeachment and 
removal of the judge from office is necessary 
to protect the integrity of the judicial branch 
and uphold the public trust. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Likewise in Australia, Sir George Bush sitting in the 
Parliamentary Commission inquiring into the alleged 
misconduct of Justice Lionel Ke ith Murphy, Judge High Court 
of Australia, held:  
“Page 8: If [judges] conduct,  even in matters 
remote from their work, is such that it would  
be judged by the standards of the time to 
throw doubt on their own suitability to 
continue in office, or to undermi ne their 
authority as judges or the standing of their 50 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
courts, it may be appropriate to remove 
them. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Even in the Justice Shaukat Ali  case ( supra ), the SJC 
observed that:  
“Page 602: … It [inquiry by SJC]  is simply the 
conduct of a Judge which is to be properly 
reviewed in the interest of the purity and 
honour of the judiciary …” 
 
This dictum was later cited with approval in the CJP case 
(supra ) at para -98. These  tests, therefore, not only affirm this 
Court’s interpretation of misconduct but also (again) dispel 
the  contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that 
only conduct which has a nexus with the petitioner’s office 
can be the basis of an informati on under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution. In fact, misconduct is any conduct of the Judge 
which damages the publics perception about his ability to 
discharge his duties or which undermines public confidence 
in the institution of the judiciary regardless  of whether such 
conduct occurs in the professional arena or in the private life 
of a Judge.  
34.   As for the learned counsel’s contention that the 
petitioner can only be removed for misconduct committed 
during his tenure as a Supreme Court Judge, it will  suffice to 
reproduce what the House held in its report dated 08.07.1912 
against Robert Wodrow Archbald, J udge of the United States 51 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Court of Appeal for the Third Circuit (Pennsylvania, New 
Jersey, Delaware and Virgin Islands) (ref: Report No. 946):  
“Page 175: It is indeed anomalous if the 
Congress is powerless to remove  a[n]… unfit 
Federal judge from office because his…  
misdemeanor,  however vicious or 
reprehensible, may have occurred during his 
tenure in some other judicial office  under the 
Government of t he United States prior to his 
appointment to the particular office from 
which he is sought to be ousted by 
impeachment, although he may have held a 
Federal judgeship continuously from the time 
of the commission of his offenses. Surely the 
House of Represen tatives will not recognize 
nor the Senate apply such a narrow  and 
technical construction  of the constitutional 
provisions relating to impeachments.”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Similarly, the House in its report dated 04.03.2010 against G. 
Thomas Porteous, Jr., J udge of the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana  (ref: Report 427) 
noted that the critical question which needs to be addressed 
by the House and Congress is whether the alleged misconduct 
demonstrates a lack of integrity and judgment in the Judge 
which makes him unsuitable to continue to perform the 
functions of his post. The timing of the misconduct is 
irrelevant to such a determination (page 19). Indeed, by 
accepting the contention of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner that a time bar should be imported into the process 
of judicial accountability, we would be granting immunity to 
Judges who have committed serious misconduct in their 
previous posts. This would be contrary to the demand for 52 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
transparency and fairness in the accountability of Judges, 
especially when it is self -evident that previous beha viour of a 
Judge is a reflection of his character, disposition and 
professional or private ethics. Therefore, the submission of 
the learned counsel that the alleged misconduct of the 
petitioner has become a past and closed transaction because 
it was commit ted during his time as a High Court Judge 
Court is incorrect.  
35.   Lastly, learned counsel for the petitioner also 
raised the argument that the petitioner was not accountable 
for the financial affairs of his independent wife and adult 
children. While the re is no cavil to the proposition that “ the 
days are long gone when a husband and wife were treated as 
one person in law a nd the husband was that person” (ref: 
Chief Justice of Gibraltar  case ( supra ) at para -257), the fact 
of the matter is that when it com es to public office holders the 
situation is different. Judges, like other public office holders, 
occupy a position of sacred trust. They hold positions where 
they exercise power and authority under the law. Under the 
Constitution and the law, such a posit ion carries certain 
benefits and privileges accompanied by obligations and 
responsibilities. A Judge of the Superior Court is entitled to 
these perks and benefits which are also enjoyed by his spouse 53 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
and family. Some of these benefits and privileges availa ble to 
the spouse and family of a Judge of the Superior Courts are:  
A. During Service  
i. A medical allowance  (ref: Rule 10  of The Federal 
Service Medical Attendance Rules, 1990);  
ii. A travel allowance (ref: Rules 3(4)(i) and  4(i) of The 
Supreme Court Judges (Travel ling Allowance) 
Rules, 1958); and  
iii. The use of a Government maintained residence  
and an official car  at the residence  (Rules 20 , and 
21 of Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and 
Privileges) Order, 1997).  
B. After Service  
i. A pension to the spouse after the death of the 
Judge ( ref: Clause  4 of the Fifth Schedule to the 
Constitution ) 
ii. A medical allowance (ref: Rule 10  of The Federal 
Service Medical Attendance Rules, 1990 ); 
iii. The services of a driver and an orderly (ref: Rule 25 
Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pensio n and 
Privileges) Order, 1997 ); and  
iv. 3000 free local telephone calls per month, 2000 
units of electricity and 25HM3 of gas per month, 
free supply of water and 300 litres of petrol per 
month (ref: Rule 25 Supreme Court Judges (Leave, 
Pension and Privileges)  Order, 1997 ). 54 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
36.   As alluded above, these entitlements  of the Judge  
which he shares with his family [his spouse and members of 
his family who are either dependent on him or with whom he 
has financial dealings ( “family members” )] also carry certain 
respo nsibilities and obligations. One such obligation is the 
duty to enjoy these privileges with dignity, probity and 
discretion. Apart from the material benefits enjoyed by a 
Judge’s family members during and after his service, they 
also receive an advantage f rom the respect and recognition 
extended, through association, by people who interact with 
them. In these circumstances, the family members of a Judge 
are required to be careful (financially, socially and politically), 
moderate and fair in their dealings a nd exchange with others 
so that no controversy arises which may embarrass the 
Judge. Although these responsibilities are shared by family 
members of all public office holders, they apply with 
particular force to family members of Judges as the latter are 
expected to be the embodiment of a person who is ‘ God-
fearing, law -abiding, abstemious, truthful of tongue, wise in 
opinion, cautious and forbearing, blameless, and untouched 
by greed ’ (ref: Article II of CoC). Accordingly, high standards of 
propriety  are e xpected of a Judge and  his family members. 
This is precisely why in a case of impropriety alleged against 
the son of a learned Judge, Justice Khilji Arif Hussain 55 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
observed in Suo Motu Case No. 5 of 2012  (PLD 2012 SC 
664) that:  
“Page 679: A lthough family members of 
public functionaries are, properly speaking, 
not performing State functions, the alleged 
facts of this case highlight the necessity of 
extreme caution and  discretion in their 
private and public dealings and conduct .” 
 
37.   Generally, every adul t individual is recognised in 
law as an independent entity. However, different principles 
apply in relation to family members of public office holders. 
This is because any irresponsible act on the part of a  family  
member may  reflect adversely on the J udge. This approach is 
recognised by the Judicial Codes of Conduct of various 
countries. The Guide to Judicial Conduct for Australian 
Judges states:  
“Page 41: … Issues involving a judge ’s 
relatives, especially close relatives, can give 
rise to particularly diffi cult questions … There 
are likely to be situations in which the 
activities  or careers of relatives attract 
consideration of the principles identified in 
the Guide,  because the situation presents an 
issue under the Guide which the judge must 
address … The res ponse by a judge to such 
matters will depend on the particular 
circumstances. Matters affecting a spouse ’s 
or partner ’s career or  appointment will, for 
example, call for consideration of public 
attitudes or percep tions, the kind of activity 
the partner engages in, the other persons 
present or participating … These are examples 
only. In the end, each situation must be 
resolved by th e judge applying the principles 
identified in the Guide. A central issue will 
always be whether and how the situation 
might re flect adversely on the judge or the 
judiciary or might diminish public confidence 
in them .”  
(emphasis supplied ) 56 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
Taking the connection between a Judge and his family in 
financial matters a step closer are the Bangalore Principles of 
Judicial Conduct ( “Principles” ) which were drafted  in 2001 
and endorsed in 2002  by the Judicial Group on 
Strengthening Judicial Integrity  (a body consisting of senior 
Judges from various  legal systems of the world). These 
principles were later endorsed by the United Nations 
Economic and Social Council  on 27.07.2006 in its Resolution 
2006/23:  
“Resolution  
2006/23  
Strengthening basic principles of judicial 
conduct  
………………………………………………………….  
1. Invites  Member States, consistent with 
their domestic legal systems, to encourage 
their judiciaries to take into consideration the 
Bangalore Principles of  Judicial Conduct, 
annexed to the present resolutio n, when 
reviewing or developing rules with respect to 
the professional and ethical condu ct of 
members of the judiciary; …”  
 
Under the headi ng of propriety, Rule 4.7 of the Principles 
reads:  
“Value 4: PROPRIETY  
Principle: Propriety, and the appearance of 
propriety, a re essential to the performance of 
all of the activities of a judge.  
………………………………………………………….  
4.7: A judge shall inform himself or  herself 
about the  judge's personal and fiduciary 
financial interests and shall make reasonable 
efforts to be informed about the financial 
interests of members of the judge's family.”  57 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
To remove any doubts about what constitutes the family of a 
Judge, the  Principles define a Judge’s family to include:  
“DEFINITIONS  
“Judge’s family” includes a judge's spouse, 
son, daughter, son -in-law, daughter -in-law, 
and any other close relative or person who is 
a companion or employee of the judge and 
who lives in the judge's household.”  
 
An obligation similar to the one set out in Rule 4.7 is also 
present in Canon 3(C)(2) of the United States Code of Conduct 
for Federal Judges. In essence, the above obligations require a 
Judge to make reasonable efforts to be aware abo ut the 
financial affairs of his family members. This precaution helps 
to forewarn him about extraneous influences or vested 
interests which can compromise not only his independence 
and credibility but also in the words of this Court in Justice 
Shaukat Ali’ s case (s upra) the “purity and honour” of the 
institution to which he belongs.  
38.   At first glance an obligation to remain informed 
about the financial affairs of one’s family members seems 
archaic because modern jurisprudence emphasises the 
protection of the rights of the individual against the State and 
society. However, to understand the rationale behind the 
obligation on Judges to make reasonable efforts to be 
informed about or to watch over the financial affairs of their 
family members, one has to u nderstand the nexus of this 
obligation with the nature of Judges work and the position 58 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
they occupy in society. As has been held above, Judges 
exercise pre -eminent authority under the law. They 
adjudicate disputes between litigants, hold parties appearing 
before them accountable and impose liabilities and grant 
relief to such parties. With their authority comes an even 
greater responsibility to decide cases fairly, independently 
and in accordance with law. In such a situation, it is 
imperative for a Judge th at he should make reasonable efforts 
to be informed about the financial interests of his family 
members for the simple reason that if a case comes before 
him which directly or indirectly involves the pecuniary, 
proprietary or other personal interests of an y of his family 
members, he can recuse himself. Such recusal is a 
manifestation of the now well -established principle of law (ref: 
Government of N.W.F.P Vs. Dr. Hussain Ahmad Haroon  
2003 SCMR 104):  
“Page 110: It is an age -old fundamental 
principle of law that justice should not only 
be done but manifestly and undoubtedly it 
should seen to have been done.  To achieve 
this objective/goal it is of prime importance 
that a Judge/person equipped with the 
authority of decision should not be having 
any sort of pers onal interest in the outcome 
of the matter under issue before him. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
However, this is not the only object behind imposing such a 
burdensome obligation on Judges. Another equally, if not 
more, important reason for requiring Judges to be aware of 
the financial interests of their family members is that the 59 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
law’s intent is to p revent a Judge’s family from becoming a 
conduit to discreetly influence his opinions and views. This 
assures the Judges independence and integrity apart from 
safeguarding the institution of the judiciary.  
39.   Likewise, the recently enacted Foreign Asset s 
(Declaration and Repatriation) Act , 2018  (“the Act” ) also 
provides a rationale for imposing such an obligation on 
Judges of the Superior Courts. This piece of legislation 
provides an advantageous scheme to Pakistani citizens to 
disclose their undeclared foreign assets subject to payment of 
tax at a nominal rate set out in the Schedule to the Act. The 
object of the Act is to bring such assets on record in the 
documented tax economy. For obvious reasons, holders of 
public office are not eligible to avail th is tax incentive. The 
significance of this Act for our purposes is that it treats the 
assets of the spouse and dependent children and the assets of 
the public office holder as identical. A Judge of the Superior 
Courts is included in the category of holder of public office. 
For ease of reference, the relevant Sections of the Act are 
produced below:  
“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the re 
is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context, -  
………………………………………………………….  
(h) "holder of public office" means a person 
who is or has been, during the preceding ten 
years ,- 
………………………………………………………….  60 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
(iv) the Chief Justice or, as the case may be, a 
Judge of the Supreme Court , Federal S hariat 
Court, a High Court or a Judicial Officer 
whether exercis ing judicial or other functions 
or Chairman or member o f a Law 
Commission, Chairman or Member of the 
Council of Islamic Ideology ; 
………………………………………………………….  
4. Application. — (1) The provisions of this 
Act shall apply to –(a) all citizens of Pakistan 
wherever  they may be, except hol ders of 
public office, their spouses and dependent 
children ;” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
40.   Accordingly, neither public office holders nor their 
spouses and dependent children can avail the benefit of this 
scheme. The purpose of such an exclusion is to ensure  that 
public office holders do not use their family members as a 
conduit to whiten their undeclared wealth. There is no relief 
in tax amnesty schemes even if the spouse is independent. 
This is a legal incident or consequence of being a holder of 
public off ice and introduces an element of transparent 
accountability in the financial matters of such officers.  
41.   Indeed, the Reference alludes to this element of 
financial accountability by implying that the London 
Properties are benami owned. However, it cite s no evidence to 
support this contention. Nevertheless, during the course of 
his submissions, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted, 
after inquiring from his client, that the latter did not gift any 
amount of money to his family members during the p receding 
tax years. In any case, the elements of benami (or the 61 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
evidence in support of it) need not be discussed here because 
it is not for us to determine at present whether the 
petitioner’s family is his benamidar. This is a factual 
determination that ca n only be made by the competent forum 
after examining all the evidence. Nonetheless, unless the 
source of funding for the London Properties is duly explained 
by the petitioner’s family, it will allow the resulting public 
controversy to continue which is ne ither beneficial for the 
petitioner in his personal capacity as a Judge nor for the 
institution of which he is a part.  
42.   Therefore, having seen that Judges are not as 
insulated from the conduct of their family members as are 
ordinary private citizens,  we need to consider the extent of the 
obligation on Judges to be aware of the financial interests of 
their family members. Both the UN Resolution 2006/23 
(endorsing the Principles) and the United States Code of 
Conduct simply state that Judges need to mak e reasonable 
efforts to be informed  about the financial interests of their 
family members. However, neither elaborate upon the scope 
of this obligation. Consequently, its ambit needs to be 
determined. To begin with, Oxford Dictionary has defined the 
term ‘informed’ in the following manner:  
“Oxford Dictionary:  
Informed: Having or showing knowledge of a 
subject or situation .” 
 62 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
It, therefore, becomes clear that Judges are supposed to have 
knowledge of the financial interests of their family members. 
However, if they do not, then they are expect ed to make 
reasonable efforts to acquire such information, more so when 
they are questioned by a competent forum to explain the 
financial interests of their family members. What constitutes 
‘reasonable effort’ on the part of Judges will no doubt depend 
upon the circumstances of each case. However, a plea of lack 
of knowledge by a Judge in relation to the financial affairs of 
his family members is untenable in light of the general trend 
in international practice, the obligations imposed on a Judge 
under the CoC and the law relating to public office holders 
including Judges. Accordingly, there is a continuing 
obligation on a Judge to keep himself informed about the 
financial interests of his family members. This view is 
consistent with the Preamble of the CoC which emphasises 
that Judges of the Superior Courts of the country are role 
models for their fellow men and women. Such an elevated 
standard of conduct is demanded from Judges so that the 
institution of the judiciary enjoys the trust and confidence of 
the nation for its integrity, probity, independence and 
transparency.  
MALA FIDES  
43.  Having dealt with the preliminary matters arising 
out of this petition, we may now consider each plea of the 
petitioner in detail. This petition was primarily filed by the 63 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
petitioner for the purposes of declaring the Reference null and 
void. Therefore, the bulk of the submissions of the learned 
counsel for the petitioner were centred around the contention 
that the filing of the Reference was a colourable and mala fide 
exercise  of power. He submitted that the whole process was 
tainted with malice aforethought. He attributed this to the 
petitioner’s judgment in Suo Motu Case No. 7 of 2017  (PLD 
2019 SC 318) ( “Dharna Judgment” ) announced on 
06.02.2019. In that case, the petitioner had passed adverse 
remarks against the two political parties that are presently 
the leading members of the ruling coalition in the Federal 
Government: Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf ( “PTI” ) and Muttahida 
Qaumi Movement ( “MQM” ). Additionally, he had also made 
critical observations about the Army. The relevant extracts 
from this judgment are produced below:  
“24: The leadership of TLP must have noted 
that despite the daylight slaughter of 
innocents on the streets of Karachi on 12th 
May, 2007 its principal conspirators and 
beneficiaries were not punished. They must 
also have noted that when PTI -PAT had 
camped in the Red Zone for several months 
they had achieved the setting up of a judicial 
inquiry commission. Though the findings of 
the Inquiry Commission had  rebutted PTI's 
allegations no adverse consequences 
followed. PTI's leadership did not even tender 
an apology, let alone clean up the area or pay 
to clean and restore it. Instead PTI received a 
lot of free publicity.  
53: For the reasons mentioned above thi s 
case is disposed of with the following 
declarations and directions:  
……………………………………………………….…  
(15) The Constitution emphatically prohibits 
members of the Armed Forces from engaging 64 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
in any kind of political activity, which 
includes supporting a political pa rty, faction 
or individual. The Government of Pakistan 
through the Ministry of Defence and the 
respective Chiefs of the Army, the Navy and 
the Air Force are directed to initiate action 
against the personnel under their command 
who are found to have violate d their oath. ” 
 
44.   Learned counsel argued that this judgment, and 
in particular these remarks, angered the ruling coalition. This 
could be gathered from the review petitions filed by PTI and 
MQM against the Dharna Judgment. Both review petitions 
demande d the petitioner’s removal from office under Article 
209(5) of the Constitution for committing misconduct. He 
asserted that these review petitions were a coordinated 
exercise by PTI and MQM to oust the petitioner since they 
contained almost verbatim langua ge and were even filed in 
Court on the same date. In addition, learned counsel also 
cited various other events/actions which he argued 
highlighted the mala fides behind the Reference. Briefly these 
are: 
i. The use of a proxy complainant, Mr. Dogar;  
ii. The leakin g of the Reference and its contents to the 
media;  
iii. The derogatory statements made by Mrs. Firdous Ashiq 
Awan, Special Assistant to Prime Minister ( “SAPM” ) on 
Information and Broadcasting, about the petitioner;  
iv. The haste with which action was taken against the 
petitioner after the Dharna Judgment; and  65 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
v. The charged language used by the AG in his Rejoinder 
to the SJC.  
45.   From the opposing side, learned counsel for the 
respondents negated all claims of mala fides levelled by the 
petitioner. He submitted that the allegations in their present 
form were too vague to satisfy the high threshold of mala fide 
and that the petitioner had failed to discharge the burden of 
proof. He maintained throughout the course of oral 
arguments that the Reference was simply filed t o ensure 
judicial accountability and that there was no ulterior motive 
of the Federal Government. He submitted that he had the 
highest respect for the petitioner whom he considered an 
elder brother.  
46.   We have carefully examined the record and the 
relevant case -law and have arrived at a conclusion. However, 
before we discuss the merits of our decision on this complex 
and fiercely debated issue, we would like to first set out what 
mala fides actually entail. There is an abundance of case -law 
on mala fide s rendered by this Court in landmark judgments, 
such as the case of Government of West Pakistan Vs. 
Begum Agha Abdul Karim Shorish Kashmiri  (PLD 1969 SC 
14) and Federation of Pakistan V s. Saeed Ahmed Khan and 
others  (PLD 1974 SC 151 ). However, there is still lack of 
uniformity in its definition and on the standard of proof that a 66 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
party needs to satisfy in order to establish its claim of mala 
fide.  
47.   First and foremost, we shall examine the meaning 
of mala fide in the legal conte xt. Traditionally, an action 
actuated with an ulterior purpose to harm another or benefit 
oneself is classified as an act that is malicious or malice in 
fact. However, in (relatively) recent times, this Court has 
recognised another category of mala fides, namely, mala fide 
in law. Even though both are a species of mala fide, yet each 
has distinct ingredients and consequences. A recent judgment 
of this Court in Said Zaman Khan V s. Federation of 
Pakistan  (2017 SCMR 1249 ) has studied not only the entire 
case-law on the subject but has also analysed the essential 
yet different ingredients of both mala fide in law and malice in 
fact. It would be useful at this stage to reproduce the relevant 
portions from the said judgment:  
“82: … where any action is taken or ord er 
passed not with the intention of fulfilling its 
mandate or to achieve its purpose but is 
inspired by a collateral purpose or instigated 
by a personal motive to wrongfully hurt 
somebody or benefit oneself or another, it is 
said to suffer from malice of f acts. In such 
cases, the seat of the malice or bad faith is 
the evil mind of the person taking the action 
be it spite or personal bias or ulterior motive .” 
“83: … where an action taken is so 
unreasonable, improbable or blatantly illegal 
that it ceases to be an action countenanced 
or contemplated by the law under which it is 
purportedly taken malice will be implied and 
[the] act would be deemed to suffer from 
malice in law or constructive malice. Strict 
proof of bad faith or collateral propose in 
such cases may not be required .” 67 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
“90: … The mere allegation that an action has 
been taken wrongly is not sufficient to 
establish mala fide of facts. Specific 
allegations of th e collateral purpose or an 
ulterior motive must be made and proved to 
the satisfaction of the Court .” 
 
48.   The crux of our analysis will be focused on malice 
in fact since the petitioner has primarily levelled allegations of 
ulterior motives against the respondents. However, to present 
a complete picture of mala fides, two general points of 
importance from the above quoted observations need to be 
stated. First, that apart from the generally recognised 
category of actions driven by a foul personal motive d escribed 
here as malice in fact, there is another category of reckless 
action in disregard of the law termed as mala fide in law. The 
first type of mala fide is attributed to a person whereas the 
second is levelled against the impugned action. While the 
former is concerned with a collateral purpose or an evil 
intention to hurt someone under the pretence of a legal 
action, the latter deals with actions that are manifestly illegal 
or so anomalous that they lack nexus with the law under 
which they are taken. T hus it becomes clear that malice in 
fact and mala fide in law have different ingredients, the 
former being comprised of factual elements with the latter 
being composed of legal features, that need to be established 
as such for the respective consequences t o ensue. Secondly, it 
is clarified that an accusation of mala fide in law involves 
more than errors of misreading the record or non -application 68 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
of the law or lack of proportionality in the impugned action. 
Instead, this is a serious allegation of wanton ab use or 
disregard of the law. However, when an ulterior motive to 
cause harm is proved then the repercussions of malice in fact 
follow. It is for this reason that a mere allegation that an 
action has been taken wrongly cannot be grounds to hold that 
such ac tion suffers from mala fide in law or malice in fact. 
This is also consistent with the view propounded in para -90 
of the Said Zaman  case ( supra ).  
49.   The aforementioned discussion confirms that 
imputing mala fide of either kind to a person or an action is a 
grave accusation. It should not be made lightly but can only 
be done when the facts or legal defects justify its use. In the 
present case, the petitioner has alleged bad faith and ulterior 
motives to the respondents personally. This amounts to a plea 
of malice in fact which requires a high standard of proof. The 
rationale behind such an approach is that a plea of malice in 
fact frustrates the process of justice. After a complainant 
establishes malice in fact against a person, the entire 
proceeding by t he latter is brought to an end. This results in 
the merits of the case being ignored. Moreover, the reputation 
of the person, against whom an allegation of malice in fact is 
made, becomes tarnished and if the said allegation is proved 
then his repute is fo rever ruined. He is made out to be a 
vicious individual who harbours ill -intentions against others. 
Such are the negative consequences of this plea, if 69 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
established. This reasoning applies with greater force if such 
an allegation is made against senior publ ic functionaries of 
the State. Indeed, it was for this very reason that Justice 
Muhammad Nawaz Abbasi in his concurring note in the CJP 
case (s upra) held as follows:  
“Page 216: ... In view thereof the mala fide of 
fact in the normal circumstances is require d 
to be established through the positive 
evidence and not merely on the basis of 
allegations  but the personal malice of a 
person in official position can be examined in 
the context as to whether the action in official 
capacity was extraneous and for collat eral 
purpose which was taken in bad faith or such 
an action was in good faith .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Similarly, this Court in the Saeed Ahmed Khan  case ( supra ) 
observed:  
Page 170: male fides is one of the most 
difficult things to prove and the onus is 
entirely upon the person alleging mala fides 
to establish it,  because, there is, to start 
with, a presumption of regularity with regard 
to all official acts, and until that presumption 
is rebutted, the action cannot be challenged 
merely  upon a vague allega tion of mal[a]  
fides.” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
50.   We are in complete agreement with the views 
expounded by the members of this Court in the above noted 
judgments. An allegation of malice in fact is unlike any other 
ordinary allegation. It carries with it a stigma for the accused 
which cannot easily be was hed away. If a lower standard of 
proof for malice in fact is adopted, that would open the 70 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
floodgates for recalcitrant litigants to make such allegations 
against their opposing side to derail the process of justice and 
to defame their opponents in Court. Th erefore, to limit these 
allegations to only genuine claims of malice in fact, we hold 
that any person who wishes to raise this plea must prove it to 
the satisfaction of the Court on the basis of positive and 
cogent evidence.  
51.   Moreover, there is also an obligation on litigants to 
plead the particulars of malice in fact in detail. This, has 
already been alluded to in the Saeed Ahmed Khan  case 
(supra) wherein it was held that vague allegations cannot 
establish a plea of malice in fact. Such a duty was im posed 
more explicitly on parties by this Court in the Begum Agha 
Shorish Kashmiri  case ( supra ). The relevant portion is 
reproduced below:  
“Page 35: mala fide must be pleaded with 
particularity and once one kind of mala fide 
is alleged, the detenu should no t be allowed 
to adduce proof of any other kind of mala 
fide. Enquiries are not to be launched merely 
on the basis of vague and indefinite 
allegations .” 
(emphasis  supplied ) 
 
Accordingly, to raise this plea, it is necessary for the relevant 
party to pinpoint  the specific incidents/events/actions which 
demonstrate the malice in fact of the opposing side.  71 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
52.   With the foregoing background, we shall now 
consider each allegation raised by the petitioner to determine 
whether it crosses the threshold of malice i n fact or not.  
53.   Firstly, an allegation has been made that this 
Reference is a direct consequence of the Dharna Judgment. 
The malice in fact is statedly evidenced by the review petitions 
filed by the coalition parties in the Federal Government before 
this Court. However, the recourse to a review petition is a 
lawful remedy granted to litigants by Article 188 of the 
Constitution. It, therefore, cannot be used as evidence for 
proving the malice in fact of the respondents. As far as the 
charged language us ed against the petitioner is concerned, it 
is noted that the review petition filed by PTI, which has been 
relied upon by the petitioner, was objected to by the office and 
was subsequently withdrawn. Its revision, as accepted by the 
learned counsel, does no t contain any adverse averments 
against the petitioner. With respect to the review petition filed 
by MQM, undoubtedly it does contain the resentful remark 
that action needs be taken against the petitioner under 
Articles  III, IV and V of the Code of Conduct. Such language 
has no place in any petition before this Court. However, the 
fact that the Dharna Judgment criticised the conduct of PTI 
and MQM without giving the two political parties a hearing 
may have disenchanted s ome members of the MQM party. Yet 
even such a feeling cannot justify the brazen accusations in 
the review petition.  72 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
54.   Be that as it may, learned counsel for the 
petitioner contended that having availed the appropriate legal 
remedy of review, MQM, a mi nority member of the coalition 
government was so reviled by the Dharna Judgment that it 
influenced the Federal Government to file a Reference against 
the petitioner. This view seems implausible and does not 
demonstrate the plea of malice in fact urged by t he petitioner. 
The Reference is based on Mrs. Isa’s ownership of undeclared 
London Properties. With the blemish attached to the 
ownership of undeclared foreign properties, such ownership 
automatically attracts speculation about its status and 
source.  In fact, in the year 2017 the SJC took cognizance of a 
similar information in the case of another learned Judge who 
resigned his office. Even the respondents’ correspondence on 
the record shows that the SJC simultaneously received a 
Presidential reference on th e same ground against another 
learned Judge of the High Court. In this perspective the filing 
of the present Reference cannot be held to suffer from malice 
in fact.  
55.   Indeed, recourse to a lawful remedy under Article 
209(5) of the Constitution cannot be malicious unless for ill -
motives an information alleges wrong or distorted or 
exaggerated facts, or seeks relief that is inordinate or 
extraneous to the undisputed facts. Furthermore, the 
observations in the Dharna Judgment pale in comparison to 
the rem arks passed by this Court in Air Marshal (Retd.) 73 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Muhammad Asghar Khan Vs. General (Retd.) Mirza Aslam 
Baig (PLD 2013 SC 1) in which far stronger observations 
about our politicians and political system failed to draw any 
adverse reaction from the Federal Go vernment against any 
Judge. Consequently, no malice in fact is made out on this 
ground.  
56.   The learned counsel for the petitioner next 
attacked the initiation of the Reference for being tainted with 
malice in fact as the complaint against the petitione r was filed 
by Mr. Dogar who has a reputation of planting false stories. 
He stated that the respondents did not make even the 
slightest effort to check the credibility of Mr. Dogar and 
instead accepted his complaint at face value. He submitted 
that conside ring the sensitivity of the matter and the fact that 
the complaint was against a sitting Judge of the Supreme 
Court, the respondents should at the bare minimum have 
scrutinised the antecedents of Mr. Dogar.  
57.   However, such an argument ignores the gene ral 
law of the land that when an information against a person 
(whether a public office holder or a private person) is to be 
evaluated, it is the substance, veracity and consequence of 
the information which matters and not the credibility and 
credentials of  the informant. Reference in this regard can be 
made to the decision in Pakistan Tobacco Company Ltd V s. 74 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Federation of Pakistan  (1999 SCMR 382 ) in which this 
Court observed:  
“10: We are inclined to hold that the question 
whether a particular Constitution petition 
filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
directly in this Court is maintainable is to be 
examined not on the basis as to who has filed 
the same, but the above question is to be 
determined with reference to the controversy 
raised in the Const itution petition, and if the 
controversy involves a question of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement 
of any of the Fundamental Rights the same 
will be sustainable. ” 
 
58.   In the present case, the information supplied by 
Mr. Dogar is not denied by the petitioner to the extent of 
ownership of the London Properties by Mrs. Isa and her 
children. This adds weight to the Court’s observation in the 
above cited case. Although in th e Pakistan Tobacco  case 
(supra ) this Court was mainly concerned with the 
maintainability of a petition filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, we consider that the same principles also apply 
to an information filed before the SJC under Article 209( 5). 
The reason is that the receipt of information from any source 
is cognizable by the SJC under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution and is sufficient to sustain an inquiry against a 
Judge of the Superior Courts. The word ‘any’ means that the 
antecedents of  the informant are irrelevant unless the 
information is false, concocted, distorted, exaggerated or 
seeks relief that is excessive in relation to the accepted facts. 75 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
As previously noted, the underlying information in the 
Reference to the extent of ownershi p of the London Properties 
by Mrs. Isa and her children is not disputed by the petitioner. 
Therefore, in such circumstances the background of the 
informant becomes insignificant. As a result, even this 
ground does not support the plea of malice in fact rai sed by 
the petitioner.  
59.   The next objection of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner was about the leaking of the Reference and its 
contents to the media. He urged that the disclosure was 
engineered by the respondents which constituted a violation 
of Rule 13 of the 2005 Rules. This provision is reproduced 
below:   
“13. Proceedings of the Council not to be 
reported: --  
(1) Proceedings of the Council shall be 
conducted in camera and shall not be open to 
public.  
(2) Only the findings of the proceedings s hall 
be allowed to be reported.  
(3) Proceedings of the meetings of the Council 
or any other steps that Council may take 
shall not be reported, unless directed 
otherwise. ” 
 
There is no cavil with the proposition that a reference filed 
against a Superior Cou rt Judge has to be kept confidential. 
The rationale for adopting such a course of action has been 
provided in this Court’s judgment in Justice Shaukat Aziz 
Siddiqui and others Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2018 76 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
SC 538 ). For convenience, the relevant portion is reproduced 
below:  
“80: …Thus, we must attempt to discover the 
purpose and true intent of paragraph 13 of 
the SJC Procedure of Enquiry 2005, which 
alone would hold the key to its proper 
contextualized interpretation. Various 
countries of the worl d have chosen either of 
two paths with regard to the process of 
accountability of Superior Court Judges. 
Broadly speaking, one path is through an 
open process including through a proceeding 
before a forum outside the judiciary e.g. 
Parliament in the full g aze of the public eye 
while the other path is of an insulated 
process of being dealt with by one's own 
peers. Our Constitutional Dispensation in 
principle has adopted the latter course of 
action. The framers of the Constitution of 
1973 appear to have made a value judgment 
that such a course of action is best suited to 
our societal and cultural ethos, where 
allegations are routinely made against all and 
sundry without any qualms about the 
truthfulness or otherwise of such allegations . 
Perhaps the framers of the Constitution may 
have been inspired, in this behalf, by the 
mystical saint of Kasur who said that we live 
in the "Age of Suspicion", where people 
immediately believe the worst about others. It 
is said that the Judges like Caesar’s wives 
ought to be abo ve suspicion. An allegation no 
matter how baseless, if permitted to be made 
public, such Judge and his capacity to 
dispense justice would be irreparably 
prejudiced .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
60.   The reasoning in the Shaukat Aziz case ( supra ) 
has also been ec hoed by the learned counsel for the petitioner 
who has lamented the loss of reputation suffered by the 
petitioner and the harassment which he and his family have 
had to endure. One can appreciate the ordeal that the 
petitioner and his family may have lived  through from the 77 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
speculative media coverage on the Reference. Nevertheless, to 
hold any particular respondent accountable for revealing the 
details of the Reference, there needs to be at least some 
material on record that connects the leaks to one or more  of 
the respondents. The chronology of events reveal that the 
Reference was signed on 20.05.2019 by the President; and it 
was filed by the Secretary Law with the SJC on Thursday, 
23.05.2019. However, it was only on Tuesday, 28.05.2019 
that news of the Refe rence broke out on social media, and by 
29.05.2019 most news channels and papers in the country 
had reported on it. It was also on 28.05.2019 that the 
petitioner wrote the first of his letters to the President, inter 
alia, requesting a copy of the Referenc e. This letter too was 
leaked the next day on the media (as was the second letter 
written by the petitioner on 03.06.2019). In this chain of 
events, another occurrence came to light as disclosed in 
paragraph 43 of the petition. Shortly after the filing of the 
Reference, a meeting took place between the petitioner and 
the (then) Chairman of SJC (former Chief Justice of Pakistan). 
The petitioner’s application CMA No 7931/19 quotes in its 
paragraph 20 an order by the SJC dated 19.08.2019 passed 
in another proc eedings against the petitioner:  
“Pages 20 -21: The above mentioned meeting 
of the respondent -Judge with the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan shows that the 
respondent -Judge not only knew about filing 
of the Reference against him by the President 
but also about the actual contents thereof 
and the allegations leveled therein before he 78 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
had started writing successive letters to the 
President on the subject professing his 
ignorance about the same .” 
 
61.   The petitioner has not disputed the aforesaid 
meeting being held prior to 28.05.2019. As a result, it is clear 
that the petitioner had read the Reference and was aware of 
the allegations made against him. Therefore, before the 
Reference was leaked, probabl y on 28.05.2019, only a 
handful of individuals knew of its existence: the Law Minister, 
AG, President, PM, (then) Chairman SJC, (then) Secretary 
SJC and the petitioner himself. The date of the media report 
about the Reference is significant. Which fresh ev ent triggered 
the sudden disclosure of the Reference is not evident from the 
record. Therefore, although the allegation made against the 
respondents raises suspicion, it is still unsupported by any 
evidence. Consequently it cannot suffice to conclusively h old 
that either one or more of the respondents leaked the 
Reference to the media. Since we cannot on the basis of 
speculations and suspicions determine who leaked the 
Reference, therefore no finding with respect to its disclosure 
and hence of malice in fac t against any of the persons who 
were aware of its contents can be recorded. Be that as it may, 
learned counsel for the petitioner also raised issue with Mrs. 
Firdous Ashiq Awan’s press conference on 30.05.2019. He 
criticised the derogatory manner in which  she discussed the 
Reference against the petitioner and argued that this was 
irrefutable proof of the respondents’ ill -will against the 79 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
petitioner. We are in agreement with learned counsel that the 
press conference was in bad taste. Even though, by 
30.05.2 019 the news about the Reference was already in the 
public domain, Mrs. Awan used the information for political 
point scoring. It is not the petitioner’s case that she had any 
role in preparing or framing the Reference. Therefore, her 
press conference cann ot have any consequences vis a vis the 
Reference. However, even if the poor choice of words used by 
Mrs. Awan cannot on their own amount to malice in fact, 
their hostile and scandalous content during the press 
conference prima facie shows that she was deri ding the 
petitioner (or was at least attempting to). By such conduct 
she violated not only Rule 13 of the 2005 Rules but also 
prima facie  breached Article 204 of the Constitution by 
committing contempt against a sitting Judge of the Supreme 
Court. Conseque ntly, she should be made answerable for her 
conduct under Article 204(2)(b) of the Constitution through 
independent proceedings.  
62.   Learned counsel for the petitioner next objected to 
the unusual despatch with which the respondents 
investigated, prepar ed and filed the Reference against the 
petitioner. He submitted that the complaint dated 10.04.2019 
was received by Chairman ARU on 12.04.2019. Within four 
days of its receipt, Chairman ARU met the Law Minister who 
authorised the investigation against the petitioner. In about a 
month the entire investigation was completed, with 80 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
10.05.2019 being the busiest day. Thereafter, in ten days, on 
20.05.2019 the President had signed the Reference. Learned 
counsel submitted that the completion of the investigation 
and the preparation of the Reference against the petitioner in 
such a short period of time strongly indicated ulterior motives 
on the part of the respondents. With respect to the learned 
counsel, we are unclear as to how this timeline conveys any 
ill-motives  of the respondents in the matter. The information 
received by Chairman ARU in the PM’s Secretariat was not 
any routine complaint. It was against a sitting Judge of the 
Supreme Court and thus received prompt attention from the 
ARU and the concerned officer s of the Federal Government. It 
must also be said that in such sensitive matters, expeditious 
action is to be preferred so that if the information is baseless 
it can be filed without delay. Allowing the affair to linger may 
expose the process to untoward m anipulation and may 
prejudice the institution and the learned Judge under 
complaint. But even if we disregard the foregoing view, the 
crucial question is how does departmental alacrity in the 
finalisation of the Reference demonstrate malice in fact of the 
respondents. There is no evidence of falsity of the material 
collected or of misrepresented facts being alleged by the 
respondents. Their expedition has no doubt resulted in legal 
errors (which are discussed below). However, this is still no 
ground for imp uting malice in fact against the respondents. 81 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Therefore, this allegation of the petitioner is also without 
merit.  
63.   Finally, learned counsel for the petitioner took 
strong objection to the language used by the AG in his written 
Rejoinder to the petitio ner’s Preliminary Response filed before 
the SJC. He stated that this was clear evidence of the AG’s 
hatred for the petitioner. He read out portions from the 
Rejoinder in Court, some of which are quoted in the 
petitioner’s pleadings. A few of these are repr oduced below:  
“It seems that the Respondent has two 
mental issues. Firstly, he has a self -
persecution phobia; and secondly he 
considers himself a legend in his own mind, 
fully bestowed with honesty, integrity and 
competence and considers the rest of the 
world as dishonest and incompetent.”  
“the Respondent craves for self -praise and 
cheap publicity.”  
“the Respondent appears to be drenched in 
self-praise.”  
 
We would like to record our disapproval of the language used 
by the AG for a Judge of the Supreme Cour t. That being said, 
the brazen language is not used in the Reference but in the 
Rejoinder which answers the objections of the petitioner to 
the Reference. These objections include criticism of the AG’s 
competence which can be found in the Preliminary Respo nse. 
The AG may have made his harsh remarks about the 
petitioner in retaliation to the prickly comments made about 
him. Be that as it may, since the remarks, notwithstanding 
their indiscretion, were made in the Rejoinder as opposed to 82 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
in the Reference, the se did not form part of the record before 
the President. As a result, they did not influence the decision 
of the President to forward the Reference to the SJC for an 
inquiry. Therefore, being subsequent to the preparation of the 
Reference and its summary, the AG’s remarks cannot be said 
to reveal malice in fact in the filing of the Reference.  
64.   Our conclusion about the absence of malice in fact 
in the filing of the Reference is reaffirmed by the petitioner’s 
admission that the London properties are ind eed owned by 
his wife and children. This is because it is now well -
established in other areas of the law that an allegation of 
malice in fact gets defeated if it is proved that a complaint 
levelled against a person is true. Accordingly, we hold that the 
allegations of malice in fact levelled by the petitioner against 
the respondents fail.  
CONSTITUTION OF ASSETS RECOVERY UNIT  
65.   Learned counsel for the petitioner next criticised 
the collection of evidence coordinated by the ARU for being 
unknown to the l aws of Pakistan. He stated that the ARU 
finds no mention in the Constitution, any Act of Parliament or 
even the Rules of Business, 1973 ( “ROB” ). Instead, he 
submitted the ARU was created by the issuance of a 
Notification dated 06.11.2018 which the Government has not 
published in the Gazette. He contended that the entire 
functioning/working of the ARU was shrouded in a cloak of 83 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
secrecy, notwithst anding that it seemed to be vested with 
unlimited powers that infringed upon the fundamental rights 
of the people of Pakistan.  
66.   Conversely, learned counsel for the respondents 
submitted that the ARU has been legally constituted. To 
support his conten tion he relied on two judgments of this 
Court reported as 2018 SCMR 574 and PLD 2018 SC 686 
(“Foreign Currency Accounts Cases” ), which he argued 
provided the impetus for creating the ARU to act as a 
coordinating agency between the different finance related  
institutions of the country to exercise oversight on economic 
matters of public importance. The purpose and object of the 
ARU, he urged, was to recover unlawful assets abroad which 
may have been created via funds obtained through money 
laundering, corrupt ion or tax evasion. He relied on Rule 
16(1)(m) of ROB read with the Notifications issued by the 
Cabinet Division to demonstrate that ARU had been created 
with the approval of the Federal Government in accordance 
with law.  
67.   In our considered view, the  Foreign Currency 
Accounts Cases provide a backdrop for examining the legality 
of the ARU. These judgments noticed that a staggering 
amount of US$ 15.23 billion was transferred overseas, in the 
financial year 2016 -2017, from private bank accounts 
without o btaining any explanation or proof that the remitted 84 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
funds had been lawfully earned and taxed. Such transfers 
were in addition to the funds that may have been sent 
through covert hundi and hawala instruments. The 
detrimental effect on the national economy o f such transfers 
cannot be exaggerated. These negative effects were also 
recognised by this Court in the Foreign Currency Accounts 
Case reported as PLD 2018 SC 686:  
“5: … Clearly, both types of outflows have a 
huge impact on the stability of the foreign 
exchange reserves of the country and 
adversely affect the exchange rates of the 
Pakistani Rupee. Also as a result, the 
national economy can become vulnerable to 
pressure due to foreign currency obligations 
of the State; can suffer undue and disruptive 
inflat ion and can drain the exchequer of 
substantial amounts of tax on account of 
escaped income and wealth .” 
 
However, it must be observed here that the judgments in 
these cases did not specifically state the need for a body like 
the ARU to be created. The rele vant extract from the 
judgment reported as PLD 2018 SC 686 is produced below:  
“11: Having said that, it is observed that any 
measures taken by the Federal Government 
in the public interest to protect the foreign 
exchange reserves of the country and to bring 
the hitherto undeclared foreign assets within 
the tax net are welcomed by the Court.  
Nevertheless, there are other deficiencies of 
the current tax laws and in the regulatory 
framework for the holding and transfer of 
foreign exchange that promote the 
accumulation of undeclared foreign assets 
and corresponding income. These have been 
highlighted by the Committee but remain 
unaddressed by the Federal Government. 
They require careful attention and 
deliberation by the concerned authorities . Let 
the Federal  Government, FBR and the State 85 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Bank of Pakistan state their respective 
positions about these matters pointed out by 
the Committee and indicate if any reform is 
proposed to correct or remedy the same. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
68.   It can thus be observed that the Foreign Currency 
Accounts Cases did not consider or decide the legality of the 
status of the ARU established vide Notification dated 
06.11.2018. At best, these judgments support reform in the 
tax and regulatory mechanism of  foreign currency accounts 
and enhanced monitoring of foreign exchange transfers from 
Pakistan. Therefore, to determine the legality of ARU’s 
creation, one has to consider whether the requisite legal 
actions and procedures for its establishment have been 
adopted by the person(s) competent and authorised to do so 
under the law.  
69.   In this context, learned counsel for the petitioner’s 
primary grievance against the ARU was that no Act of 
Parliament had created it or conferred powers on it therefore 
it was void ab initio. However, this argument of the learned 
counsel appears to misconstrue the scope of Executive power 
under the Constitution. The nature and ambit of such power 
has been considered by the Indian Supreme Court in the case 
of Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya  Kapur and others Vs. The State 
of Punjab  (AIR 1955 SC 549):  
“14: It may not be possible to frame an 
exhaustive definition of what executive 
function means and implies. Ordinarily the 86 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
executive power connotes the residue of 
governmental functions that rem ain after 
legislative and judicial functions are taken 
away.  
15: The executive function comprises both the 
determination of the policy as well as carrying 
it into execution.  This evidently includes the 
initiation of legislation, the maintenance of 
order, t he promotion of social and economic 
welfare, the direction of foreign policy, in fact 
the carrying on or supervision of the gener al 
administration of the State.”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Para-14 of the above noted judgment was approved by this 
Court in Messrs Mustafa Impex, Karachi Vs. The 
Government of Pakistan  (PLD 2016 SC 808 at para -69). 
70.   It can be noticed from these rulings that ordinarily 
executive functions involve the execution of law and policy 
and the supervision of the general administration of the State. 
As already stated above, the ARU is a coordinating agency 
which brings under one umbrella the competent statutory 
authorities to stem the menace of tax evasion, money 
laundering and corruption in our country. Accordingly, the 
ARU is essentially executing the policy of the State to curb 
financial crimes in the country. It is therefore an executive 
office, in particular an ‘Attached Department’ of the Cabinet 
Division, performing executive functions. Having such status, 
it does not need the backing  of an Act to grant validity to its 
creation and actions as required by Article 4 of the 
Constitution. Evidence for this can be found in the ROB:  
“2. Definitions. — (1) In these rules, unless 
there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context:  87 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
………………………………………………………....  
(ii) "Attached Department" mean s a 
Department which has direct relation with a 
Division and has been declared as such by 
the Federal Government;”  
 
71.   A perusal of Rule 2(1)(ii) makes it clear that for 
any ‘Attached Department’ to exist and function, it needs to 
have a direct relation with a Division and has to be declared 
by the Federal Government as an ‘Attached Department.’ The 
material on record shows that these two essential steps were 
taken in relation to the creation of AR U. The first of such 
documents, demonstrating the procedure followed for 
constituting the ARU as an ‘Attached Department,’ is the 
Summary for the Cabinet dated 11.09.2018:  
“CABINET DIVISION  
SUBJECT: __ ASSETS RECOVERY UNIT 
(ARU)  
………………………………………………………….  
3. In view of the above, and in pursuance of 
earlier decision of the Cabinet [05.09.2018], 
the following is submitted for consideration 
and approval of the Cabinet:  
………………………………………………………….  
c. Placement of ARU, under Cabinet Division, 
to be housed in the Prime  Minister’s House;”  
 
This was followed by the Notification dated 19.09.2018:  
“CABINET SECRETARIAT  
 CABINET DIVISION  
………………………………………………………….  
No. 643(S)/2018 -Cab. The Cabinet,  in its 
meetings held on 5th and 13th September, 
2018, vide cases N0. 546/35/2018 and No. 88 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
556/36/2018, decided to establish the 
Assets Recovery Unit (ARU) under Cabinet 
Division , to be housed in the Prime Minister’s 
Office, Islamabad.”  
 
The above Notifications prove that the creation of the A RU as 
an ‘Attached Department’ of the Cabinet Division was 
approved by the Cabinet itself. Article 90 of the Constitution 
establishes that the Cabinet with the PM as its head is the 
Federal Government. It reads as follows:  
“90. The Federal Government:  
(1) Subject to the Constitution, the 
executive authority of the Federation shall 
be exercised in the name of the President 
by the Federal Government, consisting of 
the Prime Minister and the Federal 
Ministers,  which shall act through the 
Prime Minister, wh o shall be the chief 
executive of the Federation.”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Consequently, it becomes evident that the approval for the 
creation of the ARU was given by the Federal Government. As 
a result, the two -fold requirement listed in Rule 2(1)(ii) of the  
ROB for the constitution of ARU as an ‘Attached Department’ 
has been satisfied in the present case.  
72.   Be that as it may, learned counsel’s main 
objection against the ARU was its alleged interference with 
the rights and liabilities of individuals in t he absence of any 
statute granting it such a power. However, the Notification 
dated 06.11.2018 issued by the Cabinet Division shows that 89 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the ARU does not act directly but instead operates through its 
members who have been borrowed from various statutory 
bodies of the country. These include:  
i. The Federal Investigation Agency ( “FIA” ); 
ii. The National Accountability Bureau ( “NAB” ); 
iii. The FBR ; and  
iv. The State Bank of Pakistan ( “SBP” ).  
As a result , the ARU is ma nned primarily with individuals 
whose powers and jurisdiction are exercised under a 
statutory regime. Accordingly, the  ARU is simply a 
coordinating office attached to the Cabinet Division with the 
main purpose of facilitating the collaborative efforts of t he 
relevant statutory functionaries.  It therefore cannot be 
accused of adversely  affecting the rights of any Pakistani 
citizen without the backing of law. This is made clear by the 
composition of the ARU and its terms of reference ( “TORs” ) 
which are  also set out in the above noted Notification  dated 
06.11.2018 :  
“CABINET DIVISION  
………………………………………………………….  
NOTIFICATION  
No. F.32/CM/2018 -Cab. The Cabinet, in its 
meeting held on 5th September, 2018, vide 
case No.546/35/2018, approved the 
Establishment of Assets Recovery Unit for 
implementation of Recovery of Unlawful 
Assets Abroad.  
2. The composition and terms of reference of 
Assets Recovery Unit shall be as follows:  
 90 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
A. Composition : 
1. SAPM on Accountability.  Chairman  
2. Senior Officer from Federal 
Investigation Agency (FIA).  Member  
3. Senior Officer from National 
Accountability Bureau (NAB).  Member  
4. Senior Officer from Federal Board 
of Revenue (FBR).  Member  
5. Senior Officer from State Bank of 
Pakistan (SBP).  Member  
6. 2/3 Experts from private sector 
with expertise in forensic 
accounting, anti -money 
laundering, international criminal 
laws and transactional legal 
systems.  Members  
7. Any other officer/agency/  firm/  or 
individu al if so required by the 
Unit on temporary or permanent 
basis may be co -opted by the 
Unit.   
 
B. Terms of Reference:  
………………………………………………………….  
3. Assets Recovery Unit designated officers 
from relevant organization/department/other 
law enforcement agencies like NAB, FIA or 
FBR shall with consultation/support of 
relevant LEA, trace/detect and pursue 
repatriation of unlawful assets from abroad. 
For this purpose, ARU may seek 
help/assistance of foreign governments/ 
firms/lawyers or individuals if so required.”   
 
TOR 3 confirms that when it comes to dealing with the assets 
of Pakistani citizens, the ARU is only authorised to act 
through its designated officer/member from the relevant 
department/agency. Since these designated officers/members 
are simultaneously se rving in statutory agencies, they are 
vested not only with the powers granted by the relevant 
statute governing their agency but are also bound by the 
procedural safeguards and obligations laid down in such a 
statute. As a result, any action attributed to the ARU in 91 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
relation to the assets of Pakistani citizens is taken through 
competent authorities strictly in accordance with the law.  
73.   As far as the issue of non -publication of the 
Notification dated 06.11.2018, setting out the composition 
and TORs of the ARU, is concerned, this Court in the case of 
Saghir Ahmed Vs. Province of Punjab  (PLD 2004 SC 261 ) 
has observed:  
“9: It depends on the language employed in a 
particular statute as to whether the 
provisions regarding publication of a 
statutory instrume nt or a notification in the 
Official Gazette are to be treated as 
mandatory or directory .  
10. Even otherwise, the provisions of a 
statute for the publication or a notification in 
official Gazette are generally regarded by the 
Courts as directory and where  their strict 
non-compliance does not provide any 
consequences.  The legal certainty also 
requires that ordinarily a statutory 
instrument should not be treated as invalid 
because of a failure on the part of public 
functionaries to publish it in the official 
Gazette. There may be many things done on 
the basis of such an  instrument. It would 
seem unfortunate were these things held to 
be invalid if it were at some stage discovered 
that there had been a failure by a public 
authority to go meticulously by the manner 
and mode of publication of an instrument or 
notification in  the Official Gazette. …  
11. However, no hard and fast rule of 
universal application can be laid down on the 
legal effect of non -publication of a notification 
in the official Gazette. In certain cases, 
keeping in view the nature and object of a 
particular statute and to carry out the 
legislative intent, the provisions for the 
publication of a notification in the official 
Gazette can be treated to be mandatory in 
nature where rights or liabilities of other 
persons are involved.  …” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 92 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
The above quoted para -10 was subsequently affirmed by this 
Court in Bahadur Khan Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (2017 
SCMR 2066 at para -12). What can be noticed from the quoted 
passage is that in ordinary circumstances, the non -
publication of a Notification in  the gazette does not affect its 
validity except for in limited situations such as when a 
statute makes publication in the gazette mandatory or where 
the rights and liabilities of other persons are involved. In the 
present case before us there is no statut e which makes 
publication of the Notification creating the ARU mandatory. 
Furthermore, wherever the rights and liabilities of citizens are 
affected, the existing statutory mechanisms are utilised to 
ensure actions taken are in accordance with the law. Even  in 
the Reference against the petitioner, the material on record 
demonstrates that all intrusive actions were taken by officers 
belonging to the relevant statutory agencies. For example, the 
tax records of the petitioner were examined by the Assistant 
Comm issioner (Inland Revenue), and the identification 
documents and travel records were accessed by Director FIA. 
Therefore, since none of the exceptions to non -publication 
apply to the facts of the present case, we find that there is no 
illegality that persua des us to hold that the publication of the 
Notifications dated 20.08.2018 and 06.11.2018 in the gazette 
was mandatory.  
74.   Next, learned counsel for the petitioner attacked 
the appointment of Mirza Shahzad Akbar as SAPM on 93 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Accountability. In response, l earned counsel for the 
respondents relied on Rule 4(6) and serial number 1A of 
Schedule V -A of the ROB to defend the said appointment. For 
the sake of convenience, these are reproduced below:  
“4. Organization of Divisions . 
………………………………………………………….  
(6): There may be a Special Assistant or 
Special A ssistants to the Prime Minister with 
such status and functions as may be 
determined by the Prime Minister . 
………………………………………………………….  
Schedule V -A 
[Rule 15(1)(g)(h)]  
LIST OF CASES TO BE SUBMITTED TO 
THE PRIME MINIS TER FOR HIS ORDERS  
………………………………………………………….  
1A. Appointment, resignation and removal of 
Special Assistants to the Prime Minister and 
of persons holding the Minister's status 
without Cabinet rank, determination of their 
salaries, allowances and privileges .” 
 
It may be noticed from these provisions that they give the PM 
the power to appoint a Special Assistant with such status and 
functions as he desires. However, learned counsel for the 
petitioner disputed this assertion and questioned the 
appointment of Mirz a Shahzad Akbar, Respondent No. 8, as 
SAPM by a simple Notification dated 20.08.2018, which reads 
as follows:  
“No. 2 -8/2018 -Min-I. – In terms of rule 4(6) 
of the Rules of Business, 1973 read with 
serial number 1A of Schedule V -A of the said 
Rules, the Prime Minister has been pleased to 
appoint, with immediate effect, Mirza 
Shahzad Akbar as Special Assistant to the 94 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Prime Minister on Accountability, with the 
status of Minister of State.”  
 
He lamented that nothing was known about the educational 
qualificat ions or expertise of Mirza Shahzad Akbar. Even the 
process followed to select him from among other qualified 
persons as SAPM on Accountability was non -transparent. 
These questions of the learned counsel are addressed in this 
Court’s judgment dated 26.12.20 18 given in Muhammad Adil 
Chattha Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (Constitution Petition 
No. 63 of 2018). The relevant portion at paragraph 14 is 
reproduced below:  
“14: In view of the fact that the qualifications 
and antecedents for appointment of a Special 
Assistant to the Prime Minister are neither 
mentioned in the Constitution nor in the 
Rules of Business. It appears to have been 
left at the discretion of the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan on the basis of his subjective 
assessment about the ability of a person to  
perform the functions that the Prime Minister 
requires him to perform for such 
appointment...”  
 
75.   The above noted observations were made in the 
context that no substantive provisions of the Constitution 
create the office of SAPM. However, the said off ice is 
mentioned in Article 260 of the Constitution as one of the 
posts that is excluded from the definition of ‘Service of 
Pakistan.’ Therefore, at present the post of an SAPM is a 
political appointment. Accordingly, the said appointment is 
made in the di scretion of the PM and is not regulated by 95 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
statute. This aspect is highlighted by Rule 4(6) and serial 
number 1A of Schedule V -A of the ROB. However, it was 
observed in the Adil Chattha  case ( supra ) that the Court will 
interfere if the PM exercises his dis cretionary power 
‘arbitrarily, unlawfully or in a fanciful manner,’ or if the 
appointment of a person as SAPM suffers from ‘cronyism, 
nepotism or political favour.’ In such a situation the 
appointment will be struck down under Article 199(b)(ii) of 
the Con stitution. As a result, there is a judicial check on the 
exercise of the PM’s discretion. Nonetheless, this relief cannot 
be claimed in collateral proceedings, a principle which has 
been affirmed many a times by this Court. For instance, in 
the case of Qazi Hussain Ahmad Vs. General Pervez 
Musharraf  (PLD 2002 SC 853) it was observed:  
“73: …  No challenge muchless effective was 
thrown to the assumption of office of 
President by him and even in these petitions 
the challenge has been made only 
peripherally and collaterally while challenging 
the Referendum Order. It is well -settled that 
a writ of quo warranto cannot be brought 
through collateral attack. Such a relief has to 
be claimed directly.  We are fortified in this 
behalf by the judgment of this Court in Pir 
Sabir Shah's case (PLD 1994 SC 738). Not 
only in this case but also in other cases it 
was held that for orderly and good 
governance validity of the appointment of 
incumbent of public off ice cannot be 
impugned through collateral proceedings .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
The learned counsel for the petitioner has neither challenged 
the appointment of Respondent No. 8 as SAPM Accountability 96 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
in separate proceedings under Article 199(b)(ii) of the 
Constitution nor has he placed any material on record which 
disqualifies Mirza Shahzad Akbar from being appointed to 
this office. Therefore, without proof of illegal or arbitrary 
exercise of discretion by the PM, we cannot interfere with his 
decision on this  matter.  
76.   In the light of our discussion, we declare that 
there is neither any fatal defect in the creation of ARU nor is 
there any unlawfulness in the appointment of Mirza Shahzad 
Akbar as SAPM Accountability.  
 
SURVEILLANCE AND ILLEGALLY COLLECTED EVIDENCE  
77.   The learned counsel for the petitioner also 
criticised the respondents’ method of collection of evidence in 
the present case. He stated that the tax and property records 
of the petitioner and his family were accessed to frame the 
Reference a gainst the petitioner, a fact admitted by the 
respondents. These searches he alleged were a breach of the 
petitioner’s and his family’s right to privacy enshrined in 
Article 14(1) of the Constitution and thus amounted to covert 
surveillance. He, therefore,  urged this Court to hold that such 
evidence had become inadmissible in all related future 
proceedings. Conversely, learned counsel for the respondents, 
without prejudice to his denial that there had been any 
illegality in the collection of evidence in the  instant case, cited 97 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
case-law from Pakistan, United Kingdom and India to 
demonstrate that the method of collection of evidence, 
irrespective of whether it was secured lawfully or otherwise, 
was no bar to its admissibility. Specifically, he relied on the 
following cases: Messrs Bisvil Spinners (PVT) Ltd Vs. 
Pakistan  (PLD 1992 SC 96 ), Kuruma v The Queen  ([1955] 
AC 197 ) and R.M Malkani Vs. State of Maharashtra  (AIR 
1973 SC 157).  
78.   At the very outset it becomes clear that this plea of 
the petitioner raises two distinct issues: surveillance and 
illegal collection of evidence. To have a coherent discussion of 
each aspect of the petitioner’s plea, the two issues are dealt 
with separatel y. Before arriving at any decision on the 
allegation of covert surveillance pressed by the petitioner, it 
needs to be understood what actions actually constitute 
surveillance. A comprehensive definition is not available in 
our laws but can be found in Sect ion 48(2) of the UK’s 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act , 2000 :  
“48 Interpretation of Part II  
………………………………………………………….  
(2) Subject to subsection (3), in this Part 
“surveillance” includes — 
(a) monitoring, observing or listening to 
persons, their movements, their 
conversations or their other activities or 
communications;  
(b) recording anything monitored, observed or 
listened to in the course of surveillance; and  
(c) surveillance by or with the assistance of a 
surveillance device. ” 98 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
It may be notice d from the above mentioned provision that 
surveillance primarily involves the monitoring or recording of 
a person’s movements, conversations or other activities and 
communication. However, in the present case the learned 
counsel for the petitioner has not produced any evidence 
before us which demonstrates that either the petitioner or his 
family have been monitored or their communications have 
been intercepted in the above manner.  
79.   In fact, the only proof which learned counsel has 
referred to is the a dmission by the respondents that the tax 
and property records of the petitioner and his family have 
been accessed from Government and public records. Indeed, 
there is no allegation that any information was obtained from 
the petitioner’s personal or private  records. However, during 
arguments learned counsel for the petitioner denied that this 
distinction made any difference to his primary contention of 
invasion of privacy and unlawful surveillance because of what 
is now commonly known as the ‘Marcel principl e.’ This 
principle has been aptly explained by the UK Supreme Court 
in Regina (Ingenious Media Holdings plc) v Revenue and 
Customs Commissioner  ([2016] 1 WLR 4164):  
“17: It is a well established principle of the 
law of confidentiality that where informatio n 
of a personal or confidential nature is 
obtained or received in the exercise of a legal 
power or in furtherance of a public duty, the 
recipient will in general owe a duty to the 99 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
person from whom it was received or to whom 
it relates not to use it for oth er purposes”  
 
Nevertheless, it may also be noted that the ‘Marcel Principle’ 
is not absolute and can be deviated from. In fact, the House of 
Lords in Hamilton v Naviede  ([1995] 2 AC 75) conceded this 
point when Lord Browne -Wilkinson speaking for the Court  
held:  
“Page 102: In my view, where information has 
been obtained under statutory powers the 
duty of confidence owed on the Marcel 
principle cannot operate so as to prevent the 
person obtaining the information from 
disclosing it to those persons to whom the 
statutory provisions either require or 
authorise him to make disclosure. ” 
 
The petitioner’s case ignores the above mentioned 
qualification to the ‘Marcel Principle.’  
80.   Starting first with Section 216(1) of the Ordinance: 
this provision declares the tax records of taxpayers to be 
confidential. However, the same Section also contains the 
exceptions to this general rule. For our purposes, the 
exception found in Section 216(3)(p) is most relevant. It is 
produced below for reference:  
“216. Disclosure of information by a public 
servant  
…………………………………………………………  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section (1) s hall 
preclude the disclosure of any such 
particulars – 
…………………………………………………………  
(p) as may be required by any offic er or 
department of the Federal Government or of a 
Provincia l Government for the purpose of 100 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
investigation into the conduct and affairs of 
any public servant,  or to a Court in 
connection wit h any prosecution of the public 
servant arising out of an y such investigation;”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
The learned counsel for the petitioner has strongly resisted 
the application of Section 216(3)(p) ibid to the facts of this 
case. He submitted that the petitioner is not a public servant 
for the purposes of the Ordinance. Therefore, his tax records 
could n ot be sought by an officer of the Federal Government 
for the purposes of an investigation. To fortify his submission, 
he stated that a Judge of the Supreme Court did not fall 
within the definition of “Service of Pakistan” laid down in 
Article 260 of the Co nstitution. For convenience, this 
provision is reproduced below:  
“260 Definitions. (1) In the Constitution, 
unless the context otherwise requires, the 
following expressions have the meaning 
hereby respectively assigned to them, that is 
to say,  "Service of Pakistan" means any 
service, post or office in connection with the 
affairs of the Federation or of a Province,  and 
includes an All -Pakistan Service, service in 
the Armed Forces and any other service 
declared to be a service of Pakistan by or 
under Act of  [Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament)]  
or of a Provincial Assembly, but does not 
include service as Speaker, Deputy Speaker, 
Chairman, Deputy Chairman, Prime Minister, 
Federal Minister, Minister of State, Chief 
Minister, Provincial Minis ter [,Attorney -
General, [Ad vocate -General,] Parliamentary 
Secretary] [, Chairman or member of a Law 
Commission, Chairman or member of the 
Council of Islamic Ideology, Special Assistant 
to the Prime Minister, Adviser to the Prime 
Minister, Special Assistant to Chief Minister, 
Adviser  to a Chief Minister]  or member of a 
House or a Provincial Assembly ;” 
(emphasis supplied ) 101 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
81.   It may be observed from Article 260 quoted above 
that Judges of the Superior Courts are not explicitly included 
in the ‘Service of Pakistan.’ However, the esse ntial features of 
such service are provided in Article 260 ibid. These have been 
interpreted by this Court to include the office of Judges of 
Superior Courts within the category of ‘Service of Pakistan.’ 
Reliance is placed on the case of Asghar Khan  (supra ) 
wherein it was observed:  
“78: Besides the office of the President, the 
Judges and Chief Justices of the superior 
courts are also included in the scope of 
service of Pakistan  by failing to make 
reference to them among the exclusions from 
service of Pakist an in Article 260.”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Accordingly, Judges of the Supreme Court are engaged in the 
‘Service of Pakistan.’ However, the exception to the 
confidentiality of tax records under Section 216(3)(p) of the 
Ordinance is available only where disclo sure is required for 
the purposes of an ‘investigation into the conduct and affairs 
of any public servant by any officer or department of the 
Federal Government .’ Therefore, it needs to be determined 
what the terms ‘investigation’ and ‘public servant’ mean. If we 
examine the expression ‘public servant’ first, it becomes clear 
on a perusal of the Ordinance that this word has not been 
defined in the said law. Howev er, it does find mention in the 
tax statutes that preceded the Ordinance, namely, the Income 102 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Tax Act, 1922 and the Income Tax Ordinance, 1979  
(“predecessor tax laws” ). Section 2(13) of the former and 
Section 2(36) of the latter described the term ‘public s ervant’ 
to have the same meaning as that ascribed to it by the 
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 ( “PPC” ). On a perusal of the PPC, 
it becomes clear that the predecessor tax laws are referring to 
Section 21 of the PPC  which reads:  
““21. “Public Servant” The words "public 
servant" denotes a person falling under any of 
the descriptions herein after following, 
namely: - 
First: [omitted]  
Second: Every Commissioned Officer in the 
Military, Naval or Air Forces of Pakistan while 
serving under the Federal Government or any 
Provincial Government;  
Third: Every Judge;”  
 
82.   A Judge is an appointee under law of a Court or a 
Tribunal. Such law may be enacted either by the Federation 
or the Province. Section 21 of PPC declares every Judge in 
Pakistan to be a public servant. Ther efore, a person holding 
judicial office is a public servant. Since Judges of the 
Superior Courts are appointed under the Constitution, it is 
only logical that the definition of public servant in Section 21 
of the PPC includes such Judges. As a result, it f ollows from 
well-established rules of interpretation (which need not be set 
out here) that the expression ‘public servant’ continues to 
bear the same meaning in the Ordinance as it did in the 
predecessor tax laws . Nevertheless, w hile in ordinary 103 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
circumstan ces this would be sufficient to settle the debate on 
the question of whether Judges are public servants, in light of 
the constitutional  importance of this petition  it is advisable if 
this question is answered conclusively  by applying the 
features of public  office, set out by this Court, to the office of 
a Judge of the Superior Courts . Reference is made to the 
judgment of this Court in Salahuddin Vs. Frontier Sugar 
Mills & Distillery Ltd  (PLD 1975 SC 244 ) which quotes the 
following passage from Ferris’s Extraordinary Legal Remedies, 
1925 Edn, page 145, with approval:  
“Pages 258 -259: "a public office is the right, 
authority and duty created and conferred by 
law, by which an individual is vested with 
some portion of the sovereign functions of the 
Government  to be exercised by him for the 
benefit of the public, for the term and by the 
tenure prescribed by law. It implies a 
delegation of a portion of the sovereign power.  
It is a trust conferred by public authority for 
a public purpose, embracing the ideas of 
tenure, duration emolument and duties. A 
public officer is thus to be distinguished from 
a mere employment or agency resting on 
contract, to which such powers and functions 
are not attached . . . . . The determining 
factor, the test, is whether the office i nvolves 
a delegation of some of the sovereign 
functions of Government, either executive, 
legislative or judicial, to be exercised by the 
holder for the public benefit.  Unless his 
powers are of this nature, he is not a public 
officer." ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
83.   It becomes plain from the above cited dictum that 
there are five main ingredients present in the office of a public 
servant. These are:  
a. The office is a trust conferred for a public purpose;  104 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
b. The functions of the office are conferred by law;  
c. The offi ce involves the exercise of a portion of the 
sovereign functions of Government whether that 
be executive, legislative or judicial;  
d. The term and tenure of the office are determined 
by law; and  
e. Remuneration is paid from public funds.  
 
84.   When the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court 
is scrutinised against these ingredients, it becomes obvious 
that Judges of this Court are indeed public servants. Their 
office is created by the Constitution and so are the 
jurisdiction and powers that they possess. They pe rform an 
essential governmental function: the administration of justice 
for the benefit of the public at large. They have a fixed tenure, 
prescribed by Article 179 of the Constitution and their 
emoluments are paid from the Federal Consolidated Fund 
under A rticle 81 of the Constitution. As a result, there is no 
doubt that a Judge of the Supreme Court is a public servant 
for the purposes of Section 216(3)(p) of the Ordinance. We 
then have the terms ‘investigation’ and ‘officer or department 
of Federal Governm ent.’ In our view, t hese expressions are 
not intended to be used in a narrow, technical or pedantic 
manner. Instead, they are to be given a natural, though 
contextual, meaning. For instance, the term ‘investigation’ is 
not to be used only in the sense in w hich it is defined in 105 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Section 4(1)(l) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. In 
fact, in relation to the Judge of a Superior Court, an 
‘investigation’ into his ‘conduct and affairs’ can only mean an 
investigation for the purposes of Article 209  of the 
Constitution . However, it is critical (for the exception in 
Section 216(3)(p) to be attracted) that the ‘investigation’ is 
duly sanctioned and is being carried out in accordance with 
law at the time that the clause is invoked. If this is not so 
then clause ( p) can have no application and the information 
cannot be disclosed. As will become clear later on in the 
judgment, there was no proper investigation for the purposes 
of Article 209 when the ARU sought the tax information of the 
petitioner from the FBR. Con sequently, the exception in 
Section 216(3)(p) of the Ordinance is not applicable to the 
facts of the case.  
85.   As far as Mrs. Isa is concerned, the language of 
clause (p) suggests that it is not limited only to information 
relating to the public servant.  Instead, provided that the other 
conditions laid down therein are met, th is clause also applies 
to any other taxpayer as long as it can be shown that there is 
a real, direct and substantial connection/nexus between the 
information sought in relation to th e latter and the 
investigation underway into the conduct and affairs of the 
public servant . And, ipso facto , unless tax information is 
sought in respect of the public servant no such information of 
any taxpayer can be accessed. Hence, the exception under 106 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Section 216(3)(p) of the Ordi nance also applies to Mrs. Isa. 
However, as already noted (and which will be discussed in 
detail later on) the jurisdictional prerequisites for carrying out 
an investigation against the petitioner did not exist. It 
therefore fol lows that the request made by the ARU for the tax 
information and the release of such information by the tax 
authorities did not fall within the exception contained in 
clause (p). As a result, the disclosure was contrary to law.  
86.   Be that as it may, o ur conclusion that the 
petitioner or his spouse did not disclose the London 
Properties in their wealth statements is not based on the tax 
information unlawfully harvested by the respondents. Rather, 
in the case of the petitioner, we have relied on the stan ce 
taken by him in his pleadings that he has no connection 
whatsoever with the London Properties. It logically follows 
then that he did not declare these properties in his wealth 
statements. With respect to Mrs. Isa, we have based our 
decision on the oral statement she made in Court through 
video link on 18.06.2020 (elaborated more fully below) that 
prior to 2018 she had not declared the London Properties in 
her wealth statements. As a result, in these circumstances 
when we have not taken into consideration  the tax 
information collected illegally by the respondents, we do not 
deem it necessary to pass any definitive finding on whether, 
and if so, in which circumstances and to what extent, such 
information is admissible in a court of law.  107 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
87.   Finally, ther e is the property search carried out by 
the respondents in the United Kingdom. Although during the 
initial stage of oral arguments, learned counsel for the 
petitioner vehemently argued that these searches were a 
violation of the right to privacy, he later accepted that the 
property searches were in fact carried out from the public 
record. It would be useful at this stage to set out the 
procedure for such property searches. Essentially, the entire 
operation consists of a two -step process. In the first step, the 
name of the relevant person is searched on the open source 
website 192.com which gives a list of the addresses of the 
potential properties owned by the said person. Subsequently, 
these addresses are entered into the UK Land Registry 
website, on the pay ment of a fee (£3 for each property search), 
which gives the details of not only the property but also the 
name of the owner. It is by now well -established that the UK 
Land Registry is an open source. This is corroborated by 
Section 66 of the Land Registra tion Act, 2002 which reads:  
“66 Inspection of the registers etc  
(1) Any person may inspect and make copies  
of, or of any part of — 
(a) the register of title,  
(b) any document kept by the registrar 
which is referred to in the register of title,  
(c) any other document kept by the 
registrar which relates to an application to 
him, or  
(d) the register of cautions against first 
registration. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 108 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Accordingly, the argument of the learned counsel for the 
petitioner that the property search was a viol ation of the right 
to privacy has become a moot point because it is now obvious 
that in searching these records the respondents have not 
violated any law. Indeed, there is no law to violate since 
property records are open to the public (and have been since  
03.12.1990). Consequently, no confidentiality attaches to 
such records. Clearly then, the acts of the officers of ARU and 
the Federal Government in accessing the property records of 
the petitioner and his family cannot be classified as either 
invasion of privacy or covert surveillance.  
88.   While reaching this decision, we have been 
conscious of Article 14(1) of the Constitution produced herein 
below:  
“14 Inviolability of dignity of man, etc.  
(1) The dignity of man and, subject to law, the 
privacy of home, shall be inviolable. ” 
 
However, it is pertinent to mention here that the guarantee 
under Article 14(1) is for the privacy of home and that too 
subject to law. Such privacy does not extend to the tax and 
property records of either the petitioner or hi s family 
members. Moreover, learned counsel’s reliance on the case of 
Mohatarma Benazir Bhutto Vs. President of Pakistan  (PLD 
1998 SC 388) to support his contention of covert surveillance 
and a violation of the right to privacy is misplaced. The facts 
of that case are distinguishable from the facts of the present 109 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
case. In the former it was established that the homes, 
Chambers and telephones of Judges of the Superior Courts 
were tapped and bugged:  
“27: The list of persons whose telephones 
were tapped and wer e under surveillance 
consists of Judges of the superior Courts 
including the Chief Justice of Pakistan, Chief 
Justice of the Federal Shariat Court, Chief 
Justice of the High Court of Balochistan, 
Chief Justice and Judges of the High Courts 
of Lahore and Si ndh, rest houses and 
Chambers of the Judges were all subjected to 
such illegal act  which will make a respectable 
nation to hang its head in s hame…  
28. The tapping and eaves -dropping of the 
telephones of the Judges of the superior or 
the subordinate Courts interferes in the 
discharge of duties and decision of cases, 
which a Judge is bound to do under law and 
the Constitution. A bug was planted in the 
Chambers of the Hon'ble Chief Justice of 
Pakistan wherever he was, bugs were also 
planted in the Judges' rest  houses, their 
privacy in home, Chambers or in the rest 
houses was all under surveillance by illegal 
intrusion.  It is a matter of common 
knowledge that the Judges while hearing the 
cases in a Bench usually discuss the merits 
and demerits in chambers and in  privacy. 
They also dictate their judgments in their 
Chambers where no intrusion or interference 
is allowed. By tapping and bugging the 
Chambers and homes of the Judges, 
interference is made in the proper discharge 
of duties which is wholly destructive of the 
independence of judiciary and its ability to 
function as a coordinate branch and pillar of 
the State. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
However, no similar allegation has been levelled by the 
petitioner against the respondents. Therefore, while it was 
correct to h old that there had been unlawful surveillance and 
a violation of Article 14(1) of the Constitution  in the Benazir 110 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Bhutto  case (s upra), giving the same ruling on the facts of the 
instant case will be tantamount to stretching the ratio 
decidendi of that case beyond its ambit. Consequently, we 
find that learned counsel’s invocation of Article 14(1) in the 
present circumstances is erroneous.  
 
DEFECTS IN THE REFERENCE  
89.   A strong objection was also raised by learned 
counsel for the petitioner about the defects inherent in the 
preparation of the Reference. This submission covered three 
main aspects: lack of authorisation by the President for 
investigating the affairs of the  petitioner, the complete bypass 
of the judicial tax hierarchy by the Government before making 
out a case under Section 116 of the Ordinance against the 
petitioner and the non -application of mind by the President in 
sending the Reference to the SJC. In add ressing us on these 
points, learned counsel for the petitioner adopted the findings 
of this Court given in the CJP case (s upra). He argued that all 
stages of a Presidential reference prior to the SJC proceedings 
could be struck down on ordinary judicial re view grounds 
(albeit he only pressed the ground of mala fide when touching 
upon the validity of the pre -SJC proceedings). He submitted 
that the Reference suffered from serious violations of law and 
procedure which rendered it liable to be quashed.  111 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
90.   On the other hand, learned counsel for the 
respondents began his submissions with the contention that 
a Presidential reference needed to satisfy only a very low 
threshold of correctness, and that merely a prima facie  case 
needed to be established by the res pondents on the accuracy 
of the contents of the Reference. He further submitted that 
this Court could not analyse in any detail the opinion formed 
by the President in deciding to send the Reference to the SJC; 
instead we were only limited to examining whet her there was 
some material before the President which had nexus with the 
object of Article 209 of the Constitution. In simple terms, 
learned counsel stated that only the ‘structural elements’ of 
the Reference could be looked into by this Court and any 
errors, whether minor or major, could not invalidate the 
opinion of the President as long as there existed some 
material which showed that a Superior Court Judge may have 
been guilty of misconduct. However, learned counsel for the 
respondents did not address the Bench on the critical issue of 
authorisation of an investigation against a Judge.  
91.   Before giving our findings on the defects in the 
Reference, highlighted by learned counsel for the petitioner, 
we would like to address the submission of learned c ounsel 
for the respondents that a Presidential reference needs to 
satisfy only a very low threshold of factual and legal 
correctness with regard to its contents. In our considered 
view, learned counsel has conflated a low burden of proof 112 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
with a low standar d of care. It is true that Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution only requires the President to form an opinion 
that a Superior Court Judge may have been guilty of 
misconduct. He does not need to be certain that a Judge is 
guilty of the conduct alleged. Never theless, his opinion must 
be based on positive and affirmative material and on the 
assurance that necessary legal and procedural safeguards 
have been observed in the preparation of the reference. 
Therefore, for the President to even form a prima facie  opinion 
about a Judge’s guilt, the President needs to verify that there 
has been compliance with the settled rules on authorisation; 
he needs to obtain proper advice on the contents of the 
reference from competent persons; and he needs to ascertain 
that there is sufficient material before him which satisfies the 
high thresholds of care and proof expected in the preparation 
of a reference.  
92.   At this stage it would be appropriate to consider 
why we have set out this requirement of a high standard of 
care and  proof for the formulation of a reference. It needs to 
be kept in mind that a complaint against a Superior Court 
Judge can be generated in one of three ways: a Presidential 
reference, a private complaint and the exercise of suo motu  
jurisdiction by SJC. Si nce all three methods are distinct, 
therefore, the quality of their information/complaint will also 
be different. Take for instance a complaint by an ordinary 
citizen. It is a certainty that when an individual files a 113 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
complaint against a Judge, he will onl y be able to provide 
primitive or half -baked information. This is because an 
individual only has limited resources at his disposal. He 
cannot be expected to unearth all the necessary information 
needed to fully document his complaint. However, a 
Presidenti al reference is articulated on a different level 
compared to a private complaint. When the President, as the 
Head of State, sends a reference against a Judge, he has at 
his disposal State agencies and access to competent legal 
advice. He can utilise these to verify that valid authorisation 
for investigation has been granted and that materials that are 
relevant and reliable under the test laid down in Bisvil 
Spinners  (supra ) are available to support the reference. 
However, if this Court were to lay down that  despite all the 
machinery of the Federal Government at his command, the 
President is only required/obliged to send a perfunctory 
reference which contains legal and factual defects, then 
nothing will be more harmful to the independence of the 
judiciary. Su ch a relaxation will give the Executive the room 
to send frivolous references with the expectation that if some 
nexus between the material and the object of Article 209 of 
the Constitution is demonstrated, the SJC will itself find 
substance in the referenc e. Therefore, to protect and defend 
the independence of the judiciary, we hold that a reference 
sent by the President must contain authorised, serious, 
considered and verified information in both respects, legal 114 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
and factual, in order to possess the gravity  that should 
accompany a Presidential action.  
 
AUTHORISATION FOR INVESTIGATION  
93.   Having determined that a reference needs to be 
thorough, it now needs to be decided whether the Reference 
against the petitioner satisfies this test. One of the basic 
objections to the validity of the Reference is the lack of 
authorisation for investigatio n conducted prior to the 
Reference’s filing. Learned counsel for the petitioner 
submitted that the CJP case (s upra) is authority for the 
proposition that authorisation for investigating the affairs of 
the petitioner (or for that matter any other Superior C ourt 
Judge) could only have come from the President himself. The 
relevant portion from the judgment is produced below:  
“64: A perusal of the above -quoted provisions 
of Article 209 would reveal that … clauses (5) 
and (6) of the said Article 209 tell us of 
various steps of the exercise leading to the 
removal of a Superior Court Judge … 
Reverting back to the various steps 
mentioned above, I wou ld summarize the 
same as under:  
(i) receipt of information by the President,  
from any source, about the mental or 
physic al incapacity of a Judge or of hi s being 
guilty of misconduct;  
(ii) collection of material in support of the 
said information ; 
(iii) formation of opinion by the President that 
such a Judge may well be incapable as 
above -mentioned or may have committed 
misconduc t; 115 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
(iv) the consequent direction (generally called 
the Reference) by the President to the Council 
to inquire into the matter; ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
94.   Learned counsel argued that the above passage 
confirms that the only purpose for ensuring that information 
against a Judge is received by the President is to obtain his 
permission to proceed with the investigation to collect 
material in support of the said  information. However, as the 
record shows this was not done. Instead, when the complaint 
of Mr. Dogar was received, the Chairman of ARU obtained the 
authorisation of the Law Minister on 16.04.2019 to 
commence an investigation against the petitioner. This is 
evident from the letter of the Chairman ARU dated 
10.05.2019. However, such authorisation is against the law 
enunciated in the CJP case ( supra ), and therefore cannot 
stand. The only reasoning advanced by learned counsel for 
the respondents to defend the  act of the Law Minister 
authorising the investigation against the petitioner was item 
21(10) of Schedule II of ROB which reads:  
“Schedule II  
[Rule 3(3)]  
DISTRIBUTION OF BUSINESS AMONG THE 
DIVISIONS  
………………………………………………………….  
21. Law and Justice Division  
………………………………………………………….  116 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
(10) Federal Government functions in regard 
to the … Supreme Judicial Council…”  
 
However, this is a very widely worded provision which deals 
with the allocation of business and not the vesting of power in 
the Law Minister to authoris e investigations against Superior 
Court Judges. Indeed, the ROB do not at all deal with the 
matter of investigations against Judges of the Superior 
Courts. Consequently, this issue has to be resolved by 
interpreting the relevant Constitutional provisions. While the 
CJP case ( supra ) does not make an explicit statement to the 
effect that authorisation for investigation must be granted by 
the President, the sequence of steps given in para -64 
(reproduced above) of that judgment interpret Article 209(5) of 
the C onstitution as granting the President such a power . 
However, logic dictates that the President cannot personally 
assess accusatory information against a Judge and instead 
requires assistance and advice in the matter. In this respect, 
there is no law that l ays down the procedure for obtaining 
such support for the President. Therefore, in such a situation 
the Constitutional principles become relevant. To gather the 
Constitutional intent as to who is the competent authority for 
authorising an investigation aga inst a Superior Court Judge, 
Article 209(5) of the Constitution should be the starting point 
of the discussion. For convenience, this sub -Article is  
 117 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
reproduced below:  
“209. Supreme Judicial Council.  
………………………………………………………….  
(5) If, on information from an y source, the 
Council or the President is of the opinion that 
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court - 
(a) may be incapable of proper ly performing 
the duties of his office by reason of physical 
or mental incapacity; or  
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct,  
the President shall direct the Council to, or 
the Council may, on its own motion, inquire 
into the matter. ” 
 
95.   It can be noticed that Article 209 involves only two 
Constitutional authorities in the initiation and consideration 
of a reference against a Superior Court Judge: the SJC and 
the President. The SJC only becomes involved in the 
proceedings once the referenc e is forwarded to it by the 
President. The observation in the CJP case (s upra) about the 
collection of material in support of the information against a 
Judge has been referred above. Although the case was 
decided on the ground of mala fide of facts, howeve r, the 
observation about collection of material against a Judge 
provides useful guidance. Under the Constitutional scheme 
the President cannot personally be responsible for authorising 
an investigation into an allegation against a Judge. He does 
not exerci se his official functions as he desires but instead 
acts on the advice of the PM or the Cabinet under Article 
48(1) except for in situations where the Constitution has 118 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
directed him to act in his discretion under Article 48(2). 
However, the sequence of step s noted in para -64 of the CJP 
judgment (s upra) does not deal with the constitutional 
mechanism under which the President may authorise 
collection of material against a Judge of the Superior Courts. 
At present there are three methods under Article 48 of the  
Constitution by which the President may possibly authorise 
such an investigation. To dilate further on this matter, it 
would be appropriate to read Article 48:  
“48. President to act on advice, etc. (1) In 
the exercise of his functions, the Presi dent 
shall act on and  in accordance wi th the 
advice of the Cabinet or the Prime Minister:  
Provided that [after fifteen days]  the President 
may require the Cabinet or as the case may 
be, the Prime Minister to reconsider such 
advice, either generally or otherw ise, and  the 
President shall, within ten days, act in 
accordance with the advice tendered  after 
such reconsideration.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
clause (1), the President shall act in his 
discretion in respect of any matter in respect 
of which he is  empowered by the Constitution 
to do so and the validity of anything done by 
the President in his discretion shall not be 
called in questi on on any ground 
whatsoever.”  
 
96.   It may be noticed that the President may be 
required by the Constitution to act on the advice of the PM or 
Cabinet under sub -Article (1) of Article 48 or to act in his own 
discretion under sub -Article (2) of the said Article. It is an 
appealing hypothesis that the President should act in his 
discretion when authorising an investigatio n against a 119 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Superior Court Judge. Indeed, there is force in the 
proposition that the removal process of Judges must be as 
isolated from the Executive as possible. However, this 
conclusion conflicts with the Constitutional scheme. Security 
of tenure of Judg es and independence of the judiciary are 
most certainly assured by our Constitution. However, these 
can be enforced in accordance with the Constitutional scheme 
for the functioning of the Federal Government which has 
significantly been altered by the 18th Amendment passed in 
the year 2010. A salient feature of this Constitutional 
Amendment is that it resets the balance of powers and 
functions between the President and the PM. Before this 
Amendment, several provisions in the Constitution allowed 
the Presiden t to carry out functions in his discretion. Some 
provisions are quoted to illustrate the point:  
“48. President to act on advice, etc.  
………………………………………………………….
(6) If, at any time, the President, in his 
discretion , or on the advice of the Prime 
Minister, cons iders that it is desirable that 
any matter of national importance should be 
referred to a referendum, the President may 
cause the matter to be referred to a 
referendum in the form of a question that is 
capable of being answered either by "Yes" or 
"No". 
58. Dissolution of the National Assembly  
………………………………………………………….  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
clause (2) of Article 48, the President may 
also dissolve the National Assembly in his 
discretion where, in his opinion,: - 
(a) a vote of no -confidence having 
been passed against the Prime 
Minister, no other member of the 120 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
National Assembly is likely to command 
the confidence of the majority of the 
members of the National Assembly in 
accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution as ascertained in a 
session of the National Assembly 
summoned for the purpose; or  
(b) a situation has arisen in which 
the Government of the Federation 
cannot be carried on in accordance 
with the provisions of the Constitution 
and an appeal to the electorate is 
necessary.  
91. Ca binet  
………………………………………………………....  
(2) The President shall in his discretion  
appoint from amongst the members of the 
National Assembly a Prime Minister who, in 
his opinion, is most likely to command the 
confidence of the majority of the members of 
the National Assembly. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
After the 18th Amendment, almost all of the discretionary 
powers of the President have either been omitted or have been 
made exercisable on the advice of the PM or the Cabinet. The 
above mentioned provisions stand amended as follows:  
“48. President to act on advice, et c. 
………………………………………………………….  
(6) If at any time the Prime Minister considers 
it necessary  to hold a referendum on any 
matter of national importance, he may refer 
the matter to a joint sitting of the Majlis -e-
Shoora (Parliament) and if it is approved in a 
joint sitting, the Prime Minister may cause 
such matter to be referred to a referendum in 
the form of a question that is capable of being 
answered by either "Yes" or "No".  
 
58. Dissolution of National Assembly  
………………………………………………………….  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
clause (2) or Article 48, the President may 121 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
dissolve the National Asse mbly in his 
discretion where, a vote of no -confidence 
having been passed against the Prime 
Minister, no other member of the National 
Assembly commands the confidence of the 
majority of the members of the National 
Assembly in accordance with the provisions 
of the Constitution, as ascertained in a 
session of the National Assembly summoned 
for the purpose.  
91. Cabinet  
………………………………………………………….  
(4) The Prime Minister shall be elected by the 
votes of the majority of the total membership 
of the National Assembly …” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
97.   The only exception to this change, brought about 
by the 18th Amendment, is Article 58(2) which read with 
Article 91(7) of the Constitution still allows the President to 
dissolve the National Assembly in his discretion if a vote of 
no-confidence has been passed against the sitting PM and no 
other member of National Assembly commands the 
confidence of the majority. As a result, while the substance of 
Article 48(2) has remained the same, the subject matters 
governed by this Constitutional provision have been 
substantially curtailed. Therefore, to hold that the Presiden t 
can authorise an investigation against a Judge in his own 
discretion will be doing violence to the language of the 
Constitution. It is our considered view that Article 48(2) only 
applies where the President is specifically authorised by the 
Constitution to act in his discretion. No such command is 122 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
given to the President in Article 209(5) of the Constitution 
which governs the removal of Judges.   
98.   Moreover, the sending of a reference is an 
executive act performed by the Federal Government. To 
declare that the President is to authorise investigations into 
Superior Court Judges in his discretion would amount to 
inviting the President to arrogate powers in complete 
contradiction of the Constitutional scheme. The 18th 
Amendment has shifted the Government’s  decision making in 
the working of the State. Evidence of this shift can be found 
in Article 90 of the Constitution which prior to the 18th 
Amendment read as follows:  
“90. Exercise of executive authority of the 
Federation.  
(1) The executive authority of the F ederation 
shall vest in the President and shall be 
exercised by him, either directly or 
through officers subordinate to him, in 
accordance with the Constitution ” 
 
However, after the 18th Amendment, this provision has been 
significantly modified. For ease o f reference, it is produced 
below:  
“90. The Federal Government:  
(1) Subject to the Constitution, the executive 
authority of the Federation shall be 
exercised in the name of the President by 
the Federal Government, consisting of the 
Prime Minister and the Federal Ministers, 
which shall act through the Prime 
Minister, who shall be the chief executive 
of the Federation.  
(2) In the performance of his functions under 
the Constitution, the Prime Minister may 123 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
act either directly or  through the Federal 
Ministers. ” 
 
99.   It may be noticed that Article 90 no longer vests 
the executive authority of the Federation in the President nor 
is it exercised by him. Instead, executive authority is now 
exercisable by the Federal Government, consisting of the PM 
and the Federal Min isters, in the President’s name. Therefore, 
the President has been replaced as the central figure of the 
State by the PM. As a result, under the Constitutional process 
for performing the executive function of authorising an 
investigation into an informatio n against a Superior Court 
Judge, the President should act on the advice of the PM or the 
Cabinet under Article 48(1) of the Constitution and not invoke 
his discretionary power under Article 48(2).  
100.   Nevertheless, upon whose advice is the President 
to act under Article 48(1) of the Constitution. That Article 
simply states that the President is to act on the advice of 
either the Cabinet or the PM. Even Article 91(1) simply 
reiterates the two advising authorities nominated in Article 
48(1). Article 90(1 ) clarifies that the Federal Government shall 
act through the PM unless the latter requires, under Article 
90(2), his functions to be performed through the Federal 
Ministers. As a result, the Constitution omits to provide any 
guidelines or criteria to dist inguish the executive functions 
that are to be performed under the advice of the Cabinet and 
those which are to be performed under the advice of the PM. 124 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
It leaves that business to be determined by the Federal 
Government according to its requirements and ex igencies 
from time to time.  
101.   Accordingly, Article 99(3) of the Constitution 
empowers the Federal Government to make rules for the 
allocation and transaction of its business. In exercise of such 
power, the Federal Government has framed the ROB that 
serve as a source of guidance on the instant subject. The ROB 
are constitutionally mandated rules and must be followed by 
the Government in carrying out its functions. The mandatory 
status of the ROB was affirmed by this Court in the case of 
Mustafa Impex  (supra ): 
“50: The Constitution confers vast powers on 
the Government for the transaction of 
executive business. There is no reason to 
suppose, or believe, that the framers of the 
Constitution intended, in disregard of the 
explicit language employed, that the Federal 
Government could, in its discretion, either 
follow, or not follow, the provisions of the 
Rules of Business. The framer of rules 
[Federal Government] is as much bound by 
the content thereof as anyone else is subject 
thereto.  These are basic precepts of 
constit utional interpretation. To allow the 
Executive to depart from the language of the 
Rules, in its discretion, would be to permit, 
and legitimize, unconstitutional executive 
actions. Quite independently of the above, 
there is ample case law stressing the 
impo rtance of a structured exercise of 
discretionary power. In this case the 
discretionary executive powers have already 
been fettered by the Constitution. The 
framing of rules for this purpose is 
inextricably linked to the guided exercise of 
official power. T he following of the Rules of 
Business is a salutary exercise intended to 
enhance, and amplify, concepts of good 
governance. We have no doubt that it is 125 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
mandatory and binding on the Government, 
and so hold. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Consequently, Rule 15 -A of the ROB specifies the procedure 
to be followed  for functions that are required by the 
Constitution t o be performed by the President.  For sake of 
convenience, it is reproduced below:  
“15-A. Reference to the President. — (1) 
Notwith standing the provisions made in these 
rules, where in terms of any provision of the 
Constitution any function is to be performed 
or any orders have to be issued by the 
Presid ent or his specific approval is required, 
the Division concerned shall incorporate  a 
paragraph to this effect in the summary 
entitled as "Summary for the Prime Minister".  
The Prime M inister shall render his advice 
and submit the case to the President. After 
the President has seen and approved the 
case, it  shall be returned to the Prime 
Minister. The cases to which this sub -rule 
applies are enumerated in Schedule V -B. 
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions made in 
these rules, where in terms of any provisions 
of the Constitution, any function is to be 
performed or any orders have to be issued  by 
the President in his discretion, the Division 
concerned shall submit the case to the 
President through the Prime Minister in the 
form of a self -contained, concise and 
objective summary entitled as "Summary for 
the President" stating the relevant facts and 
points for decision prepared on the same 
lines as prescribed in these rules for a 
Summary for the Cabinet, except that only 
one copy will be required which may not be 
printed. This procedure will not, however, be 
applicable where the President has conv eyed 
the decision to the Prime Minster for issuing 
orders in respect of cases in his discretion. 
The cases to which this sub -rule applies are 
enumerated in Schedule VI. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 126 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
102.   It may be noticed that Rule 15 -A(1) deals with 
cases that require the orders or approval of the President on 
the advice of the PM. Accordingly, the same Rule refers to 
Schedule V -B which sets out the list of cases in which the 
PM’s advice is to be tendered. Serial number 35 of Schedule 
V-B reads: “Reference to Su preme Judicial Council.” It is thus 
patent that the entire process of a Presidential reference falls 
under the advice of the PM according to the ROB. It is he who 
has to advise the President on the steps that need to be taken 
in a matter that bears relatio n to Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution. As a result, the approval by the President of the 
advice of the PM is necessary for commencing an 
investigation into a complaint made against a Judge of the 
Superior Court.  
103.   However, in the present Reference before us there 
is no such authorisation on record for commencing an 
investigation against the petitioner. Instead the record shows 
that the only authorisation sought, for probing the complaint 
against the petitioner, was from the Law Minister who under 
any interpretation of the Constitution had no jurisdiction in 
this behalf. The competent authorities, namely, the PM and 
the President were never approached by the Ministry of Law 
for the requisite authorisation envisaged by the CJP (supra ) 
judgment. Both constitutional authorities got involved in the 
process after all the material had already been collected. The 
initial authorisation by the President on the advice of the PM 127 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
to commence an investigation against a Judge in a complaint 
fallin g under Article 209(5) is a legal requirement for 
sustaining the validity of a Presidential reference that is 
ultimately filed with the SJC. Such oversight by the highest 
Constitutional functionaries protects Judges from whimsical 
and arbitrary interferenc e by Executive authorities in their 
personal judicial independence and privacy. Without valid 
authorisation the foundation of the Reference suffers from an 
initial illegality which amounts to a Constitutional violation. 
Consequently, such an infirmity is f atal to the superstructure 
that is erected on it. As a result, this Reference is illegal and 
falls to the ground.  
 
VALIDITY OF ALLEGATIONS IN THE REFERENCE  
104.   It is now important to consider the substance of 
the allegations made in the Reference filed  against the 
petitioner. It would be appropriate at this stage to produce 
the relevant portions from this Reference:  
“9. Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa was elevated as 
the Chief Justice of the Baluchistan High 
Court on 5 August 2009 (see PLD 2010 
Journal 1 at p .3). One of the afore -
mentioned properties has been acquired in 
the year 2011, while two have been acquired 
in the year 2013. Since 2011 till date Justice 
Qazi Faez Isa has filed wealth statements, 
alongwith his tax returns, intentionally and 
deliberately concealing the above three 
properties, notwithstanding that all along u/s 
116(1)(b) of the 2001 Ordinance he was 
under a direct legal and juridical obligation to 
have declared the said properties. His wife 
also filed a wealth statement for the tax year 128 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
2014, and failed to declare the said 
properties.  
………………………………………………………….  
11. Apart from the fact that the failure of 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa to declare the afore -
mentioned foreign properties of his wife in his 
successive wealth statements violates section 
116(1 )(b) of the 2001 Ordinance, the same 
also gives rise to the following issues: - 
(a) the source to acquire the afore -stated 
expensive properties is not accounted for ; 
(b) whether the properties as afore -stated 
were acquired through money laundering, 
is an aspect which cannot be ruled out.  
12. By not declaring the afore -stated 
properties and accounting for them, the 
respective wealth conciliation statements filed 
by Justice Qazi Faez Isa are also totally 
incorrect and tainted with concealments.  
Hence, a clear viola tion of Section 116(2) and 
other penal provisions of the 2001 Ordinance 
are also made out.  
………………………………………………………….  
16. A Judge of the Superior Court who omits 
to intentionally declare three expensive 
London properties jointly owned by his 
spouse and child ren, violates Section 116 of 
the 2001 Ordinance. The tax records of the 
learned Judge and his spouse are absolutely 
silent about the source through which the 
said properties had been acquired and how 
and from where the funds were made 
available to purchase  the said properties, 
without violating the money laundering 
regime and the Foreign Exchange Regulation 
Act, 1947 …”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
From a perusal of the above quoted excerpts it becomes clear 
that the Reference (repeatedly) emphasises that the petitioner 
has violated Section 116 of the Ordinance, the money 
laundering regime and FERA. These in turn raise questions 
about the source of f unds used for acquiring the London 
Properties.  129 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
105.   Similarly, the SCN issued by the SJC has also 
levelled corresponding allegations against the petitioner; and 
while we cannot examine the validity of the SCN issued by the 
SJC unless the bar under Artic le 211 is crossed, however, to 
appreciate the scope of the allegations in the Reference we are 
reproducing the said allegations in the SCN:  
“(g) That allegedly the failure of your lordship 
to declare the afore -mentioned foreign 
properties of your  wife in  your lordship’s  
successive wealth statements violates section 
116(1)(b) of the 2001 Ordinance, and gives 
rise to the following issues: - 
(a) the source to acquire the afore -stated 
expensive properties is not accounted for ; 
(b) whether the properties as afore -stated 
were acquired through money laundering, is 
an aspect which cannot be ruled out . 
………………………………………………………….  
(i) Thus there i s nothing on record to suggest 
that your lordship’s wife and children had 
independent sources of income and that such 
funds were  validly available with them to 
purchase the three foreign properties;  
………………………………………………………….  
(k) That from the aforesaid it appears that at 
the relevant point of time of the purchase of 
the three properties your lordship’s wife and 
the children were your  dependents or at least 
were not possessed of known sources of 
income or pecuniary resources sufficient for 
acquisition of the properties in question. It 
appears that the said properties were 
concealed from the Income Tax Authorities in 
Pakistan.  Furthermore, your lordship’s 
worthy wife and children, in the context of 
the matter, are sufficiently connected to you, 
so as to put you, as a Judge of the superior 
Court of Pakistan, under a direct obligation 
to give a money trail of the three properties  so 
as to establish that the source of funds and 
transfer thereof was not in violation of law.   
………………………………………………………….  
o) That allegedly the tax records of your 
lordship and your lordship’s spouse are 130 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
absolutely silent about the source through 
which the s aid foreign properties had been 
acquired and how and from where the funds 
were made available to purchase the said 
properties, without violating the money 
laundering regime and the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1947. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
An examination  of these extracts reveal that the main 
purpose of the SJC for initiating an inquiry against the 
petitioner was to establish the source of funding of the 
allegedly concealed London Properties. This is therefore 
further evidence that the removal proceedings  against the 
petitioner were aimed not at alleged tax default but at 
determining where the funds for the London Properties came 
from.  
106.   Taking up the other grounds of action against the 
petitioner first, we would like to make it clear that learned 
counsel for the respondents did not make any submissions 
on the petitioner’s alleged violation of the provisions of FERA. 
In fact, he did not even nominate the relevant provisions of 
the said law. There is also no material, before us, which 
supports the said bald allegation of a violation of the claimed 
foreign exchange regime under FERA. As a result, we have no 
doubt that this particular charge is completely without merit. 
It is, therefore, surprising that the Law Minister, the PM and 
the President all failed  to notice the non -existent case made 
out against the petitioner for allegedly violating the provisions 131 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
of FERA. The filing of a Presidential reference under Article 
209(5) is a solemn matter. It has grave consequences for the 
Judge against whom such a ref erence is prepared. It prima 
facie constitutes an interference with the security of tenure 
guaranteed to Judges of the Supreme Court under Article 179 
of the Constitution. Therefore, the allegation levelled in a 
reference should be based on cogent evidence  and sound legal 
analysis. A Presidential reference cannot be filed on 
assumptions. However, in the present case, the allegation of 
violating the provisions of FERA against the petitioner is 
exactly that: an unsubstantiated assumption neither backed 
by evi dence nor supported by the relevant rule that was 
allegedly breached. As such, it cannot be sustained.  
107.   In this context, the next allegation levelled against 
the petitioner is that of money laundering. The primary 
legislation governing this subject m atter is the Anti -Money 
Laundering Act, 2010 ( “AMLA” ). Section 2(q), (s) and Section 
3 of this Act define the offence of money laundering. These 
are produced below:  
“2 Definitions. — In this Act, unless there is 
anything repugnant in the subject or  
context, — 
………………………………………………………….  
(q) “proceeds of crime”  means any property 
derived or obtained directly or indirectly by 
any person from the commiss ion of a 
predicate offence or a foreign serious offence;  
(s) “predicate offence”  means an offence 
specifie d in the Schedule to this Act ; 132 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
3 Offence of money laundering. — A person 
shall be guilty of offence of money laundering, 
if the person: — 
(a) acquires, converts, possesses, uses or 
transf ers property, knowing or having reason 
to believe that such property is  proceeds of 
crime;  
(b) conceals or disguises the true nature, 
origin, location, disposition, movement or 
ownership of property, knowing or hav ing 
reason to believe that such property is 
proceeds of crime;  
(c) holds or possesses on behalf of any other 
person a ny property knowing or having 
reason to believe that such pr operty is 
proceeds of crime; or  
(d) participates in, associates, conspires to 
commit, attempts to commit, aids, abets, 
facilitates, or counsels the commission of the 
acts specified in clauses  (a), (b) and (c).  
……………………………………………..  
Explanation II. - For the purposes of proving 
an offence under this section, the  conviction 
of an accused for the respective predicate 
offence shall not be required.”  
 
It may be noticed from a reading of both Sections 2  and 3 that 
a necessary element of the offence of money laundering is the 
commission of a predicate offence. The execution of this 
offence gives birth to the proceeds of crime, the movement of 
which attracts the criminal conduct of money laundering. 
Theref ore, without the commission of a predicate offence 
there can be no offence of money laundering. However, not 
every statutory violation is a predicate offence; AMLA 
recognises this by setting out in its Schedule a list of 
statutory offences that constitute a predicate offence for the 
purposes of money laundering. In the present case, the main 
allegation against the petitioner is that he has failed to 133 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
declare the London Properties owned by his wife and children 
in his wealth statements. The contents of a weal th statement 
are provided in Section 116(1) of the Ordinance. For the 
moment, ignoring our view that the said provision is vague 
about a taxpayer’s obligation to disclose the assets of a 
financially independent spouse, it is clear that in order to 
attract the offence of money laundering the non -declaration of 
assets under Section 116 ibid must constitute a predicate 
offence. Only then may the allegation of money laundering be 
made against the petitioner. In this regard, the offences 
incorporated from the Ordinance to the Schedule to AMLA 
have to be examined. The gist of these offences is re produced 
below:  
““THE SCHEDULE”  
………………………………………………………….  
Section XIIA The Income Tax Ordinance, 
2001  
192 Prosecution for false statement in 
verification - where tax sought to be evaded is 
ten million rupees or more [;] 
192A Prosecution for concealment of Incom e-
where tax sought to be evaded is ten million 
rupees or more [;] 
Note: for the purposes of this Section, 
concealment of income  includes any 
act referred to in sub -section (1) of 
section 111  (unexplained income or 
assets)  
194 Prosecution for improper use of Nat ional 
Tax Number [Certificate} - where tax sought to 
be evaded is ten million rupees or more [;] 
199 Prosecution for abetment – where  tax 
sought to be evaded is ten million rupees or 
more. ”  
 134 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
A perusal of the Schedule reveals that the non -declarati on of 
assets by a taxpayer under the Ordinance is not a predicate 
offence under AMLA. Therefore, prima facie  no case of money 
laundering can be made out against the petitioner on this 
count.  
108.   Be that as it may, it is a matter of record that the 
Reference has not alleged the commission of any specific 
predicate offence under AMLA by any person. Nevertheless, 
assuming for the sake of argument that the petitioner is 
under an obligation to list the assets of his wife in his wealth 
statement, the only pre dicate offence that appears remotely 
relevant to the case against him is under Section 192 of the 
Ordinance. Nonetheless, even though Section 3 of AMLA 
specifies that the commission of the offence of money 
laundering is not dependent upon the conviction of  the 
petitioner for a predicate offence, it at least requires that a 
specific predicate offence be alleged. However, no predicate 
offence has been alleged against the petitioner in the 
Reference. Nor has any evidence been placed on record which 
may prima f acie support the allegation of money laundering. 
In the above factual scenario, an allegation of money 
laundering against the petitioner is entirely fictional at this 
stage. The said allegation is therefore without merit.  
109.   Equally, it is relevant to  note that the four 
Sections of the Ordinance were only inserted in the Schedule 135 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
to AMLA as predicate offences on 20.05.2016 whereas the 
London Properties were purchased by the petitioner’s family 
in 2011 and 2013. Consequently, it is an established fact t hat 
before 2016, violations of the Ordinance could not form the 
basis of a money laundering allegation. This proposition is 
backed by Article 12 of the Constitution:  
“12. Protection against retrospective 
punishment  
(1) No law shall authorize the punishment  of 
a person: - 
(a) for an act or omission that was not 
punishable by law at the time of the act or 
omission; ” 
 
110.   The Constitution itself grants protection to 
individuals from retrospective punishment. Therefore, 
reliance by learned counsel for the res pondents on an 
amendment made in 2016 to seek removal of the petitioner 
for acts committed in 2011 and 2013 appears to be improper. 
This will continue to be so unless the application of Section 
192 is interpreted otherwise by the competent forum under 
the Ordinance.  
111.   Possibly, for the above mentioned reasons, learned 
counsel for the respondents submitted that the Reference 
does not allege that the petitioner has violated the provisions 
of AMLA. Instead, he argued the Reference simply refers to a 
violation of the money laundering regime in general. To 
support his contention he relied on certain Circulars and 136 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Notifications issued by SBP under FERA, some of which are 
produced below:  
“Notification No. F.E. 2/98 -SB 
Dated the 21st July, 1998  
In exercise of  the powers conferred by sub -
section (2) of Section 8 of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (Act No. VII of 
1947), and in supersession of State Bank of 
Pakistan Notification No. F.E. 1/91 -SB dated 
26th February, 1991, the State Bank of 
Pakistan is p leased to permit: -  
………………………………………………………….  
b. Any person maintaining an account 
expressed in a foreign currency, and held 
under any permission, general or otherwise, 
granted by the State Bank of Pakistan to take 
or send out of Pakistan, cheques or drafts 
drawn on such account.  
F.E. Circular No. 17  
………………………………………………………….  
No transfer of funds abroad shall be made 
through illegal channels such “Hundi 
system”. All transfer of funds shall take place 
through banking channels, following the 
instructions given to the banks from time to 
time for the purpose.”  
 
After examining the above noted Circulars and Notifications, 
it is unclear how these help the respondents prove the charge 
of money laundering against the petitioner. There is no 
allegation or material on r ecord suggesting that the petitioner 
or Mrs. Isa transferred money to the United Kingdom via 
illegal means/methods. Therefore, this novel argument is 
theoretical and speculative in content. The contention also 
lacks force for the simple reason that the off ence of money 
laundering is governed by a special law, AMLA, since 2010. It 137 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
is by now well -established that when a special law regulates a 
particular subject area then another law enacted for a 
different special purpose cannot affect the subject matter 
governed by the former special law. This is a principle of 
construction recognised by our Superior Courts. For instance, 
in the case of Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi Vs. Additional District 
& Sessions Judge  (1994 SCMR 1299) this Court approved 
the principle that statu tes which are not pari materia cannot 
govern each other’s interpretation:  
“11: In this regard, it may be pertinent to 
refer to the case of Mahbub Ahmad v. First 
Additional District Judge and anothe r (PLD 
1976 Karachi 978)…  It may be advantageous 
to reprodu ce the relevant portion which 
contains in para. 8 thereof and which reads 
as follows: -- 
8. “…  It may also be pointed out that unless 
the provision is `pari materia', it is not correct 
to construe a provision with reference to 
another provision in a different Act, for it is 
the language of the provision which is the 
determining factor. ” 
12. Reference may also be made to the case 
of Mrs.  M. Waterfield v. C.E. Lee Anan and 
another (PLD 1957 (W.P.) Lahore 882) and 
the case of Salah Muhammad v. Muhammad 
Roz and others (PLD 1962 (W.P.) Lahore 68). 
In both the cases, it has been held by 
Division Benches of the Lahore High Court 
that a statute cannot be interpreted in the 
light of language used in another statute  
except when the language which has to be 
interpreted is, in the context, open to more 
meanings than one.  
13. We may also refer to the case of Hari 
Khemu Gawali v. The Deputy Commissioner 
of Police, Bombay and another (PLD 1957 SC 
(India) 90), in which the Indian Supreme 
Court has inter alia held that it is not safe to 
pronounce judgment on the provision of one 
Act with reference to decision dealing with 
the other Acts which are not pari materia. ” 138 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Even Halsbury’s Laws of England (Volume 96, 2018) has 
affirmed this viewpoint:  
“809: Comparison between Acts not in pari 
materia or the decisions on them affords no 
reliable guide to their construction, since the 
same words used in different statutory codes 
may have different meanings in each code, 
according to the intentions of the Acts a nd 
the mischiefs they are designed to prevent .” 
 
112.    It is, therefore, only logical that Circulars and 
Notifications (which are only subordinate legislation) issued 
under FERA cannot control the subject of money laundering 
defined and governed by AMLA.  However, learned counsel for 
the respondents also relied upon the Anti -Money Laundering 
Regulations, 2008 ( “2008 Regulations” ) to argue that the 
charge of money laundering in the Reference was simply an 
allusion to the regime in general. But this reliance  of learned 
counsel is flawed because these were framed under the Anti -
Money Laundering Ordinances of 2007 and 2009 ( “AML 
Ordinances” ). These AML Ordinances did not recognise the 
conduct attributed to the petitioner as a predicate offence. 
Consequently, re ference to the 2008 Regulations is of no 
assistance to the respondents in justifying their allegation of 
money laundering against the petitioner.  
113.   This brings us to the primary allegation in the 
Reference against the petitioner: his failure to discl ose the 
London Properties of his wife and children in his wealth 139 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
statement. In the Reference it is alleged that this obligation is 
imposed on the petitioner by virtue of Section 116(1)(b) of the 
Ordinance. However, learned counsel for the petitioner 
submit ted that no such obligation could be imposed on the 
petitioner under Section 116(1)(b) because this provision only 
applies to the assets and liabilities of a dependent spouse and 
minor children of a declarant taxpayer. On the other hand, 
the petitioner’s w ife is a financially independent taxpayer and 
their children are adults. They possessed these attributes 
even when the properties in question were acquired. Learned 
counsel also stated that no notice had been received either by 
the petitioner or Mrs. Isa u nder Section 116(1) of the 
Ordinance, therefore, it was not legally possible to level a 
charge of non -declaration of assets against the petitioner.  
114.   We have examined the record which reveals that 
indeed no notice was ever issued to Mrs. Isa or the p etitioner 
under Section 116(1). Mrs. Isa did receive notices for the 
years 2015, 2017 and 2018 but those were issued under 
Section 114(4) of the Ordinance for her failure to file her tax 
returns. Moreover, on a perusal of the Reference it became 
evident th at the entire case under Section 116 of the 
Ordinance rested on the opinion of an Assistant 
Commissioner (Inland Revenue) who thought that the 
petitioner was liable to disclose the London Properties of his 
wife and children. This is evidenced from para -7 of the 
Reference:  140 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
“7. The precise observations recorded by the 
learned Assistant Commissioner (IR) in his 
letter bearing No. 112 dated 10th May, 2019 
(see Attachment VIII & IX ) addressed to the 
Commissioner (IR), AEOI/International Taxes 
Zone, Large Taxpaye rs’ Unit, Islamabad as 
follows: - 
“(e) Offshore Properties  
The properties’ documents in respect of 
which are attached with the complaint are as 
under: - 
# Owners  Property  Value  Purchase 
date 
1 Ms Sehar Isa 
Khoso & Ms 
Zarina 
Montserrat Khoso 
Carrera  90 Adelaide 
Road London 
E10 5NW  GBP 
270,000  28.06.2013  
(transferred 
08.07.2013)  
2 Ms Zarina 
Montserrat Khoso 
Carrera & Arslan 
Isa Khoso  40 Oakdale Road 
London E11 4DL  GBP 
245,000  27.03.2013)  
3 Ms Zarina 
Montserrat & Ms 
Sehar Isa Khoso  50 Coniston 
Court, Kendal 
Street, London 
W2 2AN   20.10.2011  
 
(B) Findings: - 
(i) That, Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa did not 
declare the above offshore properties owned 
by his wife (and children).  
(ii) That, Mrs. Sarina Isa Khoso is wife of Mr. 
Justice Qazi Isa as per CINC 42301 -
9722154 -2, who also file her tax return for 
Tax year 2014.  
(iii) That, Mr. Justice Qazi was liable to 
declare the above offshore properties as per 
provisions of Section 116(1)(b) which 
mandate every taxpayer to file the Wealth 
Statement in the prescr ibed format declaring 
therein “the total assets and liabilities of the 
persons and his spouse, minor children, and 
other dependents.”  
(iv) That, Mrs. Sarina M. Isa (wife), Sehar Isa 
Khoso (daughter), and Arslan Isa Khoso (son) 
also did not declare the above properties 
since they did not file their tax declarations 
for the Tax Year 2014 -2018.””  141 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
115.   It appears from this extract that the mainstay of 
the respondents’ allegation against the petitioner under 
Section 116 of the Ordinance is based on a lite ral reading of 
Section 116(1)(b) ibid. The respondents’ interpretation of the 
said provision has never been tested judicially before. Indeed, 
during arguments learned counsel for the respondents 
candidly acknowledged that there was no case -law in our 
jurisprudence on the subject of declaration by a taxpayer of 
the assets of his spouse and children under Section 116(1)(b). 
However, learned counsel did provide us with the wealth 
statement form issued by the tax authorities under the 
Income Tax Rules, 2002 for  the tax year 2013. What is 
notable about this form is that it only required a taxpayer to 
declare the assets of his spouse who had not filed a return of 
income along with a wealth statement independently. 
Moreover, only the assets of minor children had to  be 
disclosed. It is an admitted fact that Mrs. Isa filed a return 
and wealth statement in the tax year 2013. As such, it seems 
that in the tax year 2013 the petitioner was under no 
obligation to declare the London Properties in his wealth 
statement. Howev er, this is only the tip of the ice -berg. On an 
examination of the (several) instructions published by FBR for 
completing a wealth statement in subsequent tax years, we 
have noticed that the FBR is itself unsure about the true 142 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
interpretation of Section 116 (1)(b) of the Ordinance. At this 
stage, it would be appropriate to reproduce this provision:  
“116. Wealth Statement. — (1) [The] 
Commissi oner may, by notice in writing, 
require any person [being an individual] to 
furnis h, on the date specified in the notice , a 
statement (hereinafter referred to as the 
"wealth statement") in the  prescribed form 
and verified in the prescribed manner giving 
particulars of — 
………………………………………………….........  
(b) the total assets and liabilities of the 
person’s spouse, minor children,  and other 
dependents as on the date or dates specified 
in such notice”  
 
116.   As already mentioned above, in the tax year 2013 
the FBR expected taxpayers to only declare assets of a spouse 
who had not filed a return and wealth statement. However, in 
the tax year 2015, FBR altered the scope of this duty. It asked 
taxpayers to declare only those assets of their spouse and 
minor children which had been created by funds provided by 
the taxpayer. In 2016, FBR again changed its interpretation of 
Section 116(1)( b). Now a taxpayer had to declare the assets of 
his spouse and minor children, whether in Pakistan or 
abroad, if they had been created by funds provided by the 
taxpayer. It is this last interpretation which has continued till 
date. Amongst all of these var ying constructions of Section 
116(1)(b), there is also the overriding difficulty that the 
language of Section 116(1)(b) is open to more than one 
interpretation. In fact, it is perhaps for this reason that both 
the parties before us have come up with comple tely divergent 143 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
analyses of Section 116(1)(b). The respondents have opted for 
the literal interpretation under which no condition of 
dependency is attached to the term “spouse” because each 
and every word in Section 116(1)(b) is given its ordinary and 
natur al meaning. This would indicate that taxpayers are 
obligated to give particulars of the total assets and liabilities 
of their spouses, irrespective of whether the said spouses are 
independent or dependent. However, learned counsel for the 
petitioner chose a different route. He applied the principle of 
statutory interpretation called noscitur a sociis . This Court in 
Ghulam Rasool Vs. Muhammad Hayat  (PLD 1984 Supreme 
Court 385) defined the aforementioned principle as follows:  
“Page 390: … Nevertheless, there is a rule of 
interpretation well -understood and 
recognised in law and it is of noscitur ex 
soci[i]s. Maxwell on Interpretation Statutes 
(12th Edn., page  289) explains it as follows : - 
"Where two or more words which are 
susceptible of analogous meaning are 
coupled together  noscitur ex soci [i]s they are 
understood to be used in their cognate sense. 
They take as it were the colour from each 
other the meaning of the more general being 
restricted to a sense analogous to that of less 
general. " 
Crawford on Statuto ry Construction (p. 325) 
comments on this rule  of interpretation as 
follows - "In order to ascertain the meaning of 
any word or phrase that is ambiguous or 
susceptible to more than one meaning the 
Court may properly resort to the other words 
with which the  ambiguous word is associated 
in the statute.  Accordingly, if several words 
are connected by a copulative conjunction a 
presumption arises that they are of the same 
class unless of course a contrary intention is 
indicated. On the other hand, the maxim 
noscitur ex soc [i]is is not to be applied where 
the meaning of a word is clear and 
unambiguous. Nor is it to be used so as to 
render general words useless. Like all other 144 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
principles of construction it is to be used only 
as an instrumentality for determining th e 
intent of the Legislature where it is in 
doubt. "” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Under the above noted construction, the petitioner would only 
be obligated to give particulars of the total assets and 
liabilities of his dependent spouse because the term spouse 
would draw its characteristics from the other words used in 
Section 116(1)(b) , namely, the terms ‘minor children’ and 
‘other dependents.’ Nonetheless, as is evident from the above 
quoted passage, even this method of interpretation is not 
absolute.  
117.   Be that as it may, we are not inclined to decide 
this issue on the basis of e ither the respondents’ present 
interpretation of Section 116(1)(b) or on the basis of the 
petitioner’s interpretation of the said provision. Neither have 
produced any case -law or other relevant material to support 
their respective versions of Section 116(1 )(b). Even the FBR’s 
own instructions on completing a wealth statement form are 
unclear and have wavered from year to year. In such a 
situation, we consider that it would be better if this matter is 
determined in the first instance by the hierarchy of 
specialised fora specified in the Ordinance.  
118.   However, it has become plain that the respondents 
have framed the Reference against the petitioner on the 
untested opinion of an Assistant Commissioner (Inland 145 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Revenue) without giving much weight to the fact  that their 
interpretation of the law in this area is unsupported by 
authority. Accordingly, the respondents’ decision to charge 
the petitioner with a violation of Section 116 of the Ordinance 
on the basis of an interpretation that is devoid of judicial 
consideration let alone approval, and which lacks any 
definitive and consistent departmental practice is conjectural. 
When confronted, learned counsel for the respondents 
submitted that the Reference was not based solely on an 
alleged violation of Section 11 6 of the Ordinance. Instead, he 
argued that Section 116 was just a reference point in 
presenting the respondents reservations about the alleged 
conduct of the petitioner. He stated that the real case against 
the petitioner rested on violations of Articles II and III of the 
Code of Conduct. That the respondents concern was not the 
discharge of tax liability by the family of the petitioner but the 
source that had funded the purchase of the London 
Properties. With all due respect to learned counsel, this 
argum ent prematurely assumes both the lack of funds with 
Mrs. Isa and the commission of misconduct by the petitioner. 
According to our understanding of the duties of a Judge 
under the CoC, noted and discussed earlier in this judgment, 
a Judge may be made answer able for the financial affairs of 
his family members. However, we do not consider that such 
liability accrues in respect of speculative allegations. As the 
following narrative will confirm, this is precisely what the 146 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
respondents attempted to achieve by pre paring the present 
Reference.  
119.   On 17.06.2020, the petitioner of his own volition 
appeared in Court during the course of submissions by 
learned counsel for the respondents. He sought permission 
for Mrs. Isa to orally apprise the Court through video l ink 
about the improprieties committed by the respondents in 
preparing the complaint against her as she could not file an 
application or affidavit or provide documents to explain her 
position because she did not have a lawyer. Being personally 
affected by o ur proceedings, she sought to make a statement 
without oath through video link from her home. The Bench 
briefly conferred on the said request and in exercise of its 
jurisdiction under Article 187 of the Constitution to do 
complete justice granted her permi ssion to address the Court 
on 18.06.2020. In her address to the Court, Mrs. Isa 
complained that neither she nor her authorised 
representative (AR) had been served with notices by the tax 
authorities under Section 114 of the Ordinance. These were 
apparently  mailed to her outdated address at Patel Court, 
Bath Island, even though her new address, Phase II DHA was 
on the record of the tax authorities. She stated that the 
required amount of foreign currency was transferred through 
banking channels, a fact which was in the knowledge of the 
SBP, and that the tax authorities were aware that apart from 
her income from taxable sources she also had a stream of 147 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
non-taxable agricultural income from agricultural land 
situated in Jacobabad, Sindh and Nasirabad, Baluchistan . 
We informed her that we could not hear or decide upon the 
merits which was an issue that could only be determined by 
the SJC. However, it became clear to us that Mrs. Isa was 
prima facie  willing to offer an explanation for the source of 
funds used to pur chase the London Properties. But such 
explanation had not been called for or considered by the tax 
authorities. As a result, the Reference was prepared against 
the petitioner in the absence of any determination by the tax 
authorities on the liability of ei ther the petitioner or Mrs. Isa.  
120.   Consequently, the plea of the respondents that the 
case against the petitioner rests on his alleged violations of 
the CoC and not his infringements of Section 116 of the 
Ordinance subtly improves their original stance. However, to 
establish the source of f unds for the acquisition of the London 
Properties, the requirements of due process under Article 4 
and Article 10A of the Constitution mandate that the first 
person concerned, namely, Mrs. Isa ought to be given an 
opportunity to explain her sources of fund ing for the London 
Properties and the reasons for not declaring such properties 
in her wealth statement. Without granting such opportunity, 
the framing of the Reference against the petitioner was 
premature, hypothetical and impulsive. Accordingly, even thi s 
allegation against the petitioner is entirely presumptive.  148 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
APPLICATION OF MIND BY THE PRESIDENT  
121.   Another flaw in the Reference highlighted by the 
learned counsel for the petitioner is the President’s failure to 
form an opinion in terms of Article  209(5) of the Constitution. 
For convenience, this provision is again reproduced:  
“209. Supreme Judicial Council.  
………………………………………………………….  
(5) If, on information from any source, the 
Council or the President is of the opinion  that 
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court - 
(a) may be incapable of proper ly performing 
the duties of his office by reason of physical 
or mental incapacity; or  
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct,  
the President shall direct the Council to , or 
the Council may, on its own motion, inquire 
into the matter.”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Sub-Article (5) of Article 209 of the Constitution makes it 
plain that before directing the SJC to hold an inquiry against 
a Supreme Court Judge, the President should have formed 
the opinion that the said Judge may be guilty of misconduct. 
However, the basis upon and the means by which the 
President needs to form his opinion is not readily discernible 
from Article 209(5). To comprehend the meaning and object of 
this function  of the President, one needs to consider the 
nature of powers and functions that the President possesses 
under the Constitution. In the first instance, an analysis of 149 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the President’s responsibility to form an opinion rendered in 
the additional note by Just ice Chaudhry Ijaz Ahmed in the 
CJP case ( supra ) indicates one point of view:  
“Page 247: Sub Article (5) of Article 209 casts 
duty upon the President of Pakistan to fo rm 
his opinion after receiving information qua 
the judges of the superior courts with rega rd 
to physical or mental incapacity to perform 
duties of his office or has been guilty of 
misconduct. The President of Pakistan has to 
form his opinion after application of mind 
reasonably, objectively with cogent reasons 
based on relevant material in good  faith after 
application of mind. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
Based on the facts and needs of that case, the said learned 
Judge concluded that the President’s failure to perform his 
Constitutional duty had fatal consequences:  
“Page 246: The perusal of record shows that 
neither the President nor the Prime Minister 
under the mandatory provisions of the 
Constitution has deliberated upon the matter 
and formed opinion by applying their 
independent mind. Hence, non -application of 
mind and non - formation of opinion i s fatal 
and render t he subsequent proceedings void.”  
 
122.   It may be noted at the outset that the above noted 
view is not shared by the majority judgment in the CJP case 
(supra) which is silent about the substance of the President’s 
opinion and the proce dure for arriving at such an opinion 
under Article 209(5). However, during oral submissions, 
learned counsel for the petitioner argued that unlike the 
above quoted view the President had simply followed the PM’s 
advice for sending the Reference to the SJC.  In doing so he 150 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
had not formed an opinion as required by Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution. Accordingly, the Reference framed against the 
petitioner lacked an essential Constitutional ingredient under 
Art 209(5), namely, the application of mind by the Pre sident. 
It was therefore seriously deficient. To support his contention, 
he relied on paragraph 18 of the Reference (ref: Const. P. No. 
17 of 2019, Part II) which reads as under:  
“Page 80: As per the advice of the Prime 
Minister I have formed an opinion th at Mr. 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa may have been guilty of 
misconduct; hence I hereby direct the 
Supreme Judicial Council to inquire into the 
matter…”  
 
123.   On the other hand, learned counsel for t he 
respondents argued that the President had correctly formed 
his opinion as envisaged by Article 209(5) of the Constitution. 
He submitted that the President was provided with a 
comprehensive summary from the Ministry of Law and 
Justice along with all the relevant attachments and the PM’s 
advice. He stated in Court that the President discussed the 
Reference with the Law Minister, a statement which he 
elaborated upon in his written arguments. It seems that after 
the Reference was sent to the President he not  only reviewed 
it with the PM but also with the Law Secretary, the AG and 
the Law Minister. Input was also sought from Secretary to the 
President.  
124.   The Reference as it was sent to the President 
contained multiple allegations against the petitioner. These 151 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
allegations involved both pure questions of law and mixed 
questions of law and fact. One such question was: whether 
the petitioner Judge (or for that matter any other citizen of 
Pakistan) is obligated under Section 116 of the Ordinance to 
declare the  assets of his independent spouse? Another issue 
that arose was: whether the funds employed by Mrs. Isa to 
purchase the London Properties comprised proceeds of crime 
in order to involve the commission of the offence of money 
laundering under AMLA? To ponde r over these matters or 
indeed to form an opinion on them required legal knowledge 
which the President admittedly himself does not possess. In 
such a situation, it became incumbent upon him to seek legal 
advice from persons who were well -versed in tax and financial 
matters.  
125.   Although it is not for this Court to specify a list of 
persons from whom legal advice may be sought by the 
President, however, we can set out the persons who should 
not be approached by the President for legal advice on a 
referen ce under Article 209 of the Constitution. Fairness and 
objectivity dictate that those involved in the investigation and 
framing of the reference may brief the President but cannot 
advise him on whether it is maintainable and appropriate for 
inquiry by the SJC. This is because there is a clear conflict of 
interest for the architects of the reference to opine on the 
weaknesses of their work. But this is precisely what 
happened in the present Reference. The President discussed 152 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the Reference and its legal aspec ts with the AG and the Law 
Minister. As senior functionaries of the Federal Government, 
both gentlemen were admittedly involved in the framing of the 
Reference against the petitioner. Under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution, the opinion formed by the Pres ident is expected 
to be considered, fair and objective. This is because under 
Article 48(1) ibid the President has the power to return the 
advice by the PM or the Cabinet for reconsideration. In order 
to be objective and fair he should rely upon counsel an d legal 
experts not linked with the framing of the reference or 
working for the Federal Government. Irrespective of whether 
such qualities, which have to form part of the President’s 
opinion, are present in the officers of the Federal Government, 
their con sultation becomes questionable on grounds of 
conflict of interest. The fact that the President also received 
legal input from his Secretary is unhelpful because the 
respondents do not claim his legal advice to have been 
rendered in writing. The President’s  failure to note under 
Article 48(1) a defect of gross illegality in the Reference, 
namely, an assumed view of Section 116 of the Ordinance 
and AMLA, suggests that the legal basis of the allegations 
made therein were not tested. We reckon that this happene d 
because the President’s opinion was influenced by the 
inadmissible advice of individuals who were involved in the 
preparation of the Reference. In these circumstances, it 153 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
cannot be said that the President formed an informed opinion 
in terms of Article 20 9(5) of the Constitution.  
126.   Under the Constitutional scheme, one needs to 
understand the reason for the President’s responsibility to 
apply his mind to form an opinion under Article 209(5). The 
starting point for such an examination should be this 
Constitutional provision itself. What is of significance for us is 
that after the 18th Amendment, Article 209(5) is the only 
provision in the Constitution which requires the President to 
form his opinion. However, prior to the 18th Amendment, 
Article 58(2) ( reproduced under the heading ‘Authorisation for 
Investigation’) of the Constitution also imposed the same 
obligation on the President.  
127.   On a careful perusal of these Articles, it becomes 
clear that there is a distinction between the “opinion” to be 
formed by the President under the two provisions. Article 
209(5) of the Constitution simply requires the President to 
form an opinion whereas Article 58(2) ibid required the 
President to form his opinion in the exercise of his discretion. 
Consequently, the  President’s opinion under Article 209(5) is 
directed by sub -Article 1 of Article 48 whereas his opinion 
under Article 58(2) was controlled by sub -Article 2 of Article 
48. To understand why the application of mind is inherent in 
the formation of opinion un der Article 209(5), we need to 
appreciate the meaning assigned to the President’s opinion 154 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
formed under a discretionary power as specified in Article 
58(2). In this regard, reliance is placed on the case of 
Federation of Pakistan Vs. Haji Muhammad Saifullah  
Khan  (PLD 1989 SC 166) wherein the Court settled the 
debate on this matter:  
“Pages 189 -190: The discretion conferred by 
Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution on the 
President cannot, therefore, be regarded to be 
an absolute but is to be deemed to be a 
qualified one, in the sense that it is 
circumscribed by the object of the law that 
confers it . It must further be noted that the 
reading of the provisions of Articles 48(2) and 
58(2) shows that the President has to first 
form his opinion, objectively and then, it is 
open to him to exercise his discretion one 
way or the other , i.e. either to dissolve the 
Assembly or to decline to dissolve it. .. An 
obligation is cast on the President by the 
aforesaid Constitutional provision that before 
exercising his discre tion he has to form his 
'opinion' that a situation of the kind 
envisaged in Article 58(2)(b) has arisen  which 
necessitates the grave step of dissolving the 
National Assembly … Thus, though the 
President can make his own assessment of 
the situation as to the  course of action to be 
followed but his opinion must be founded on 
some material. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
The above quoted excerpt establishes that notwithstanding 
the element of discretion which was available to the President 
under Article 58(2), his opinion had to be based on some 
material and had to be objective. There is no reason why the 
President’s opini on under Article 209(5) (which is not 
accompanied by any discretion) should not be governed by 
the same stringent principles. When the President is 
performing his function under Article 209(5) he is ultimately 155 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
bound by the advice of the PM or the Cabinet a s the case may 
be under sub -Article (1) of Article 48. However, the proviso to 
Article 48(1) ibid authorises the President to return, within 
fifteen days, the advice for reconsideration. Therefore, the 
President’s power clearly grants him the jurisdiction to 
evaluate the worth of the advice tendered to him. If he is so 
inclined he may require the same to be reconsidered once by 
the PM or the Cabinet. Consequently, even Article 48(1) 
envisages that the President when performing his functions 
under this provi sion will apply his mind to the information 
before him. Otherwise the purpose of inserting a proviso, 
which permits the President to return the advice, becomes 
redundant if the President only has to mechanically agree 
with the PM or Cabinet.  
128.   Moreov er, it has been noted above that the object 
of Article 209(5) is to protect the security of tenure of Superior 
Court Judges. Therefore, this Constitutional provision is 
intrinsically connected with the independence of judiciary. We 
have already observed th at an independent judiciary is 
critical to the survival of a just democracy. By requiring the 
President, as the highest Constitutional authority in the 
country, to apply his mind and form an objective opinion in 
the exercise of his jurisdiction under the p roviso to Article 
48(1) of the Constitution before sending a reference to the 
SJC for inquiry, it is ensured that this fundamental right of 156 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the people is protected from arbitrary interference by the 
Executive.          
129.   Be that as it may, learned cou nsel’s submission 
that the President had not formed an opinion in terms of 
Article 209(5) of the Constitution was focused on the fact that 
the President had solely based his opinion on the advice of 
the PM. Since his initial contention, that the President’ s 
opinion under Article 209(5) ought to be formed in the 
exercise of Presidential discretion under Article 48(2), 
conflicted with the 18th Amendment to the Constitution, 
learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the public 
importance of a reference un der Article 209(5) was such that 
it required advice to the President to be tendered by the 
Cabinet rather than the PM. However, the short and simple 
answer to the said objection of learned counsel can be found 
in the ROB which provides in its Schedule V -B, serial number 
35 that matters relating to ‘Reference to Supreme Judicial 
Council’ be approved by the President on the advice of the 
PM. The rationale for this rule becomes evident when the list 
of cases requiring Cabinet approval is examined. This list is  
contained in Rule 16(1) of the ROB:  
16. Cases to be brought before the 
Cabinet. — (1) The following cases shall  be 
brought before the Cabinet: - 
(a) proposals for legislation, official or non -
official, including money bills ; 
(b) promulgatio n and revocation  of 
Ordinances;  157 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
(c) the budgetary position and proposals 
before the presentation of an Annual Budget 
Statement and a Supplementary Budget 
Statement or an Excess Budget Statement 
under Articles 80 and 84 ; 
(d) proposals for levy, abolition, remission, 
altera tion or regulation of any tax and 
floatation of loans ; 
(e) a reference to the Supreme Court for 
advice on a question of law under clause (1) 
of Article 186;  
(f) generation of electricity and laying o f inter -
provincial transmission lines;  
(g) omitted vide S .R.O 368(1)/2010 dated 1st 
June 1, 2010  
(h) proposals for signing of negotiated 
instruments with foreign countries and 
approval for ratification of the instruments : 
(i) important reports and documents  required 
to be laid before the Assembly or Senate;  
(j) cases involving vital political, economic 
and administrative policies ; 
Note. - Cases of this nature shall first be 
brought to the notice of the Prime Minister by 
the Minister -in-Charge. The Prime Minister 
will decide whether any such case should be 
brought before the Cabinet.  
(k) case which the Minister -in-Charge 
considers important enough for discussion in 
the Cabinet ; 
(l) other cases required to be re ferred to the 
Cabinet under the provisions of these rules; 
and 
(m) any case desired by the Prime Minister t o 
be referred to the Cabinet . 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
A perusal of this provision reveals that the matters which are 
placed before the Cabinet for approval mainly consist of 
proposals for legislation and issues pertaining to the economy 
such as fiscal, budgetary and monetary proposals including 
proposals for levy or abolition of taxes. Issues involving vital 158 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
political, economic and administrative policies, international 
treaties and agreements and any case so desired by the 
Minister -in-Charge or the PM are also referred to the Cabinet. 
Accordingly, generally m atters that affect a large section of 
the public or relations between the Federation and the 
Provinces in the political, economic and administrative area 
fall within the scope of Cabinet advice.  
130.   A similar mandate for Cabinet decisions also 
exists i n foreign democratic jurisdictions. In Australia the 
Cabinet Handbook (13th Edn) sets out the following issues 
which require the Cabinet’s deliberation:  
“SECTION 4  
CABINET BUSINESS  
Matters for Cabinet Consideration  
………………………………………………………….  
72: The following  is an indication of the kind 
of issues that would normally require 
consideration by the Cabinet:  
a. Proposals relating to the delivery of the 
Government’s priorities  
b. Significant or controversial policy issues  
c. Proposals affecting the Government’s 
financial position, or important financial 
commitments  
d. Proposals that are challenging to 
implement due to their complexity  or timeline 
for delivery  
e. Significant matters affecting state and 
territory government relations  
f. The most significant international business, 
including international treaties and 
agreements  
g. National emergencies, including any 
decision to take military action  
h. Proposals that affect Australia’s 
constitutional arrangements  159 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
i. Proposals requiring sig nificant new or 
amendments to legislation or regulations  
j. Any significant or controversial exercise of a 
minister’s statutory power  
k. Significant Government appointments ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
 
131.   A comparable list of subject matters is also found 
in other foreign jurisdictions such as Canada, United 
Kingdom and New Zealand. What is significant for our 
purposes is that these lists demonstrate a consistent 
international practice that only issues that have a wholesale 
and widespread effect on the State, its society and political 
economy belong to the category of cases that need 
consideration by the Cabinet. The other spheres of State 
functions which lack the above features may be performed on 
the advice of the PM with the involvement of Cabinet not 
being necessary. Advice in relation to the filing of a reference 
is a function of the President which falls in the latter 
category. It is neither a legislative measure nor a political, 
economic or administrative proposal. It is also not a policy 
decision. As suc h it lacks the features that qualify for 
consideration from and debate by the Cabinet. In fact, if one 
examines in detail Schedule V -B of the ROB, it becomes plain 
that not only matters pertaining to the Supreme Judicial 
Council for the removal of Judges o f the Superior Courts but 160 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
also the removal of persons holding other key Constitutional 
Posts are decided on the advice of the PM:  
“SCHEDULE V -B 
[Rule 15 -A(1)] 
LIST OF CASES REQUIRING ORDERS OF 
THE PRESIDENT ON THE ADVICE OF THE 
PRIME MINISTER  
………………………………………………………….  
2D. Appointment, resig nation and removal  of 
Provincial Go vernors, determination of their 
salaries, allowances and privileges  
………………………………………………………....  
19. Auditor General of Pakistan:  
(i) Appointment, removal,  term of office 
and terms and conditions of service;  
………………………………………………………….  
33. Federal Shariat Court: number of Judges, 
their appoi ntments, transfer, resignation, 
removal,  allowances and privileges . 
………………………………………………………….  
35. Reference to Supreme Judicial Council.  
………………………………………………………….  
36D. Council of Islamic Ideology:  
(i) Appointment, resignation and removal 
of members and Chairman, ” 
 (emphasis supplied ) 
 
132.   Consequently, keeping in view the nature of cases 
which are deliberated upon by the Cabi net and the fact that 
the PM is consistently the single Constitutional authority who 
advises the President with regards to the removal of persons 
in Constitutional Posts, we hold that in the filing of a 
reference the President is bound to act on the advice  of the 
PM and not the Cabinet. Therefore, it is only logical that in 161 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
deciding whether to send the Reference against the petitioner 
to the SJC the President relied on the advice of the PM.  
133.   Furthermore, if the reference is substantive, 
cogent, coher ent, rational and lawful, then the President 
simply has to record his assent. There is no additional 
obligation on him to set out his separate reasons. However, if 
the reference is defective factually and/or legally then the 
President must state his reason s for disagreement and call for 
reconsideration of the matter by the PM in the light of those 
reasons. If the President subsequently disagrees even with the 
reconsidered advice, then he is bound by Article 48(1) to 
endorse the said advice leaving it for th e SJC to analyse the 
merits of the reference sent by the President.  
134.   It is pertinent to state here that the above 
discussion means that the Federal Government must set out 
its reasons for preparing and sending a reference against a 
Judge of the Supe rior Court. In fact, the summary and 
statement of reference prepared by the Ministry of Law for the 
PM and the President are the documents which contain these 
reasons. It is these documents which contain the crux of the 
reference against a Superior Court J udge, and therefore they 
need to be factually and legally complete. Failure to comply 
with this requirement will render the reference unsustainable.   
135.   Be that as it may, the crucial question remains 
whether in light of what has been discussed above,  it can be 162 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
said that the President applied his mind to the facts alleged in 
the Reference against the petitioner. As noted previously in 
this section, the President in forming his opinion sought the 
advice of the Law Minister and AG, both of whom were 
involved in the preparation of the Reference and therefore had 
a conflict of interest. Additionally, we have held under the 
heading ‘Validity of the Allegations in the Reference’ that the 
accusations against the petitioner have been made 
prematurely in the abs ence of statutory notice to Mrs. Isa to 
explain her sources of funds. Likewise, there was no evidence 
to support the allegations made under FERA and AMLA. Both 
these facts went unnoticed by the President. Consequently, 
keeping in view these circumstances, we find that the 
independent application of mind by the President is lacking in 
the present case. Instead he has followed the advice tendered 
to him without ascertaining its correctness. This is contrary 
to the requirements of both Article 209(5) and Artic le 48(1) of 
the Constitution and therefore renders the Reference 
defective.  
 
CONCLUSION FOR DEFECTS IN THE REFERENCE  
136.   In the light of our discussion, noted above, it has 
become clear that there are multiple defects in the Reference. 
Briefly, these are: 163 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
i. No authorisation for investigating the affairs of the 
petitioner was given by the President and PM. Instead 
the authorisation of the Law Minister was obtained;  
ii. No notice was issued to Mrs. Isa as required under 
Section 116(1) of the Ordinance prior to  the filing of the 
Reference;  
iii. The petitioner was presumed to be under the obligation 
to declare the assets of his independent wife and adult 
children on the basis of an unsettled and disputed 
interpretation of Section 116(1)(b) of the Ordinance;  
iv. There was neither any evidence nor the nomination of a 
predicate offence in the Reference to support the 
allegation of money laundering against the petitioner;  
v. Likewise, there was no evidence that the petitioner had 
violated the regime under FERA and even the releva nt 
provisions from the said law were not specified in the 
Reference;  
vi. The President received inadmissible advice from the AG 
and Law Minister, the chief architects of the Reference, 
on the strengths and weaknesses of the Reference;  
vii. The President did not ge t considered, fair and objective 
advice from a third party on the questions of law noted 
in the Reference;  
viii. The President failed to notice the various legal and 
procedural defects in the Reference;  164 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
ix. The President did not form a considered opinion under 
Article 209(5) of the Constitution;  
x. As there was no valid authorisation for the investigation 
(noted in i above), the respondents illegally accessed the 
tax records of the petitioner and Mrs. Isa; and  
xi. Mrs. Awan made contemptuous remarks about the 
petitioner in public.  
 
These illegal acts of the respondents depict their utter 
disregard of the law. Filing a reference under Article 209 of 
the Constitution that is signed by the President and which 
presents a charge sheet against a Judge of the Superior 
Courts is a matter requiring utmost prudence and caution by 
its framers. However, in the present case the actions of the 
respondents have violated not only the express provisions of 
the Constitution, the ROB, the Ordinance and AMLA but have 
also ignored the law laid d own in the CJP case ( supra ) which 
specifically set out certain safeguards to protect Superior 
Court Judges from arbitrary actions of the Executive. 
Therefore in essence, the respondents have paid scant 
attention to the mandate of the relevant laws governin g the 
field of Presidential references. In these circumstances, the 
errors committed by them in the preparation and framing of 
the Reference cannot be termed as mere illegalities. Instead, 
in the context of Article 209 their errors amount to a wanton 
disregard of the law. Being arbitrary and illegal  these act have 165 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
ceased to be actions contemplated by any of the applicable 
laws such as the Constitution  and the  Ordinance  (amongst 
others) . As a result, although the preparation and framing of 
the Reference agai nst the petitioner is not patently motivated 
with malice in fact, the scale and degree of the illegalities are 
such that the Reference is deemed to be tainted with mala 
fide in law. For this reason, the Reference is hereby quashed.  
 
SHOW CAUSE NOTICE ISSU ED BY THE SUPREME 
JUDICIAL COUNCIL  
 
137.   We have already observed in this judgment that 
the SCN dated 17.07.2019 issued by the SJC is almost 
entirely based upon the information given and the resulting 
allegations made in the Reference. In the preceding 
paragraphs we have struck down and quashed t he Reference 
for being legally defective. The SCN issued by the SJC derives 
its substance from this quashed Reference. Therefore, except 
for the underlying factual information of Mrs. Isa’s ownership 
of the undeclared London Properties, the remaining conte nts 
of the said Reference are without foundation. Accordingly, the 
narrative in the notice alleging misconduct against the 
petitioner and the subsequent direction to file a response 
have lost force and cannot be sustained. Even the not 
denied/admitted unde rlying information about ownership of 
the London Properties by Mrs. Isa and her children requires 
further probe by the respondents on the point of absence of 166 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
declared lawful sources for the purchase of such properties to 
maintain a Reference against the pe titioner. As a result, the 
notice dated 17.07.2019 cannot survive in limbo and must 
abate. Indeed, without the Reference the SCN is just a “blank 
piece of paper” (ref: R (on the application of Miller) V The 
Prime Minister  [2019 UKSC 41 at para -69]) which c annot 
become the basis for any subsequent inquiry against the 
petitioner. Consequently, the ongoing proceedings against the 
petitioner in the SJC also stand abated.  
 
REFERRAL TO FEDERAL BOARD OF REVENUE  
138.   It would now be appropriate to elaborate upo n our 
reasons for directing the FBR to commence tax proceedings 
against Mrs. Isa and her children, notwithstanding our order 
to quash the Reference against the petitioner. Our decision to 
take such a step was primarily based on two grounds: to 
establish th at Judges of the Superior Court are answerable 
for allegations casting aspersions not only on their personal 
integrity but also on the integrity of the institution; and to 
honour the petitioner’s plea that the allegation of absence of 
source of funds and m oney laundering must be first put to 
Mrs. Isa who is an independent taxpayer.  
139.   Since the start of these proceedings all the learned 
counsel in the present and connected petitions have termed 
their case a struggle for the independence of the judiciar y. 167 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Learned counsel for the petitioner repeatedly urged before 
this Court that unless the Reference against the petitioner 
was quashed, it would undermine the independence of the 
judiciary. However, what has escaped the attention of learned 
counsel during t his intense discourse is another equally 
important fundamental principle of the Constitution, namely, 
the accountability of the Judges of the Superior Courts. An 
independent judiciary is certainly a necessity for any civilised 
society governed by laws to p rosper and thrive. But in utmost 
good faith neither Judges nor the institution can retain the 
public trust when serious stigmas are cast on their integrity. 
Recalling the quotation from the Holy Quran at the start of 
this judgment, the institution cannot b e perceived to be 
ignoring an unpleasant allegation of undeclared foreign assets 
of a family member of a Judge.  
140.   In this regard, it may be mentioned that the CJP 
case ( supra ) is distinguishable from the facts and 
circumstances of the present case. I n the CJP case ( supra ) 
this Court quashed the reference against the (then) Chief 
Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and brought the 
matter to an end without further action on the information 
contained in the reference against him. It is not at all difficul t 
to understand why the Larger Bench in that case adopted 
such a course of action. It is because the reference filed 168 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
against the (then) Chief Justice was established on record to 
be so manifestly motivated by the malice in fact  of the military 
ruler at the  time that the allegations against the former were 
rendered insignificant.  
141.   However, in the present case no finding of malice 
in fact has been given. It is true that the Reference suffers 
from grave legal defects. But the consequences of illegality of 
an impugned action are different from those following a 
finding of malice in fact. The illegalities in the present 
Reference are a result of its careless and casual preparation. 
These errors or defects do not erase Mrs. Isa’s ownership of 
the London Pro perties, the primary fact which forms the basis 
of the Reference and which is not denied by the petitioner. 
Whilst the ownership of the London Properties is not 
disputed, the source of funds for their purchase and the 
mode by which these funds were transfe rred abroad require 
explanation. Otherwise, an unexplained investment by the 
spouse of a Judge of the Superior Courts, who is a holder of 
public office, compromises the integrity of the learned Judge 
and ultimately the probity and credibility of the instit ution 
which he serves.   
142.   Rather than allowing the disturbing allegation 
against the petitioner and his family to circulate and attract 
innuendos thereby injuring the reputation and integrity of 
both the petitioner and this Court, we adopted the fair , 169 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
impartial and transparent route of allowing Mrs. Isa and her 
children to disclose the source of their funds to the relevant 
authorities, namely, the FBR. Such a transparent course of 
action is consistent with the CoC, the maintenance of 
institutional int egrity and the image of Judges as the neutral 
and independent arbiters of law and justice. The matter of 
undeclared and unexplained foreign wealth of public office 
holders bears a stigma in Pakistan that these assets have 
been acquired unlawfully (a stigma  which applies with even 
greater force since the PANAMA leaks on 03.04.2016 ). 
Therefore, every public office holder including Judges of the 
Superior Courts, officers of the armed forces, elected 
representatives and public servants are accountable under 
the law. Indeed, neither the institution of the judiciary nor the 
other institutions of Pakistan can tolerate a contrary 
perception. Consequently, all public office holders remain 
accountable under their applicable legislation on misconduct. 
By referring the issue of source of funding to the FBR for 
verification from Mrs. Isa and her children, we have chosen 
the path which in the first place should have been taken by 
the respondents but which was casually ignored by them. 
Therefore, by this referral the contro versy surrounding the 
allegation in the Reference will be settled.  170 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
143.   It may be mentioned here that our decision to 
refer the matter for verification to the FBR grants the 
petitioner’s plea from the very start of the proceedings that 
his wife and chil dren should be asked about their source of 
funds for the acquisition of the London Properties. This was 
reiterated by learned counsel for the petitioner during 
arguments. He submitted that a determination by the tax 
authorities was essential to ensure that  the due process 
rights of the petitioner and his family under Article 10A of the 
Constitution were not violated. Mrs. Isa also adopted a similar 
stance in her statement, given through video link, on 
18.06.2020  to the Court.  To our minds the FBR being the 
premier tax authority in Pakistan is the most well equipped to 
deal with questions of a financial nature. It not only 
maintains the complete tax records of taxpayers, including 
those of Mrs. Isa’s, but also employs personnel who are well -
versed in comprehe nding and analysing financial and tax 
records.  
144.   Moreover, as our short order bears out, by sending 
the matter to the FBR we have assured the substantive and 
procedural rights of each party under the Ordinance. These 
rights and the right of the petitioner’s family to appeal against 
adverse orders have sp ecifically been preserved. Additionally, 
we have ordered that only appropriate proceedings for 171 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
undeclared or unexplained assets be initiated against the 
petitioner’s family which should be concluded within a 
reasonable timeline.  
SUO MOTU JURISDICTION OF S UPREME JUDICIAL 
COUNCIL  
 
145.   Next, we in our short order also directed the 
Chairman FBR to submit his report, regarding the 
proceedings before the Commissioner (Inland Revenue), to the 
SJC for its consideration. This was done to give SJC the 
chance, if it so wished, to commence proceedings against the 
petitioner in exercise of its suo mot u jurisdiction. However, it 
is reiterated that our short order dated 19.06.2020 merely 
issues a direction to the Chairman FBR and  in no way 
obliges the SJC to take any action based on the report. The 
SJC may do so of its own volition if it considers that the 
report justifies any action against the petitioner. But it may 
also file the report if it finds that the same contains no 
substance/merit. The SJC is the only consti tutional body 
which can examine the conduct of a Superior Court Judge. 
Therefore our direction for the disclosure of the findings and 
the record of the verification proceedings by the FBR to the 
SJC acknowledges the latter’s exclusive jurisdiction in this 
matter. Consequently, the Chairman FBR’s report is a piece of 
information to be evaluated by the SJC in its s uo motu 
jurisdiction.  172 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
146.   At the same time our short order has preserved 
the rights of the affected taxpayers, Mrs. Isa and her children, 
under  the Ordinance. This includes the right to appeal 
against the decision of the Commissioner or against any other 
adverse order passed at the appellate stage. To our minds, the 
two directions, namely, the filing of the report by the 
Chairman FBR before the S JC and the protection of the 
affected persons right to appeal, issued by us were necessary 
in the interests of justice. The jurisdiction of the FBR is 
concerned with taxing income whereas the jurisdiction of the 
SJC is related only with the misconduct of a  Judge. 
Therefore, the proceedings and/or the outcome before one 
forum do not affect those of the other forum. However, the 
SJC may if so inclined in the exercise of its suo motu 
jurisdiction conferred by the Constitution take into 
consideration any procee dings before the tax authorities or 
orders passed by them.  
CONCLUSION  
147.   These then are the detailed reasons for our 
findings recorded in the short order dated 19.06.2020.  
148.   Before parting with our judgment, we would like to 
thank learned counsel for the petitioner in Const. P. No.17 of 
2019 and the connected petitions as well as learned  
 173 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
counsel for the respondents, whose names are recorded in the 
title of the judgment, for their invaluable assistance to the  
Court. We also express our appreciation to all the learned 
counsel who appeared before us for presenting their well -
reasoned arguments with grace and respect and for giving a 
patient ear to the questions posed by the Hon ’ble members of 
the Bench.  
  
              
 JUDGE  
 JUDGE  
  
 
 
  
 
 JUDGE  
 JUDGE  
  
  
 JUDGE  
 
 JUDGE  
  
  JUDGE  
 
 
Islamabad,  
19.06.2020.  
Irshad Hussain/Meher LC  
 
  APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  174 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
INDEX  
Sr. No  Topic  Para Nos  
1 Introduction  
 Independence of Judiciary; Impartiality of Judges  1-2 
2 Facts  
 Factual matrix; Petitioner’s propositions; 
Connected petitions with main propositions; 
Respondents propositions; Recusal application by 
counsel for petitioner; Short order dated 
19.06.2020  3-12 
3 Maintainability  
 Art 184(3) and bar of Art 211 on jurisdiction; 
Grounds of review of pre -reference proceedings; 
Petition maintainable  13-23 
4 Case against the Petitioner  
 Reference to Art 209; Brief reference to the 
allegations; Reference to Code of Conduct; 
Reference to SJC Rules 2005; Meaning of 
misconduct; Timing of misconduct; 
Accountability for family’s conduct (Judicial 
Estacode, Bangalore Principles, Amnesty 
Schemes, Scope of obligation on Judges to be 
informed of financial affairs of family me mbers)  24-42 
5 Mala Fides  
 Meaning and standard of proof of mala fides; 
Specific incidents raised by counsel for petitioner 
as highlighting the mala fides of respondents 
(Review petitions filed against Dharna Judgment, 
Proxy complainant, Leaking of Refere nce, Firdous 
Ashiq Awan’s press conference, Hastiness of 
Government, Remarks of (former) AG in 
Rejoinder); No malice in fact  43-64 
6 Constitution of ARU  
 Reference to Foreign Currency Accounts Cases; 
Creation of ARU (Executive authority, 
Notifications from  Cabinet read with Rule 2(1)(ii) 
ROB, Composition and TORs of ARU, Publication 
of Notification in gazette); Appointment of 65-76 175 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Shahzad Akbar as SAPM (Reference to 
Muhammad Adil Chattha case); Both creation 
and appointment legal  
7 Surveillance and Illegally Collected Evidence  
 Meaning of surveillance and its application to the 
case; S216(3)(p) ITO 2001 – reference to previous 
tax laws and Section 21 PPC; Judges are public 
servants – includes discussion on Mrs. Isa’s 
status; Tax information accessed i llegally; UK 
property record search; Application of Art 14 and 
distinction from Benazir Bhutto case  77-88 
8 Defects in the Reference  
 Identification of the main defects; Quality of 
Presidential reference as distinguished from other 
methods of complaints a gainst Judges  89-92 
9 Authorisation for Investigation  
 Reference to para 64 of CJP case; Reference to 
item 21(10) of Schedule II of ROB; 18th 
Constitutional Amendment; Analysis on who is 
the competent authority for investigation 
(Whether President to act on advice or in his 
discretion, Whose advice is President to act on, 
Investigation illegal)  93-103 
10 Validity of Allegations in the Reference  
Reproductions from Reference and SCN; FERA (No 
submission by counsel for respondents, No merit in 
the allegation); Money laundering (Reference to 
provisions of AMLA, S116 ITO 2001 not a predicate 
offence, Were other ITO 2001 offences predicate 
offences at relevant time, Counsel for respondents 
contention that petitioner had violated the money 
laundering re gime rejected, Premature allegation); 
S116 ITO 2001 (No notice issued to Mrs. Isa or 
petitioner, Entire case based on AC (IR) opinion, 
FBR’s, petitioner’s and respondents interpretation of 
s116, Counsel for respondent’s subsequent reliance 
on Code of Condu ct rejected, Mrs. Isa’s address to 
the Court, Compliance of Arts 4 and 10A, Premature 
allegation)  
 104-120 176 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
11 Application of Mind by the President  
 Reference to Ch Ijaz Ahmed, J concurring note on 
substance of President’s ‘opinion’; President’s 
reliance on  advice from Law Minister and (former) 
AG; Reasons for President’s obligation to apply 
his mind when forming an opinion under Art 
209(5) – reference to Art 48(1) and proviso; Advice 
of PM, not Cabinet, to be relied on; Whose 
obligation is it to set out rea sons for preparing a 
reference against a Judge; No independent 
application of mind  121-135 
12 Conclusion for Defects in the Reference  
 Defects amount to malice in law  136 
13 Show Cause Notice issued by SJC  
 Super structural in nature – hence abates  137 
14 Referral to FBR  
 To safeguard integrity of petitioner and 
institution and to honour the former’s plea; 
Distinguished CJP case; Accountability of public 
office holders; Plea of petitioner (in detail); FBR 
most appropriate authority to verify the 
informati on provided; No curtailment of any 
party’s substantive and procedural rights  138-144 
15 Jurisdiction of SJC  
 Suo motu jurisdiction; SJC proceedings separate 
from FBR proceedings  145-146 
16 Conclusion  147-148 
 
 177 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Faisal Arab, J. - I have had the privilege to go through the judgment 
proposed to be delivered by my learned brother Umar Ata Bandial, J and 
except for my view on Article 48 of the Constitution, Section 116 of 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001  and on the plea of mala fide  I resp ectfully 
agree with the same. I also intend to add my own reasons in support of 
the main judgment.  
Facts : 
2.  The origin of the Reference No.1 of 2019 filed by the 
President against the petitioner can be found in the letter dated 
10.04.2019 , which one Abdul Waheed  Dogar, stating himself to be an 
investigative journalist, wrote to the Chairman, Asset Recovery Unit, 
Prime Minister’s Secretariat, Islamabad. In this letter, Abdul Waheed  
Dogar  claims that he has laid hands on documentary evidence showing 
three Judges, including the petitioner, own properties abroad in the 
names of their relatives. The details of the foreign properties were said to 
be attached with the letter. The Law Minister was informed about this 
letter, who advised the Chairman , Asset Recovery Unit , to verify the 
information contained therein. In the process of verification, the Director 
General, International Taxes, Federal Board of Revenue confirmed from 
the tax records that no property located abroad has been declared either 
by the petitioner or his wife in terms of Section 116 (1) (b) of the Income 
Tax Ordinance, 2001. From further verification from the Land Registry in 
London, it transpired that three properties (i) 50 Coniston Court, Kendal 
Street, London W2 2AN acquired in  the year 2011 (ii) 90 Adelaide Road, 
London E10 5NW acquired in the year 2013 and (iii) 40 Oakdale Road, 
London E11 4DL also acquired in the year 2013 stand in the joint names 
of the petitioner’s wife and children ( hereinafter “ London Properties ”). 
Later , it has come on record that the first of these properties was initially 
acquired in the year 2004 in the name of the petitioner’s wife only and in 
the year 2011 the petitioner’s daughter was made co -owner along -with 
his wife. The second property acquired i n the year 2013 stands in the 178 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
joint names of the petitioner’s wife and son and the third, also acquired 
in the year 2013, stands in the joint names of the petitioner’s wife and 
daughter.  
3.  After the process of verification of the London properties 
was co mpleted in the manner stated above, the Law Ministry placed a 
summary along -with a draft of the Presidential Reference before the 
Prime Minister , which summary was endorsed by him on 17.05.2019 
and was then placed before the President under Article 48 (1) of the 
Constitution , advising him to direct the Supreme Judicial Council under 
Article 209 (5) of the Constitution to inquire into the non -disclosure of 
foreign assets. The draft of the Presidential Reference was also appended 
with the Prime Minister’s adv ice, which the President was asked to sign. 
The President acted on such advice and signed the Reference , which was 
then sent to the Supreme Judicial Council to conduct inquiry against the 
petitioner under Article 209 (5) of the Constitution.  
Scope  of Arti cle 209 of the Constitution:  
4.  Clause 5 of Article 209 reads ‘ If, on information from any 
source, the Council or the President is of the opinion that a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a High Court ……. (b) may have been guilty of 
misconduct, the President shall direct the Council to, or the Council may, 
on its own motion, inquire into the matter. ’ The use of the words ‘ from any 
source’  appearing in Article 209 (5) allows information to come from a 
member of the general public or a government functionary or is based on 
a finding of fact of a judicial forum . No specific route from which 
information is to come has been laid down  in the Constitution. While 
leaving the door wide open for the information to come in from any 
source, Article 209 (5) of the Constituti on has also ensured that receipt 
of any and every information per se  should not trigger inquiry against a 
Judge and only such information is to become actionable on which either 
the Supreme Judicial Council or the President has formed the opinion 179 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
that the matter needs to be inquired into. The informant has no right to 
seek that the President or the Supreme Judicial Council must conduct 
inquiry on the information that has been placed by him before any of 
them. The Constitution has left such decision in its e ntirety in the hands 
of the Supreme Judicial Council and the President. Until  either of them 
consider any information to be convincing enough to call for an inquiry 
only then the Supreme Judicial Council could embark upon the inquiry 
otherwise not.  
5.  Had the Constitutional safeguard of formation of opinion on 
a particular information not been made a condition precedent , no judge 
would be able to work with the freedom and confidence required of him 
in discharge of the obligation of his or her office. On e very kind of 
complaint made against them the Judges would remain unendingly 
entangled in putting up their defence in one inquiry after another and 
correspondingly the members of the Supreme Judicial Council would 
also be perpetually engaged in conducting i nquiries upon whatever 
information is placed before them by any informant, crippling them from 
performing their normal judicial function. Apprehending this drawback, 
the Constitution has given primacy to the opinion that is formed on the 
information by eit her of the two opinion -makers described in Article 209 
(5) of the Constitution.  It is for this reason that when the Constitution 
admits information  from any source,  it basically says let there be search 
for the truth if in the opinion of any of the two opi nion makers there is 
substance in the information regardless of the source  as there is no 
independence of judiciary if there is no effective mechanism for its 
accountability.  
6.  Article 209 (6) of the Constitution is also of considerable 
importance. It re ads ‘ If, after inquiring into the matter, the Council reports 
to the President that it is of the opinion - (a) that the Judge is incapable of 
performing the duties of his office or has been guilty of misconduct, and (b) 180 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
that the President may remove the Jud ge from office .’ The words “… after 
inquiring into the matter  …” are significant. It means once a matter is 
referred by the President to the Supreme Judicial Council to conduct 
inquiry then it becomes a constitutional obligation of the Supreme 
Judicial Cou ncil to first conduct the inquiry and then submit its report 
to the President. Once that is done and in its report return s its findings 
of guilt or otherwise , it is then for the President to either accept the 
report or reject it. He may not agree on removi ng a judge as Clause 6 of 
Article 209 of the Constitution uses the word ‘may’ , which clothes the 
President with such discretion. For removal of doubt, it may be clarified 
that where the Supreme Judicial Council exonerates a judge of the 
charges framed against him, in that eventuality the matter ends there. 
The exoneration brings the  whole proceedings to an end which no more 
remains open to challenge , not even by the President by seeking judicial 
review before this Court.  To quote an example from a matter from foreign 
jurisdiction, this happened in the case of a Judge of the Supreme C ourt 
of India where under the Indian Constitution, the Inquiry Committee 
(whose role can be equated with the role of Supreme Judicial Council) 
found Justice V. Ramaswami guilty of misconduct but the Indian 
Parliament (whose role under our Constitutional sc heme is equal to the 
role which our President exercises in such matters) did not accept the 
recommendation of the Inquiry Committee  as the majority voted against 
removal . With the result that Justice Ramaswami continued in his  office 
until he superannuated . 
7.  Then there is Article 209 (7) of the Constitution which 
states ‘A Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall not be 
removed from office except as provided by this Article’. This means that 
the only forum of accountability of a Judge of the S uperior Judiciary is 
the Supreme Judicial Council and no other. This has been done keeping 
in mind the independence of the judiciary so that no forum other than 181 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the one provided in the Constitution i.e. the Supreme Judicial Council 
decides with regard to misconduct or incapacity  of a judge of the 
Superior Judiciary . The framers of the 1973 Constitution under Article 
209 (7)  clearly entrusted the power to inquire into the conduct of a Judge 
of the Superior Judiciary in the exclusive hands of the Supreme Judi cial 
Council so that the process is expeditiously concluded  one way or the 
other .  
Scope of Article 211  of the Constitution:  
8.  This Court on its judicial side cannot examine the merits of 
the allegations on account of the constitutional bar contained in Article 
211 of the Constitution , which though appears to be a clog on judicial 
review but if such a bar was not implanted through a constitutional 
provision, it would have deprived the most important organ, the Supreme 
Judicial Council , of its vital powers  in discharging its constitutional 
responsibility of inquiring into the conduct of Judges of the Superior 
Courts in an effective and efficient manner. In the face of the bar 
contained in Article 211 , if any interference by this Court on the merits 
of the c ontroversy gains currency, every Judge against whom the 
Supreme Judicial Council is to conduct inquiry would first come to this 
Court and seek examination of the credibility of the informant as well as 
of the merits of the information . If this Court w as to first give its findings 
on the adequacy of the allegations or credibility of the informant and 
then decide whether to allow or restrain the Supreme Judicial Council 
from proceeding with the inquiry, it would be deviating from the scheme 
devised under the Constitution for the accountability of the judges of the 
Superior Judiciary. It would also set a very dangerous precedent for 
actions that may be taken under Article 209 (5) of the Constitution in 
future. In every case the credentials of the informant and not the worth 
of the information disclosed against a judge would be examined first on 
the judicial side of this Court. Invasion of this Constitutional power by 182 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
any Court would not only amount to demonstrating mistrust in the 
forum created exclusively for t he accountability of judges but would also 
be in disregard of the Constitutional mandate  contained in Article 211 . 
Hence, where decision to conduct inquiry has been taken in terms of 
Article 209 (5) of the Constitution, the allegations made against a sitti ng 
Judge can only be proved or disproved before the Supreme Judicial 
Council  and not before a court through a judicial pronouncement . Any 
judicial interference that amounts to stifling the very function which the 
Constitution has assigned exclusively to the Supreme Judicial Council 
would be violative of Article 211 of the Constitution . 
The effect of a bsence of plea of benami ownership or bribery or 
corruption in the Reference:  
9.   The petitioner has taken the plea that no allegation of 
benami  ownership  or bribery or corruption has been alleged against him 
in the Reference in order to question his integrity and honesty. It would 
be appropriate to examine the allegations made in paragraphs 11, 12 and 
16 of the Reference which in a summarized form are as fol lows:  
In the tax records of the petitioner, three London properties standing 
in the joint names of the petitioner’s wife and two children acquired 
for 751,000 British Pounds in the years 2011 and 2013 have not 
been declared by him to the tax authorities a s required under 
Section 116 (1) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 and as their 
source of acquisition is irreconcilable with the petitioner’s declared 
sources of income, nondisclosure is tainted with concealment, 
raising the questions as to how and from wh ere the funds were 
made available for their purchase without violating the money 
laundering regime and Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, 1947.  
 
10.  In any legal proceedings what is sufficient is to plead  facts 
and facts alone, not their legal effects. Th e terms such as benami  
ownership or corruption or bribery  are all legal effects that arise from a 
set of alleged facts . Once that is done then i t is for the adjudicating 
forum to work out the legal effects emanating from any given set of facts 183 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
alleged in any pleadings. The aforesaid rule of pleadings was best 
explained in the case of Ala-ud-Din Vs. Mst. Farkhanda  Akhtar  PLD 1953 
Lahore 131). In th is case Kaikaus J, as he then was, held “… party is to 
state only the facts and it is for the Court to apply the law and work out 
the results, though as a matter of convenience and on account of lack of 
regard for the rules of pleading, legal effects are g enerally made part of the 
pleadings” . In the said judgment, Kakaus, J also explained the rules of 
pleading through an explicit example which for brevity sake is not 
reproduced. Then i n the case of Budho Vs. Ghulam Shah (PLD 1963 SC 
553), a five -member benc h of this Court reiterated this principle and held 
that pleadings are to be confined to a statement of material facts, it shall 
be presumed that reliance would be placed on such facts and what legal 
effects emerge from such facts need not be stated in the pleadings in 
order to seek the relief. Failure to state the legal effects , therefore , cannot 
even be regarded as an omission in law much less fatal to any legal 
proceedings. In fact stating legal effects in the pleadings was regarded as 
lack of regard for the rules of plea dings. Hence, what legal effect  emerge s 
from the narration of a set of fact s alleged in the Reference was not 
required to be made part of the Reference.  
11.  For a moment even if the rules of pleadings are kept aside, 
one of the allegatio ns made in the Reference is of probable concealment 
of foreign assets. This allegation was made by drawing inference from the 
fact that the foreign assets were neither declared by the petitioner nor his 
wife as required under Section 116 (1) (b) of the Inc ome tax Ordinance, 
2001. To draw inference of probable concealment through deductive 
approach in a chain of reasoning cannot be termed as illogical. Hence, 
based on the contents of the allegations made in paragraphs 11, 12 and 
16 of the Reference, particul arly the plea of probable concealment, 
opinion can be legitimately formed that matter needs to be inquired into.  
 184 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Scope of Section 116(1) (b) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001:  
12.  With regard to the plea of the petitioner that as the London 
Properties are not in his name he was not required to declare it in his 
Wealth Statement s in terms of Section 116(1)(b) of the Income Tax 
Ordinance, 2001 , it may be stated that under Section 116(1) (b) of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001, all resident taxpayers are req uired to 
declare any wealth that stands in their names or in the names of their 
spouses or minor children or persons who are dependent on them. The 
logic behind seeking such an extended declaration is that the resident 
taxpayers often purchase properties f rom their own sources of income 
not only in their own names but also in the names of their spouses, 
children as well as those persons who are dependent on them. It is this 
interconnection between the wealth created from the income of one 
which stands in th e name of another that has made it obligatory upon 
every resident taxpayer to also declare assets of such persons in whose 
names the taxpayer is most likely to purchase from his own sources . 
Keeping this in mind, the provisions of filing wealth statement a nd 
wealth reconciliation statement were incorporated in Section 116 (1) & 
(2) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 . When a taxpayer declares his 
assets under Section 116, such declaration had to reconcile with his 
declared income.  
13.  When any asset  that has not been declared in terms of 
Section 116 gets disclosed at any stage , it is likely to give rise to the 
question whether it is a c ase of concealment of income from which such 
asset was acquired. In such eventuality the taxpayer can be called upon  
by tax authorities to explain the source of its acquisition. If he offers no 
explanation or the explanation that was offered is found unsatisfactory 
then the value of the undeclared asset, to the extent it was not 
satisfactorily explained, through fiction  of law is treated as a person’s 
deemed income generated from ‘other sources’ and added to his already 185 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
declared income, if there was any. This is done in terms of Section 111 of 
the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001. The income tax liability so determined 
is then  recovered along -with applicable penalty under Section 182 of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 . Once that is done  on the basis of deeming 
provision , the Income Tax authorities cannot travel beyond their 
mandate and compel such person to divulge the nature of  the activity 
that had become the source of acquiring the undeclared asset. Hence, 
insofar as the legitimacy of the activity from which the undeclared asset 
was created would still remain a mystery and the matter would come to 
an end  but only for the purpo ses of  income tax law. Hence, the legitimacy 
of the activity from which the undeclared asset was created would still 
remain unascertainable inspite of the fact that Sections 111 and 182 of 
the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 were fully applied by the Income Tax  
authorities by taking the matter to its logical conclusion.  
14.  Apart from detecting tax evasions on undeclared incomes  
as discussed above, t he declarations made under Section 116 of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 can also be used by a forum that is 
entrusted with the function to initiate disciplinary proceedings against a 
public office  holder  in order to ascertain whether his undeclared assets 
were acquired beyond his known sourc es of income. In that  sense the 
declarations made under Section 116 (1) (b)  become  a ‘relevant fact’ in 
order to prove a ‘fact in issue’ which is possessing assets beyond means. 
So, the utility of the declaration made under Section 116 is not restricted 
to detect probable tax evasion only but it can be utilized by a forum , 
other than income tax authorities , to examine the legitimacy of the 
source from which an asset was acquired when it comes to examining 
the conduct of a public office holder.  
15.  In the present case, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Judicial 
Council  was not invoked to recover income tax that may not have been 
paid on income from which the London properties were acquired as such 186 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
a function falls within the exclusive domain of Income Tax Ordinance, 
2001 but it was invoked on account of non -disclosure o f foreign assets 
located beyond the tax jurisdiction of this Country so as to determine as 
to whether such assets were acquired through legitimate means of 
income. It is the d etermination of legitimacy of source of acquisition of 
London properties which is  being sought in the Presidential Reference , 
hence , the allegation of probable concealment was made. Therefore, 
taking r ecourse to Section 116 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 could 
only be termed as a ‘ relevant fact ’ which is intended for proving the ‘fact-
in-issue ’ which is the probable concealment of the source from which the 
foreign assets were acquired.  
16.  Where a person holds a high public  office and any asset 
standing in his name or in the name of any member of his or her 
household in the country  or abroad  and had not been declared to the tax 
authorities in terms of Section 116 (1)  (b) of the Income Tax Ordinance  
and if someone, accidentally or deliberately, finds out about it and 
shares such information with the authority that is competent to see k 
source of acquisition of such undisclosed property, then the holder of 
public office cannot avoid making necessary disclosure. The source of 
undeclared asset must reconcile with the legitimate source of income of 
the holder of high public office or of th e member of his or her household, 
in whose name the asset stands. Unless it is so demonstrated, non -
disclosure is likely to cast doubts on his or her integrity and honesty  and 
can be taken as an act of concealment of an illegal source from which the 
undecl ared asset was acquired.  Thus, in the context of accountability of 
a public office holder, the declaration under Section 116 (1) (b) of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 by itself is not a ‘fact in issue’ but only a 
‘relevant fact’ which can be used to seek e xplanation with regard to 
source of acquisition of undeclared assets that stand either in the name 
of the public office holder or his spouse or children or any other person  187 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
dependent upon him.  No claim of privacy or privilege can justify 
withholding of fin ancial disclosure that is relevant in such accountability 
process.  Thus , the declaration of assets and liabilities made under 
Section 116 (1) (b) can be used as a ‘relevant fact’ before both the forums 
i.e. income tax authorities and the forum that is empowered to take 
disciplinary action against a holder of public office, as the object and 
purpose of both the forums is distinct.  
17.  The declaration required under Section 116 of the Income 
Tax Ordinance, 2001 is also regardless of ones’ gender  as the phrase 
used in the said section is ‘person’s spouse’ and not wife. Thus, if a 
resident taxpayer is a husband then he is required to disclose the assets 
of his wife and if resident taxpayer is a wife then she is required to 
declare her husband’s ass ets. Such a declaration has nothing to do with 
the spouse’s financial dependency or otherwise on the resident taxpayer. 
Income tax law is not concerned with whether the spouse of a resident 
taxpayer is dependent or is a person of means. All that it intends  is that 
no tax evasion takes place by hiding one’s undeclared source of income 
in the names of taxpayer’s loved ones. Husband and wife are both 
presumptive heirs of each other . Any property in the name of any of them 
is also inheritable by their children.  Hence, wealth in the name of 
taxpayer’s spouse , irrespective of his or her own means of income, has to 
be declared on account of mere existence of such relationship with the 
taxpayer . If dependency of spouse of a public office holder is made a 
criterion, it may give rise to scenarios where a resident taxpayer may 
purchase property in the name of his or her spouse who is financially 
well off and is living as a member of the taxpayer’s household and a 
property in his or her name remains undeclared and when s uch a fact 
gets disclosed, the public office holder in order to avoid disciplinary 
proceedings takes the plea that his or her spouse being a person of 
means and not dependent on him or her, therefore, information about 188 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the source of acquisition of undeclar ed asset was not required to be 
divulged by him or her under Section 116 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 
2001. This, if accepted, would then mean that if first asset of substantial 
value raised from the income of taxpayer bought in the name of 
taxpayer’s spou se is declared,  then there is no need to declare all assets 
acquired subsequently by the taxpayer in his or her spouse’s name as by 
then the spouse with the ownership of valuable asset that was acquired 
first in point of time has become a person of means . As stated earlier , the 
whole intent of the income tax law is to prevent tax evasion which would 
be frustrated  if such an unintended meaning is attributed to the term 
‘spouse’ appearing in Section 116 . It is for this reason that when the law 
states ‘spouse’  it does not qualify it by stating that only such assets are 
to be declared which stand in the name of a dependent spouse. The word 
‘spouse’ cannot be read to restrict or qualify its meaning which on its 
plain reading is not intended. Therefore, nothing is  to be read into 
Section 116 so as to mean that  the term ‘spouse’ is confined to  only such 
spouses who are dependent on their taxpaying spouses.  
18.  In the book ‘Statutory Interpretation by F. Bennion’ (5th 
Edition page 751) , it is stated that punctuation s are to denote the stops 
that ought to be made in oral reading, and point out the sense. When 
the relevant portion of Section 116 (1) (b) of the Income Tax 
Ordinance, 2001 is examined it reads ‘ the total assets and liabilities of 
the person’s spouse, mino r children, and other dependents…’ we find that 
in the said provision there is a coma before the conjunction ‘ and’. When 
in any sentence two independent clauses are joined together, each 
intended to stand on its own as a complete message then a coma is 
added before the conjunction ‘ and’ in order to denote that the words that 
appear after the coma and the conjunction are not to be read so as to 
modify what has preceded before in the same sentence . Joining of two 
clauses in one sentence does not mean that both are to be read as 189 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
ejusdem generis . This rule is to be applied with caution so as not to limit 
the meaning of the general word ‘spouse’ to a narrow category of 
‘dependent spouse’. What Section 116(1) (b) intend to mean is that the 
wealth in the names of the taxpayer’s spouse or minor children has to be 
declared on account of mere existence of such relationship with the 
taxpayer. The dependency of such relations on the taxpayers is n ot a 
condition precedent. This being the legal position, a resident taxpayer 
even in an action taken under Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 cannot take 
the stand that unless his or her spouse is shown to be dependent on him  
or her , there is no legal obligation t o declare the assets that stand in 
their names under Section 116 (1) (b) of the Income Tax Ordinance, 
2001.  
19.  It may also be added here that as far as a person’s wife is 
concerned, the legal position is that when a woman marries and 
moves to her husband ’s house then the husband has to bear the 
entire cost of her living  in all circumstances  even if she is a lady of 
means . Husband cannot force his wife to share household expenses  
even if wife is capable of maintaining  herself  from her own financial 
resourc es. The responsibility of a husband to financially support his 
wife is to such an extent that when he fails to do so she has a right to 
seek divorce. This obligation of a husband towards his wife as a 
member of his household exists under civil law, Muslim Personal Law 
as well as under Islamic law which creates a right of the wife over her 
husband to provide for her living which he can reasonably bear. 
Hence, based on her legal right, a husband is legally obligated to 
provide to her wife all necessities of l ife irrespective of her own means as 
long as the marriage subsists and even for some time thereafter. In 
Islamic jurisprudence , Al-Kamal -Ibn-al Humam a learned Islamic 
scholar of Fiqh , while dilating upon the obligation of husband 
towards his wife states t hat wife can even rent her own house to her 190 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
husband so that her husband will allocate that house for their 
dwelling (FathulQadir, 111, 321 – 339). When law recognizes that it is 
a right of a wife that her husband must maintain her as long as she 
remains pa rt of his household, there is no concept where a husband can 
claim that he has no financial responsibilities towards his wife for the 
reason that she is a lady of means. When it is within husband’s power 
and reach to comply with the mandate of the law whic h requires him to 
disclose assets in the name of his wife who is living with him as member 
of his household  then he must honour the mandate of the law.  
Plea of mala fide:  
20.  As regards plea of mala fide , only on one occasion in the 
past this Court interfered with the proceedings of the Supreme Judicial 
Council.  This happened in the case of Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry Vs. 
President of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 Supreme Court 61). Even in that case 
the merits of a llegations made in the Presidential Reference were not 
made basis for nullifying the proceedings but this Court noticed quite 
pronounced acts of mala fide on the part of the then President who under 
the then existing provisions of Article 209 (5) of the Co nstitution was the 
sole opinion -maker to initiate the inquiry. What happened on 09.03.2007 
with the then Chief Justice of Pakistan could be said to be one of the 
darkest days in the history of Pakistan’s judiciary. A day when 
independence of judiciary and the judicial institutions were trampled at 
the hands of the then President.  On 09.03.2007, the then President 
called the Chief Justice for a meeting at his office in the morning hours, 
in which the Chief Justice refused to give any assurance that this Cour t 
will not be an impediment in granting judicial clearance of his 
candidature in the upcoming presidential elections . Upon his refusal, t he 
Chief Justice was asked to either resign or face the Reference. The Chief 
Justice refused to resign, upon which he w as not allowed to leave for 
more than five hours. During this time t he Chief Justice was stripped of 191 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
all his powers and a Reference against him was filed  under Article 209 (5) 
of the Constitution . The President appointed a senior judge as the Acting 
Chief Justice, who took oath the same day  and held the meeting of t he 
Supreme Judicial Council at 06:30 p.m. Two Chief Justices of the High 
Courts who were members of the Supreme Judicial Council were 
specially flown in for the meeting even before the Acting Chi ef Justice 
had taken oath of his office. During the hearing of Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry’s  case, this Court summoned  the record of the proceedings of 
the Supreme Judicial Council and after examining the same, noticed that 
no order of convening the Supreme  Judicial Council meeting on 
09.03.2007 had ever been passed on that day. The Council nevertheless 
met in the evening and issued a notice to the deposed Chief Justice for 
his appearance before the Supreme Judicial Council on 13.03.2007 and 
also restrained him from performing his judicial functions. In the 
meanwhile, the Chief Justice was taken to his residence and put under 
house arrest.  
21.  From the contents of the judgment rendered in the case of 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry , it becomes evident that the Presidential 
Reference was not quashed by this Court on the basis of the allegations 
contained therein but because his removal from his office was on 
account of his refusal to give assurance to the then President that his 
candid ature in uniform in the said elections would not be judicially 
invalidated. Hence , the unholy haste in first seeking resignation under 
coercion followed by mistreatment and forcible removal from office and 
then sudden convening of the meeting of the Suprem e Judicial Council 
on one and the same day clearly demonstrated utter mala fide  on the 
part of the then President who himself was the sole opinion maker under 
Article 209(5) of the Constitution to refer the matter to Supreme Judicial 
Council. That was the background that led to the quashment of the 
Reference against the then Chief Justice by this Court. The petitioner 192 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
has not alleged mala fide  against the President but has raised such a 
plea only against the informant and the persons who processed the 
information. The present case is thus not even remotely close to what 
treatment was meted out to the then Chief Justice of Pakistan.  
Maintainability of the Presidential Reference  on the touchstone of 
Article 48 of the Constitution :  
22.  The petitioner has also  sought quashment of the 
Presidential Reference on the ground that it is not maintainable in law. 
In this regard , the petitioner formulated two legal questions in his 
petition. In the first question,  it is stated that by acting on the advice of 
the Prime M inister, the President has contravened the provision of Article 
209 (5) of the Constitution as he did not form his own independent 
opinion in respect of purported misconduct. In the second question , it is 
stated that without obtaining the approval of the F ederal Cabinet, the 
Prime Minister could not have advised the President to file the Reference 
and reliance was placed on the case of Mustafa Impex, Karachi Vs. The 
Government of Pakistan  (PLD 2016 SC 808) in this regard. Both the legal 
questions though con tradict each other, one can say that these pleas 
may have been taken in the alternative without stating so. In order to 
examine the question whether the Reference suffered from any legal 
defect , the true import of Article 48 (1) & (2) of the Constitution n eeds to 
be examined in the light of Article 209 (5) of the Constitution.  
23.  Article 48(1) of the Constitution makes it obligatory upon 
the President to act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or the 
Prime Minister which means it comes into play when any matter relates 
to executive authority of the Federation as Article 99 (1) of the 
Constitution provides that the executive authority of the Federation shall 
be exercised by the Cabinet and the Prime Minister in the name of the 
President. This also indicates that the affairs of the government in the 
parliamentary form of government are exclusively in the hands of the 193 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Prime Minister and the Cabinet as it is them who are collectively 
responsible to the Parliament in terms of Article 90(6) of the 
Consti tution. Then there is a non-obstante  clause contained in Article 
48(2) of the Constitution , which creates an exception to the rule laid 
down in Article 48(1) as it allows the President to act in his own 
discretion in certain matters without taking advice from the Prime 
Minister or the Cabinet. There are few provisions in the Constitution in 
which the President can exercise his powers in his own di scretion. These 
are pro viso to Article 48 (1), Article  48(2), Article 56(2), Article 58(2), 
Article 75(1) (b), Article 91(7), Article 209(5), Article 232(1) and proviso to 
Article 232 (2).  
24.  From the contents of Article 209 (5) of the Constitution , it 
becomes clear that in forming his opinion the President is not dependent 
on the advice of the Prime Minister or the Cabinet . He can form opinion 
on any information that may have come to him from any other source . 
This is so as the Judiciary is separate and  distinct from the Executive 
branch of the Government. It has to remain completely separate and 
uninfluenced by any decision of the Executive in the running of its 
affairs. No doubt the Executive to a certain extent have a role in the 
appointment of judges  of the Superior Judiciary and it also controls their 
perks and privileges, however, once a judge of the Superior Judiciary is 
appointed and his tenure of service stands secured under the 
Constitution, the Executive being the biggest litigant in the countr y was 
not to be conferred with the power to decide against which judge an 
inquiry into his conduct or capacity should be conducted by the 
Supreme Judicial Council. When the Executive s of the Provinces have 
not been entrusted with the power to initiate disc iplinary proceedings 
with regard incapacity or misconduct of the judges of the district 
judiciary then to vest such a power in the Federal Government, when it 
comes to giving directions to the Supreme Judicial Council to initiate an 194 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
inquiry into the conduc t of a judge of the Superior Judiciary was out of 
question. Nonetheless, such a power had to exist in some office in order 
to trigger inquiry against the conduct of the judges of the Superior 
Judiciary, therefore, the Constitution vested such power in the President 
who is the symbol of unity of the State  and not part of the Executive 
branch of the government . So while examining the power of the President 
to call for inquiry under Clause 5 of Article 209 of the Constitution , it 
clearly indicates that the Pre sident has to act in his own discretion  to 
which he is entitled to by virtue of Article 48(2) of the Constitution . 
25.  For the President to act under Article 48(1) the source is the 
advice of the Prime Minister and the Cabinet and for the President to act  
under Article 209(5) the source could be any, there is no limitation. All 
that the executive can do is to place information which it considers 
actionable before the President and then it is for him to either seek any 
further information or consider the in formation already provided 
sufficient enough to refer the matter to the Supreme Judicial Council for 
inquiry without being burdened with the constraints of Article 48 (1) of 
the Constitution. The Executive on its part cannot compel the President 
by advisin g him on the strength of Article 48 (1) of the Constitution to 
send the Reference proposed by it to the Supreme Judicial Council for 
inquiry against a judge of the superior judiciary.  In the present case, 
information with regard to London Properties after verification from the 
income tax records of the Federal Board of Revenue and the office of the 
Land Registry of London was submitted to the Law Minister vide ARU’s 
letter dated 10.05.2019 and on such information the course that was 
adopted was of Article 4 8 (1) of the Constitution which is evident from 
the summary prepared for the Prime Minister. Paragraphs  17 & 18 of the 
summary  for convenience sake are reproduced as follows: -  
 195 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
“17.  Therefore, it is proposed that His Excellency the 
Prime Minister of Paki stan may kindly be pleased to advice 
His Excellency the President of Pakistan under Article 48 of 
the Constitution to form an opinion that Justice Qazi  Faez Isa 
may be guilty of misconduct and hence direct the Supreme 
Judicial Council under Article 209(5) of the Constitution to 
enquire into the matter, according to the law and the 
Constitution, and submit a Report after such enquiry to his 
Excellency the President of Pakistan under Article 209(6) of 
the Constitution.  
18.  This Summary is accompanied by a d raft 
Reference (see Attachment A) proposed to be filed before the 
learned Supreme Judicial Council; which, if found 
appropriate, His Excellency the Prime Minister of Pakistan 
may advice His Excellency the President of Pakistan to sign 
and institute/file th e Reference. ” 
 
26.  From the contents of paragraphs 17 & 18 of the summary , 
it is clear that it was proposed to the Prime Minister to advice the 
President to direct the Supreme Judicial Council to probe into the 
allegations in terms of Article 209 (5) of the Constitution, and after such 
inquiry submit a Report to the President under Article 209 (6) of the 
Constitution.  The summary was then endorsed by the Prime Minister on 
17.05.2019 and was then placed before the President . The President 
acted on such adv ice and signed the Reference  on 20.05.2019,  which 
was then sent to the Supreme Judicial Council to conduct inquiry 
against the petitioner under Article 209 (5) of the Constitution.  Thus, 
nothing was left for the President to decide on his own in terms of A rticle 
209 (5) of the Constitution. From what transpired from the whole 
process , it becomes abundantly clear that the President acted on the 
summary in terms of Article 48(1) of the Constitution and signed the 
Reference considering the advice to be binding  on him. Thus, the 
decision of filing the Reference was not based on President ’s own 
independent opinion. The Reference not being based on President’s own 196 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
independent opinion, the same was submitted to the Supreme Judicial 
Council beyond the contemplation of the provisions of Article 209 (5) of 
the Constitution and thus was not maintainable in law.  
Judicial Accountability : 
27.  The framers of our Constitution believed that the process of 
accountability of Judges of the Superior Judiciary be better left in t he 
hands of an independent body of Judges instead of the Parliament to 
prevent any political pressure on them. The institution of the Supreme 
Judicial Council was thus carved out under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution for the superior judiciary from the judiciary. The 
mechanism provided for judicial accountability in essence is indirectly 
holding oneself accountable in the eyes of the public.  It is compatible 
with the principle of judicial independence, both individual independence 
of the judges and indep endence as a whole of the institution and ensures 
public trust in the judiciary.  By virtue of Article 209 (7) read with Article 
211 of the Constitution the role of scrutinizing the merits of the 
allegations made against a Judge of the Superior Judiciary an d render 
findings thereon is to be exclusively performed by the Supreme Judicial 
Council only . No Court can assume such a role. The Supreme Judicial 
Council is not to be treated as a forum that is dead in its duty to examine 
the merits of the allegations m ade against any judge of the superior 
judiciary. Only plea of mala fide  was allowed to be taken by this Court in 
the case of Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry Vs. President of Pakistan (PLD 
2010 Supreme Court 61)  and that too mala fide was attributed to the 
former President who was then solely entitled to form the opinion as to 
whether Supreme Judicial Council be directed to conduct inquiry against 
a judge of a Superior Judiciary. No such plea was taken against the 
President.  
 197 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
28.  Every judge of the Judiciary, without any distinction, 
deserves the honor, dignity and respect which go with his office. When 
the integrity of a judge of the Superior Judiciary is called in question 
under Article 209 (5) of the Constitution, the n not only his credibility but 
of the entire judicial institution is put at stake. The very commencement 
of the inquiry proceedings against a judge causes psychological pain and 
anguish that continues until his name gets finally cleared. The agony 
may even con tinue for s ome time thereafter. Nonetheless, the sanctity of 
the mechanism provided for overseeing the conduct of judges of the 
Superior judiciary has to be respected as nothing makes the judges of 
the Superior Judiciary immune from the process of accountability. 
Allegations of misconduct had been made against notable justices of 
superior judiciary around the world. Some got impeached and the others 
were cleared.  Every Judge of the Superior Judiciary has to demonstrate 
due deference to the Supreme Judicial Council tha t has been entrusted 
with the Constitutional responsibility to make inquiries into their 
conduct.  This is to be done to assure that judges are performing their 
role as Guardians of the Constitution.  
29.  Where an asset located in the country or abroad, sta nding 
in the name of a judge of the superior judiciary or any member of his 
household which was acquired while he was in office and has not been 
declared to the income tax authorities and such fact becomes public then 
the satisfying sense of finality to th e whole episode would always be 
missing un less the matter is brought to its closure. One can imagine the 
immeasurable damage both to the image of the judge for the remainder 
of his tenure in office and the faith of the people in the accountability 
process when the allegations made in the Reference having extensively 
gone into public domain are not taken to their logical conclusion.  As the 
saying goes ‘the robe magnifies the conduct’.  Leaving the matter without 
inquiry would in fact give rise to a great deal  of skepticism about his 198 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
integrity in the public eye. Judges write many judgments, some of which 
go against the sitting government. This does not mean that Article 209(5)  
of the Constitution  cannot be invoked against a Judge who has delivered 
such judgment s. When it comes to accountability of judges, n o 
distinction can be made amongst them. The jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Judicial Council  also does not depend upon what motivated the 
informant to place the information on the desk of one of the two opinion 
makers who found it to be credible enough to call for an inquiry, nor the 
filing of a Reference becoming public would be enough to vitiate the 
proceedings before the Supreme Judicial Council. The function of the 
Supreme Judic ial Council is to search for the credibility of the 
information rather than the credibility or motivation of the informant, 
therefore, primacy has  to be given to the matter that goes to the heart of 
the controversy .  
Conclusion : 
30.  The petitioner command s great respect in the legal 
fraternity . However, when questions have been raised on the petitioner’s 
financial credibility then it becom es all the more necessary that he and 
his wife, who lives with him as a member of his household, should take 
this as an  opportunity to scrub away the taint.  Proving the allegation 
wrong by making a full disclosure with regard to source of acquisition of 
London Properties located beyond the tax jurisdiction of this country 
would be the only appropriate response to meet the allegations and clear 
the doubts that may have arisen in the minds of the public . For any 
reason, if Article 209 (5) of the Constitution is made ineffective through 
judicial interference , it will die in the hearts and minds of the people for 
whom it was fr amed.  After holding that the Presidential Reference was 
not maintainable in law, wrapping up the se proceedings without 
adopting the course provided in the short order dated 19.06.2020 would 
not have resulted in genuine exoneration for the petitioner.  Keepi ng this 199 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
in mind when this Court in its short order directed the Commissioner 
Income Tax, FBR to probe into the reasons of non -declaration of foreign 
assets and place its report before the Supreme Judicial Council , it in 
effect left it to the Su preme Judicial Council to  consider whether such 
report  contains sufficient information so as to embark upon inquiry as 
envisaged under Article 209(5) of the Constitution.  
 
JUDGE  200 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
 
YAHYA AFRIDI, J. – I have had the pleasure of going 
through the majority judgmen t authored by my worthy brother Umar Ata 
Bandial, J. and agree with him to the extent of declaring the Presidential 
Reference filed against Mr Justice Qazi Feaz Isa to be without lawful 
authority. However, on the grounds to declare the same and on certain 
crucial issues dilated upon by my respected brother Judge, I very 
respectfully differ. Hence, my separate note.  
2.    As for the facts leading up to the present petitions, and the 
valuable submissions of the learned counsel for the parties, the same 
have very aptly been recorded by my worthy brother Umar Ata Bandial J. 
Thus, I would not repeat the narration thereof and adopt the same to be 
read as a part of the present opinion.  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 17 OF 2019  
3.  In Constitution Petition No. 17 of 201 9, Mr Justice Qazi 
Faez Isa, the Petitioner, has invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 ( “Constitution” ), seeking in essence, the 
quashing of the reference filed against him by the President of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan ( “the President” ) under Article 209 of the 
Constitution  (“the Reference”)  before the Supreme Judicial Council 
(“Council”), and all such steps and proceedings taken in pursuance 
thereof.  
Scope of Original Jurisdiction under Article 184(3)  
4.  Before considering the merits of the challenge made to the 
Reference, I would first address the question regarding the 
maintainability of the present petition, and whether in the peculiar 201 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
circumstances of the present case, the Supreme Court of Pakistan 
(“Supreme Court” ) ought to positively exercise its original  constitutional 
jurisdiction vested under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. The said 
provision reads:  
Article 184 of the Constitut ion“(3) Without prejudice 
to the provisions of Article 199, the Supreme Court 
shall, if it considers that a question of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement of any of 
the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part 
II is involved have the power to make an order of the 
nature mentioned in the said Article.”  
 
5.     The above provision determines the very contours of the 
original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court by premising the same on the 
fulfilment of the two condition precedents1: firstly, that the Supreme 
Court considers the matter being of public importance; and secondly, 
that the said matter involves any of the enforcement of the fundamental 
rights provided under Chapter I of Part II of the Constitution 
(“fundamental rights”) . 
6.  What is crucial to note is that Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution vests a distinct and discretionary2 jurisdiction with the 
Supreme Court, wherein it has vast authority to take action suo motu  or 
on receiving petitions. This jurisdiction of the Supreme Co urt should not 
be viewed merely as a forum of redress of aggrieved individuals, but more 
as a repository of authority to address issues that fall within the ambit of 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Importantly, an order passed by the 
Supreme Court unde r this jurisdiction is final and not appealable. The 
only medium of challenge available to a person aggrieved of such an 
order is the limited jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under review.   
                                                             
1 Justice Raja Jilal -Ud-Din and another v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, 
Human Rights, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and others (PLD 2016 Supreme Court 269); Al -Jehad Trust 
v. President of Pakistan PLD 2000 SC  84; Suo Motu Action Regarding Eligibility of Chairman and Members of 
Sindh Public Service Commission etc.: In the matter of 2017 P L C (C.S.) 984.  
2 Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2013 SC 413); Justice 
Khurshid Anwar Bhinder a nd others v. Federation of Pakistan and another (PLD 2010 SC 
483) 202 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
7.   Thus, to maintain judicial discipline and to uphold the rul e 
of law, there is an inherent and dire need for judicial introspection; to 
structure the unfettered discretion of the worthy Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court to constitute benches of the Supreme Court to hear and 
decide cases under Article 184(3), and i n particular, suo motu actions , 
lest the exercise of such jurisdiction may be seen to have been abused. 
However, passing any definite findings on this crucial matter in the 
present petition would not only be swaying from the issue in hand but 
also, on many  counts, will be premature, as the matter is already sub-
judice  before the Supreme Court.3 
Matters of Public Importance  
8.  The scope and extent of the term “matters of public 
importance”, as provided under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, has 
been an i ssue of perennial deliberation of this Court. The judicial 
consensus reached is for the same to encompass any issue affecting the 
legal rights or liabilities of the public or the community at large, and it is 
not restricted to an individual or a group of i ndividuals, how so large the 
group might be.4 It is also settled law that the locus standi  of the 
Petitioner would not be a prime mover for determining this condition 
precedent of invoking Article 184(3) of the Constitution, except in 
exceptional circumstances.5  
Independence of Judiciary   
9.    On careful consideration of the issues agitated b y the 
Petitioner in the present petition, it is noted that the key issue, apart 
from his grievance, in essence, is the independence of the judiciary. To 
                                                             
3  C.M.A. No. 7798 of 2018  
4 Anwar Aziz v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2001 Supreme Court 49), Abdul Wahab v. HBL (2013 SCMR 1383 ) 
and Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 Supreme Court 161); Miss Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 1988 Supreme Court 416); Pakistan Muslim League (N) through Khawaja Muhammad Asif, 
M.N.A. and others v. FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN through Secretary Ministry of Interior and others (PLD 2 007 
Suprem e Court 642)  
5 Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2013 Supreme Court 413)  203 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
understand the jurisprudential purport and importance of this concept, 
one must first appreciate the ve ry essentials of a safe, socially 
progressive, and economically prosperous society. A view I am inclined to 
endorse and posit is that, for such a society, a delicate balance must be 
maintained between the three essential foundational institutions: the 
State, the rule of law, and an accountable government6. Surely, the 
institution of the rule of law has evolved, however, its general gist has 
always remained the same and has been aptly described7 in terms that:  
“In the West, in India, and in the Muslim world,  there was 
a body of preexisting law, sanctified by religion and 
safeguarded by a hierarchy of priests and clerics, that was 
prior to and independent of the state. This law was seen 
as being older, higher, and more legitimate than the 
current ruler and the refore binding on him. That is the 
meaning of the rule of law: even the king or emperor is 
bound by the law and not free simply to do as he pleases.”  
 
10.   In order to establish the rule of law in a society where 
constitutionalism prevails, the mode and m anner of its constitutional 
instantiation have varied amongst the civilized nations. Our 
constitutional history bears witness to a meaningful effort of the 
legislative branch to bolster the rule of law. To this end, one of the 
marked features has been to e stablish an independent judiciary.   
11.  The independence of the judiciary, in effect, is the 
constitutional insulation of the judges, through the structural and 
procedural mechanisms, from undue influences of other organs of the 
State, in particular, the  executive. To ensure such independence, the 
Constitution provides for separation of the three organs of the State, 
thereby aiming to maintain the balanced trichotomy of power in the 
country. In the zeal to insulate the judiciary, one must not forget to 
attend to its accountability. All this is to ensure that no organ of the 
                                                             
6 Francis Fukuyama, The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French 
Revolution (1st edn, 2011) pp.15 -16 
7 Francis Fukuyama, The Origins of P olitical Order: From Prehuman Times to the French 
Revolution (1st edn, 2011) p 121  204 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
State, be it the judiciary, assumes unbounded authority. Both 
independence and accountability of the judiciary must be deliberately 
present, complementing each other in strengthening th e intrinsic fibre of 
the judiciary, in achieving the ultimate goal of establishing the rule of law 
in the society. To propagate and seek independence of judiciary without 
its accountability would amount to imposing judicial autocracy.     
12.  In view of t he above delibrations, independence of the 
judiciary with all its legal, social and political implications is surely a 
"matter of public importance ".8 Hence, the challenge made by the 
petitioner meets the first condition precedent for invoking the jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution.  
 
Fundamental Rights   
13.  Now, moving on to the other constitutional requirement  for 
the positive exercise of the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, 
which is the enforcement of the fundamental rights. The petitioner claims 
to seek enforcement of his fundamental rights to a fair trial9, free 
speech10 and information11, and that,  too, for the larger interest of 
safeguarding the independence of the judiciary.  On the face of it, to deny 
a person the enforcement of the said rights would surely appear to be 
unjust. However, in the peculiar circumstances of the present case, when 
the Petitioner is not just a citizen, but a Judge of the Supreme Court, I 
feel compelled to examine the question: whether a sitting Judge of a 
constitutional court can file a constitutional petition, which not only 
relates to the terms and conditions of his se rvice but also affects the 
terms of the code of conduct that he has sworn to uphold.  
                                                             
8 Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 Supreme Court 161); Al -Jehad Trust v. Lahore High Court (2011 
SCMR 1688);  Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry  v. President of Pakistan through 
Secretary and others (PLD 2010 SC 61).  
9 Article 10 -A of the Constitution  
10 Article 19 of the Constitution  
11 Article 19 -A of the Constitution  205 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
 
Majesty of an Oath  
14.  The Petitioner is a Judge of the Supreme Court and has 
assumed the office by taking an oath under the Constitution12. The oath 
declares; inter alia , that “I will abide by the code of conduct issued 
by the Supreme Judicial Council”  (“code of conduct” )13. 
15.  The form and meaning of oaths vary across jurisdictions, 
yet it has over time, evolved into a recognized "natural and universal 
custom".14 At its core is always the deterring force to ensure the truth of 
utterance or fulfilment and performance of the promise so made by the 
declarant.  In our constitutional framework, neither the overriding sway 
of the fundamental rights can be diminished, nor  can the importance of 
an oath be rendered insignificant. Each one has a constitutional niche . 
On the one hand, we have the fundamental rights that have been 
conferred with constitutional protection to be jealously guarded against 
any invasion of law or ac ts of the executive.15 On the other hand, on 
taking an oath, a Judge accepts to assume a constitutional position with 
all its trappings; be it the privileges and facilities attached therewith or 
the duties and obligations.  Accordingly, where the declaratio n of his 
oath commands him to avoid an act, the sitting Judge is constitutionally 
obligated under the oath to abstain therefrom. This act of self -restraint 
by the sitting Judge would not infringe or compromise his fundamental 
rights but only moderate the e xercise of enforcing the same. And thus, 
once a person takes an oath under the Constitution, he by his conduct 
subjects all rights and privileges available to him under the Constitution 
and the law, which may be contrary to or not in consonance with the 
behaviour expected of a sitting Judge, as prescribed under the code of 
conduct. Consequently, the fundamental rights of a sitting Judge shall 
                                                             
12 Articles 178 and 194 read with Third Schedule of the Constitution.  
13 Third Sc hedule of the Constitution read with Article 209(8) of the Constitution  
14 Helen Silvino, ‘The Oath’  [1959] (68)7 Yale Law Review 1329   
15 Article 8, 199, 184(3) of the Constitution  206 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
remain eclipsed, so far as their enforcement is not in consonance with 
the terms of his oath.  
16.  The limitation on a person to invoke the original jurisdiction 
of the constitutional courts for the enforcement of his fundamental rights 
in our country is not alien to the Constitution. Some of the striking 
instances in this respect are:  the members of “f orces” cannot claim any 
fundamental right in the matters relating to their service 16; those 
employed in "service of Pakistan" are debarred from invoking extra -
ordinary Constitutional jurisdiction of superior courts concerning the 
terms and conditions of ser vice17; and in some cases relating to terms 
and conditions of service of the civil servants, this Court has observed 
that even if the order of the competent authority is without jurisdiction, 
writ jurisdiction would still not be available to him.18 
 
Code of Conduct  
17.      As fairly commented by an eminent jurist, the essential 
expectation from a Judge is “judicial virtue -phronesis : sobriety, wisdom, 
courage, modesty, and the capacity to resist the siren of notoriety for 
righting all wrongs regardless of one ’s formal jurisdiction to do so”.19 As 
for our jurisdiction, the judicial virtues  of a constitutional Judge have 
been articulated in the code of conduct. A careful review thereof reveals 
that on the one hand, a Judge is bestowed with the sacred constitutional 
trust, and on the other hand, he is obligated "to present before the public 
an image of Justice of the Nation,…..Equally, it imposes patterns of 
behaviour, which are a hallmark of distinction of a Judge among his 
fellow -men".20 And in doing so, demands from him, amongst other 
                                                             
16 Article 8, 199 (5) of the Constitution  
17 Article 212 and (other restrictions imposed by law)  
18 Syed Arshad Ali and others  Versus  Pakistan Telecommunication Company Ltd. and others 
(2008 S C M R 314); I.A. Sharwani and others versus Government of Pakistan through 
Secretary, Finance Division, Islamabad and others (1991  S C M R 1041)     
19 Lawrence B. Solum, "Virtue Jurisprudence: A virtue -centred Theory of Judging" (2004).  
20 Preamble to the code of conduct  207 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
attributes: to be “cautious and forbearing”21; “to keep hi s conduct in all 
things, official and private, free from impropriety”22; to avoid publicity 
and “not engage in public controversy ”23; and most important and 
relevant to the present matter, "endeavour to avoid, as far as possible, 
either on his behalf or on b ehalf of others, in litigation".24   
18.     Admittedly, there is no absolute bar on a sitting Judge to 
resort to litigation. The command provided in the code of conduct is for 
the worthy Judges to "endeavour to avoid" litigation in person or a 
representati ve capacity. Thus all possible efforts are to be made by the 
worthy Judges to avoid litigation, and resorting to the same should only 
be made in dire need, and that too, as a last inevitable option. Caution 
should always govern the need. In case, a sitting  Judge  having no other 
possible alternative enters into litigation, he has to tread very carefully 
and remain "cautious and forbearing" to ensure that his actions do not 
infringe upon the respect and dignity attributable to the esteemed office 
of the Judge . The object is to avert any chance of him being placed in a 
position which leads to his conduct being seen as unbecoming of a 
Judge.  
19.    I appreciate the repeated assertions of the worthy counsel 
of the Petitioner that he is under the strict instructi ons of his client to 
vehemently assert that the petition was moved for safeguarding the 
independence of the judiciary and that he had accepted the brief for the 
same reason. However, from the Petitioner’s point of view, the subject 
matter of the present li tigation, in pith and substance, revolves around 
allegations of impropriety, no matter how baseless it may seem. This 
being so, seeking to enforce the fundamental rights to challenge the very 
charges against him to be ultra vires,  and that too without with standing 
                                                             
21 Article II of code of conduct  
22 Article III of code of conduct  
23 Article V of code of conduct  
24 Article VI of code of conduct  208 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
the prescribed enquiry would negate the very spirit of the oath taken by 
the petitioning Judge.  
Conclusion  
20.      In view of the above deliberations, I am of the considered 
opinion that the present petition is not maintainable. It starkly lacks  one 
of the essential conditions  – enforcement of fundamental rights – for the 
Supreme Court to invoke its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution. More so, when the positive exercise of the said 
jurisdiction by this Court would in effect thaw the process of 
accountability of one holding a public office, be it a Judge of the Supreme 
Court. Accordingly, the instant petition being bereft of essential 
constitutional requirements is non -maintainable, and thus, must fail.  
 
CONSTITUTION PE TITIONS NO. 19 TO 30, 32 AND 34 OF 2019  
21.     The Petitioners in these petitions include eminent lawyers 
and the premier elected bodies representing the entire lawyers' 
community of our country. Most strikingly, though they all have 
independently moved t his Court, yet they have in unison challenged the 
very legality of the Reference filed by the worthy President against Justice 
Qazi Faez Isa and the steps taken in pursuance thereof.  
 
The Supremacy of the Supreme Judicial Council  
 
22.      I will first address the preliminary objection raised by the learned 
counsel of the Federation regarding the lack of jurisdiction of this Court 
to entertain the present petitions given the bar provided under Article 
211 of the Constitution. The exclusive j urisdiction of the Council to 
proceed against a sitting constitutional Judge under Article 211 of the 
Constitution should stand supreme unless the same is effectively 
challenged on the grounds of coram non judice , mala fide  and want of 209 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
jurisdiction.25  To this end, I am not going to comment upon the merits of 
the charges levelled against Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa in the Reference, as 
the same falls in the exclusive domain of the Council. Similarly, another 
contested issue, the scope and extent of the culpabil ity of a sitting Judge 
qua the actions and inactions of his spouse and children, is a matter 
which ought to have been expressly dealt with in the code of conduct. In 
absence of a clear provision therein, this issue, in my opinion, has to be 
left open for d etermination by the Council; the authority competent 
under the Constitution26 to determine and prescribe the terms of the 
conduct of a sitting judge.    
23.  Given the above, my present opinion would test the 
challenge to the Reference on its constitutional  plane, as to  its 
maintainability and validity, and not on the credence or merit of the 
alleged misconduct. In the circumstances, any directions of this Court 
setting steps for the Council to follow, and that too, without hearing the 
learned counsel for th e parties on the challenge made on the jurisdiction 
and bona fide of the Council, would be premature and offend the 
principle of natural justice. Moreover, a direction of this Court pre -
determining a course of action for the Council to follow, when the 
Constitution already provides a clear mandate for the same, would  
amount to usurping the exclusive constitutional jurisdiction vested in it 
under Article 211 of the Constitution.  
 
Maintainability of the Petitions under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  
 
24.    In essence, these petitions seek the enforcement of the 
fundamental rights i.e. access to justice and a fair and independent 
judiciary. These issues, as stated earlier, have been treated by this Court 
                                                             
25 Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan through 
Secretary and others (PLD 2010 SC 61)     
26 Under Article 209(8) of the Constitution  210 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
as “matters of public importance”. Moreover, it has also by now been 
settled that for seeking matters of public importance relating to the 
enforcement of fundamental rights before the original constitutional 
jurisdiction of this Court, the general petitioner need not be an aggrieved 
person in the strict  sense.27 And more importantly, the present 
Petitioners, unlike a sitting Judge of the superior court, are not shackled 
by any legal restrain of a constitutional oath to invoke the original 
constitutional jurisdiction of this Court. Resultantly, the present  
Petitioners fulfil the two mandated condition precedents to invoke the 
constitutional court under Article 184(3). Given the above, the objection 
of the Federation to the maintainability of the petitions is devoid of merit, 
and thus the same is dispelled.  
 
Constitutional Requirements for a Presidential Reference  
25.    Our written Constitution envisages a Federation with a 
parliamentary form of government, where the executive authority of the 
Federation vests with the Cabinet headed by the worthy Prime Mini ster, 
and all its acts are to be expressed in the name of the worthy President.28 
The worthy Prime Minister personifies the executive authority of the 
Federal Government, while the worthy President figures as the apolitical 
head of the State, unifying the f ederating units, and maintaining the 
balance of the trichotomy of power between the three organs of the State. 
The role of the worthy President in the executive affairs of the 
Government, under the Constitution, as a general rule29, is bound by the 
“advice”  of the Cabinet. However, the Constitution provides for 
exceptions to the above rule30, where the worthy President has been 
mandated to exercise his discretion or form his independent opinion on 
                                                             
27 Al-Jehad Trust v. President of Pakistan PLD 2000 SC  84; Suo Motu Action Regarding 
Eligibility of Chairman and Members of Sindh Public Service  Commission 2017 P L C (C.S.) 
984), Miss Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416)  Pakistan Muslim 
League (N) through Khawaja Muhammad Asif  v. Feder ation of Pakistan (PLD 2007 
Supreme Court 642)   
28 Article 91 of the Constitution  
29 Article 48(1) of the Constitution  
30 Article 48(2) of the Constitution  211 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
matters, and then act accordingly. Similarly, while performing  some 
“other constitutional” functions, the Constitution also dictates for the 
worthy President not to be bound by the said "advic e".   
26.  As far as the decision of the worthy President to send the 
Reference against the Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa under Art icle 209 of the 
Constitution is concerned, the learned counsel representing the 
Federation and defending the Reference, vehemently contended that the 
same was to be sent on the "advice" of the worthy Prime Minister and 
that it was binding upon the worthy P resident. On the other hand, the 
learned counsel for the Petitioners have vehemently argued to the 
contrary.  
27.    Before commenting on the above -narrated legal issue, it 
would be appropriate to first contextualize the facts leading to the 
sending of the Reference to the Council. Based on the complaint of Mr 
Dogar, a summary was prepared and then moved by the Ministry of Law, 
and finally placed before the worthy President, with the "advice" of the 
worthy Prime Minister, in terms that:  
“Subject: REFERENCE U NDER ARTICLE 209(5) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF 
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN  
21. In terms of Article 209(5), read with Article 48 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, the  President is advised to form an opinion on 
the proposals contained in paras 17 and 18 of the summary, and direct the 
Supreme Judicial Council to inquire into the allegations of misconduct against Mr 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. Accordingly, 
draft reference (Attachment A) may p leased be signed.  
        (-sd-) 
       IMRAN KHAN  
PM’s Office U.O. No. 1338/Secy(PM)/2019 dated 17 -05-2019. 
 
The worthy President signed and approved the summary with his 
handwritten note in terms that:  
22. The Prime Minister’s advice at Para 21 of the Summary is approved and 
the Reference signed. (handwritten noting)   
                   (-sd-) President  
    
28.    The above noting on the summary reflects the following: 
firstly, that the "advice" of the wort hy Prime Minister was unconditionally 212 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
approved by the worthy President; secondly, the approval so made by the 
worthy President was without his independent application of mind on the 
“information” contained in the summary regarding the alleged 
misconduct ag ainst Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa; and finally that, there was 
no formulation of an "opinion" by the worthy President regarding the 
sufficiency of the “information” to constitute misconduct against the 
sitting Judge of the Supreme Court to file a reference.  
29.  Given the above factual background, the constitutional 
mandate of the President to receive information regarding the alleged 
misconduct of a Judge of a constitutional court, and the ultimate 
decision to file a reference against him before the Council i s governed by 
Clause (5) of Article 209 of the Constitution, and it reads:  
“(5) If, on information from any source , the Council or the 
President is of the opinion that a Judge of the Supreme Court 
or of a High Court - 
(a) may be incapable of properly perfor ming the duties 
of his office by reason of physical or mental 
incapacity; or  
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct,  
the President shall direct the Council to , or the Council may, 
on its own motion, inquire into the matter .”  
      (emphasis provided)  
 
30.  A careful reading of the above provision, inter alia ,  
strikingly begs the following comments on a presidential reference: 
firstly, that the "information" regarding the alleged misconduct of a 
constitutional Judge, plays a very crucial and determining ro le in the 
entire decision making of sending a reference against the said Judge to 
the Council; secondly, the said "information" may emanate from "any" 
source; thirdly, on receipt of the said information, the worthy President 
has to form his opinion, or whe ther to proceed with the sending of the 
reference or otherwise; and finally, that a Reference sent by the worthy 
President has a special status, as compared to any other reference filed 
before the Council, as an inquiry thereon is mandatory.  213 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
31.  To legally appreciate the issue under review, the focus 
should now be on the “advice” of the worthy Prime Minister to the worthy 
President to file a reference against an honourable Judge of the superior 
judiciary for his alleged misconduct.  
32.  In this r egard, the contention of the learned counsel 
representing the Federation, defending the Reference was that; sending a 
Reference against a Judge of a constitutional court to the Council was an 
executive act, and it came within the purview of the general rul e, 
envisaged under clause (1) of Article 48 read with clause (1) of Article 91 
of the Constitution and clause 15A read with item 33 of the Schedule IV 
of the Rules of Business, 1973 (“Rules of Business”) ; and thus the 
“advice” of the worthy Prime Minister was binding upon the worthy 
President. However, the learned counsel for the Petitioners vehemently 
argued to the contrary.  
33.   The legal purport of clause (5) of Article 209 of the 
Constitution portrays a picture contrary to the contention of the learned  
counsel for the Federation. The constitutional mandate of the worthy 
President, under the said provision, is to form an “opinion”: whether 
misconduct is made out against the Judge, and if so, then a reference is 
to be sent for an enquiry to the Council. T his decision or for that matter, 
the "opinion" is to be based on the "information" received from "any 
source". The "advice" of the worthy Prime Minister when received by the 
worthy President, would only be an "information" received from a 
"source", and thu s lose its efficacy as an "advice", within the 
contemplation of clause (1) of Article 48 of the Constitution. In such 
circumstances, the "advice" of the worthy Prime Minister would then fall 
within the exception to the general rule, as envisaged under clau se (2) of 
Article 48 of the Constitution; where the worthy President would have to 
apply his independent mind on the matter and then act accordingly.  214 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
34.  The contention that the “advice” of the worthy Prime 
Minister to file a reference against Judge of a constitutional court was 
binding on the worthy President would have been reasonably plausible 
only if we omit to read the words, "If, on information from any source," 
prefacing Article 209 (5). It is only then that the "advice" of the Prime 
Minister would maintain its constitutional identity, and not be 
categorized as an "information" reaching the worthy President from a 
"source". This, I am sure, could not be the intent of the legislature, as 
every word of the Constitution has a purpose and meaning to it. No word 
is to be rendered redundant. More so, when the words so provided in the 
Constitution, given their ordinary meaning, convey no absurd purpose or 
meaning.31 In such circumstances, the will of the legislature, as reflected 
in the letter of the law, has  to be respected and abided. Thus, in the face 
of the command of the Constitution, any contrary provision contained in 
the Rules of Business, as relied upon by the learned counsel for the 
Federation, would have to yield and be declared ultra vires of the 
Constitution.  
35.    One cannot lose sight of the special constitutional status 
assigned to a Presidential Reference under Article 209(5) of the 
Constitution. Unlike other complaints received by the Council, which can 
be discarded without any formal enquiry , a Presidential Reference, 
however, commands a mandatory enquiry by the Council. This being so, 
the decision -making process leading to the worthy President sending a 
reference to the Council under Article 209(5) deserves careful and 
thorough deliberation by the worthy President. Given the facts relating to 
the opinion formed by the Worthy President in the present case, I have 
noted that it demonstrates grossly negligent attitude lacking any 
application of mind. Instead of applying his independent mind to the 
                                                             
31 Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources v. 
Durrani Ceramics (PLD 2015 Supreme Court 354); Baz Muhammad Kakar v. Federation of 
Pakistan through Ministry of Law and Justice (PLD 2012 Supreme Court 923); Shahid Nab i 
Malik v. Chief Election Commissioner ( PLD 1997 Supreme Court 32)      215 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
seriously  important matter placed before him, the worthy President 
blindly accepted and followed the "advice" of the worthy Prime Minister to 
send the Reference to the Council. The formation of the “opinion” by the 
worthy President was, it seems, muddie d by the blatant and uncalled for 
obedience to the “advice” of the worthy Prime Minister.  
36.      Accordingly, for the reasons discussed above, I hold that 
the worthy President has grossly failed to discharge his constitutional 
obligations as ordained und er Article 209(5) of the Constitution.  Since 
the very foundation of the "opinion" formed by the worthy President is 
based on the non -exercise of lawful jurisdiction, therefore the 
'superstructure' built thereon, the signing and sending of the Reference 
to the Council would lack legal sanction and be without lawful authority, 
and thus ultra vires  of the Constitution . Consequently, the proceedings 
before the Council in furtherance of the Reference against Mr Justice 
Qazi Faez Isa stand abated.   
 
Legal validi ty of Information Obtained Unlawfully  
37.    One must be mindful of the fact that even the above -
recorded findings declaring the Reference to be without lawful authority 
are not to be understood or construed to belittle or diminish the 
authority vested in the Council to proceed on the information of alleged 
misconduct of a sitting Judge.  
38.  It is also pertinent to note that any “information” capable of 
being translated into evidence could be measured on the principles of the 
law of evidence; relevance and  admissibility, and not the source of such 
information or evidence, unless it is hit by an exclusionary rule. It is by 
now a well -recognized principle in Common Law jurisdictions, in 
particular in the United Kingdom32, Canada33, and India34 that, when 
                                                             
32 The point was put starkly by Crompton J. in England in the 19th century: “It matters not 
 how you get it; if you steal it even it would be admissible in evidence..” R. v. Leatham 
 (1861), 8 Cox C.C. 498, at 501, [1861 -73] All E.R. Rep. Ext. 1646; R v Sang, [1979] 2 All ER 
 1222; Kuruma v. The Queen (PLD 1957 Privy Council 32);  Jones v the University of 216 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
such information is relevant, the admissibility thereof would follow. 
However, there is a divergence of opinion witnessed in the judicial 
pronouncements germinating from the United States of America35, which 
I, with great respect, do not subscribe to. The judici al stance taken 
across the Atlantic to disregard taintedly obtained evidence would only 
be legally palatable if viewed in their territorial context, and that too with 
the constitutional prohibition to search and seize properties under the 
Fourth Amendment.  
39.  Now reverting to Clause (5) of Article 209 of the 
Constitution, the information, though obtained and disclosed unlawfully, 
if admitted would fall within the mischief of “information from any 
source”. And thus, it would remain the discretion of the Co uncil to 
decide; whether based on the said admitted information, it would suo 
motu proceed against a sitting Judge or otherwise. Any finding by this 
Court on the probative value of the information or any direction to the 
Council to act in a particular mann er, and that too at this stage, would 
not only be premature but also amount to usurping the constitutional 
domain of the Council.   
Information in Mr Dogar’s Complaint  
40.    Much has been stated about Mr Dogar and his complaint of 
10-4-2019 (“Complaint”) . His lack of standing, as a journalist; his mala 
fide in filing the complaint against the wife of Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa 
owning foreign property in the United Kingdom; he being a proxy of 
disgruntled elements in the ruling establishment; and most striki ngly 
that, the information regarding the foreign property of Mrs Sarina Isa 
                                                                                                                                                                      
 Warwick, [2003] 3 All ER 760[2003] 3 All ER 760;  Imerman v Tchenguiz and others ; 
 Imerman v Imerman, [2011] 1 All ER 555 [2011] 1 All ER 555.         
33 Propp v. Propp, 2014 SICCA 5, [2014] S.J. No. 12, at para. 41 (Sask. C.A.)  
34 Magraj Patodia vs R. K. Birla and Ors (1971 AIR 1295, 1971 SCR (2) 118); RM Malkani vs. 
 the State of Maha rashtra (AIR 1973 SC 157);  Umesh Kumar v. State of Andhra Pradesh 
 (AIR 2014 SC 1106)     
35 Boyd v. the United States (116 U.S. 616(1886); Weeks v. United States (232 U.S. 383(1914); 
 U.S. v. Leon (468 U.S. 897, 104 S.Ct. 3405 (1984); Mass. v. Sheppard (46 8 U.S. 981 (1984); 
 Brewer v. Williams, 430 U.S. 387, 97 S.Ct. 1232 (1976); Terry v. Ohio, 382 U.S. 1 (1968); 
 Adams v. Williams, 407 U.S. 143 (1972).    217 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
stated in his complaint was obtained by surveillance by the intelligence 
agencies on the directions of the Federal Government.  
41.   The foreign property highlighted in the Complai nt has been 
admitted by Mr Justice Qazi Feaz Isa to be owned by his wife, Mrs Sarina 
Isa. In view thereo f, any negative aspersions against Mr Dogar, at least to 
the extent of the adjudication of the present petitions, are legally 
insignificant, if not enti rely irrelevant.  
Unlawful Surveillance  
42.  It is universally recognized that unlawful surveillance of any 
person, much less a sitting Judge of a constitutional court is to be 
seriously deprecated. Our Constitution exalts the right to privacy36 and 
guarantees that every citizen is to be dealt with in accordance with the 
law.37 Thus, any action by the executive, without the backing of the law, 
violating or undermining the independence of the judiciary would 
constitute the offence of subversion of the Constitution, entailing severe 
penal consequences for both the actors and abettors.  
43.   The Petitioners were able to place on record, sufficient 
material to demonstrate strong reservations of the ruling party in 
Government and its political allies a gainst the judicial pronouncement 
authored by Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa.38 In such circumstances, had the 
information regarding the foreign property owned by the family members 
of Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa not been freely and legally accessible, then it 
would  have sufficed to establish the allegation of obtaining the said 
information through surveillance. To this end, the learned counsel for the 
Petitioners was initially able to successfully set up their stance. However, 
the learned counsel for the Federation,  in rebuttal, was able to 
demonstrate that the information regarding any property in the United 
Kingdom, including the one owned by the family member of Mr Justice 
                                                             
36 Article 14 of the Constitution  
37 Article 4 of the Constitution        
38 In SUO MOTU CASE NO.7 OF 2017 (PLD 2019 Supreme Court 318)  218 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
Qazi Faez Isa could be retrieved or accessed through internet searche s. 
And further, placing  on record, a copy of the title of the said foreign 
property, pre -dating the Complaint, and that too, from the relevant and 
competent authority under the laws of the United Kingdom 
(“Certificate” )39  confirmed that the requisite search under the laws of the 
United Kingdom had already been carried out.  Hence, the stance of the 
Petitioners regarding mala fide  of the Federal Government did not cross 
the legal threshold to saddle it with the responsibili ty of unlawfully 
obtaining the said information by surveillance.   
Asset Recovery Unit’s Legal Status  
44.    The legal sanction for establishing the Asset Recovery Unit (“ARU”)  
has also been a matter of contest between the parties. The question that 
arises  is whether this controversy is so integral to the impugned 
Reference that it must be decided. I am in such a situation reminded of 
Justice Frankfurter’s dictum: "[t]hese are perplexing questions. Their 
difficulty admonishes us to observe the wise limitati ons on our function 
and to confine ourselves to deciding only what is necessary to the 
disposition of the immediate case."40 In the present case, the controversy 
in hand can be resolved based on the legality of the actions taken by the 
Chairman of ARU, pass ing a definite finding on the legal status of ARU 
would be unnecessary, if not legally incorrect.     
Verification of Mr Dogar’s Complaint from Income Tax Officials  
45.  The steps taken for the verification of the information 
contained in the Complaint fro m the Income Tax authorities in Pakistan 
can be summarised in terms that the Law Minister41, on being informed 
about the allegations contained in the Complaint, directed the Chairman 
ARU, to seek verification of the ownership of the said foreign property 
                                                             
39 Certificate dated 26.04.2019 (CMA No.3321/2020)  
40 Whitehouse v. Illinois Central R. Co., 349 U.S. 366, 372 -73; On the same line Justice 
Robert said, “if it is not necessary to decide more, it is necessary not to decide more.”  PDK 
Labs. Inc. v. United States DEA, 360 U.S. App. D.C. 344, 362 F.3d 786 (2004)  
41 Direction/advice of the Law Minister to Chairman, ARU in meeting dated 16.04.2019 
recorded in letter No. 1 -11/20 -19-ARU dated 10.05.2019  219 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
from the income tax returns of Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa or his wife, Mrs 
Sarina Is a. In pursuance of the directions of the Law Minister, Chairman 
ARU42 sought confidential information from the then Chairman Federal 
Board of Revenue, who, without any protest, complied blindly thereto43; 
and particulars of their income tax returns filed and maintained under 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 (“Ordinance”) were discl osed to Chairman 
ARU by Chairman Federal Board of Revenue44; and finally,  the said 
confidential information was further passed on by Chairman ARU to the 
Law Minister and was then made the basis for the Reference.45 
Confidentiality of Income Tax Returns and t he Penal Consequence for its 
breach  
46.    The above -stated conduct of the Law Minister, the 
Chairman ARU, the then Chairman Federal Board of Revenue and the 
complying Income Tax Officials, when viewed in terms of the provisions 
of the Ordinance, raises se rious legal concerns regarding their said 
actions. To start with, the Ordinance expressly provides for 
confidentiality of information recorded in the income tax returns of an 
assessee.46 The income tax officials, who are the custodian of the said 
informatio n, are commanded under the law to jealously guard the same, 
and in case of any breach thereof, the offender is to face penal 
consequences under the Ordinance.47 However, this confidentiality of 
information would in no way prevent the competent income tax of ficials 
to seek from the assessee, the source of funds48 for the acquisition of any 
assets. In case, the competent income tax official is not satisfied with the 
explanation for the source of funds, he can departmentally proceed 
against the assessee for non -declaration and misdeclaration of assets 
under the enabling provisions of the Ordinance.  
                                                             
42 Letter No. 1 -11/2019 -ARU dated 22 .04.2019  
43 F.No.2(99)Int. Taxes/EOI/2019 dated 10.05.2019  
44 FBR disclosed information to ARU vide letter No. F. No. 2(99)Int. Taxes/EOI/2019 dated 
10.05.2019  
45 ARU further pass on the information to Law Minister vide letter No. 1 -11/2019 -ARU dated 
20.05.20 19 
46 Section 216 of Ordinance        
47 Sections198 and 199 of Ordinance      
48 Sections 111 and 216 Ordinance  220 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
47.  In the present case, once the Income Tax Officials had information 
regarding the alleged undeclared assets of Mrs Sarina Isa, they despite 
having ample authority to legally proceed against her under the 
Ordinance, opted to proceed unlawfully by disclosing confidential 
information to unauthorized persons. Thus, prima facie , keeping in view 
the chain of directions emanating from the Law Minister leading to the 
unlawf ul disclosures of confidential information by the Income Tax 
Officials, all persons at different rungs of the governmental hierarchy, 
who were part of this unlawful disclosure of confidential information, 
have exposed themselves to penal prosecution for co mmission of offences 
under Section 189 read with Section 199 and section 216 (1) of the 
Ordinance.  
Immunity from Penal Consequences for Breach of Confidentiality  
48.  The worthy counsel representing the Federation contended 
that the information so directed  to be obtained, disclosed and received 
was immune from penal consequences, as it was in furtherance of an 
enquiry against a “public servant”, which was legally protected from 
prosecution under Section 216(p) of the Ordinance. For clarity, let us 
review th e penal as well as the asserted saving provisions under the 
Ordinance, which read:  
198. Prosecution for unauthorized disclosure of information 
by a public servant. --A person who discloses any particulars in 
contravention of 1[sub-section IB of section 107 or] section 216 
shall commit an offence punishable on conviction with a fine 2[of 
not less than five hundred thousand rupees] or imprisonment for 
a term not exceeding 3[one year], or both.  
199. Prosecution for abetment.  – Where a person 4[knowingly 
and willfully] aids, abets, assists, incites or induces another 
person to commit an offence under this Ordinance, the first -
mentioned person shall commit an offence punishable on 
conviction with a fine or imprisonment for a term not  exceeding 
three years, or both.  
216. Disclosure of information by a public servant. --(1) All 
particulars contained in:  
(2) Any statement made, return furnished, or 
accounts or documents produced under the 
provision of this Ordinance; …….  221 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
shall be confidential  and no public servant save as provided in 
this Ordinance may disclose any such particulars.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Qanun -e-
1[Shahadat], 1984 (P.O. Order No. 10 of 1984, or any other law 
for the time being in force, no court or other  authority shall be, 
save as provided in this Ordinance, entitled to require any public 
servant to produce before it any return, accounts, or documents 
contained in, or forming a part of this records relating to any 
proceedings under this Ordinance, or any  records of the Income 
Tax Department generally, or any part thereof, or to give evidence 
before it in respect thereof.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section (1) shall preclude the 
disclosure of any such particulars -- 
  ……….  
(p) as may be required by any of ficer or department 
of the Federal Government or a Provincial 
Government for an investigation into the conduct 
and affairs of any public servant, or to a Court in 
connection with any prosecution of the public 
servant arising out of any such investigation;  
49.      A careful reading of the above provisions, brings forth the 
intent of the legislature to seriously protect the confidentiality of 
information recorded in the income tax returns of an assessee. This 
intent is evident from the said information being  expressly excluded from 
judicial scrutiny and more importantly declaring such breach of 
confidentiality to be an offence following penal consequences.  
50.    Apart from the strict statutory protection of the said 
information, one must appreciate that the Law Minister and the 
Chairman ARU lacked the mandate to initiate an enquiry against a 
sitting Judge of the Supreme Court, as the legal domain to do so rests 
solely with the Council, and none other. Even otherwise, the information 
relating to income tax ret urns of Mrs Sarina Isa would not fall within the 
scope of the purported enquiry of a "public servant" envisaged under 
Section 216(3)(p) of the Ordinance. The particulars of Mrs Sarina Isa's 
income tax returns would remain immune from such permissible 
disclosures and thus retain its confidentiality. Surely, the legal position 
would have been otherwise, had Mrs Sarina Isa consented to allow such 
disclosure, which she did not or had the competent tax authorities 
initiated proceedings against her under the Ordi nance, which they never 222 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
did. This being so, passing any directions by this Court to the tax 
authorities with specific time spans and setting the procedure for the 
Income Tax officials to proceed against Mrs Sarina Isa, would amount to 
parallel legislation,  when the Ordinance provides a framework for all 
such matters. More so, when such  directions have been made against a 
person who was not a party to the present petitions. In the 
circumstances, any such directions of this Court would amount to 
prosecute her , and that too without providing her with an effective 
opportunity of hearing.   
51.   It was further vehemently asserted that the Law Minister 
was immune from criminal prosecution under Article 248 of the 
Constitution. It is by now judicially settled that there is no protection 
extended to holders of constitutional office from prosecution for their 
illegal acts.49 Hence, no constitutional immunity from prosecution would 
be available to the Law Minister or any other Federal Minister for issuing 
directions to  obtain legally confidential information, and that too in the 
face of the said direction to an officer of the Government to commit an 
offence under the Ordinance.   
Administrative and Penal Consequences for Passing on Confidential 
Information  
52.    The di rection of the Law Minister and the Chairman ARU to 
solicit, obtain and receive, confidential information regarding the income 
tax returns of Mr Justice Qazi Faez Isa and Mrs Sarina Isa, prima facia, 
exposes them  to criminal prosecution for having committed an offence 
under the section 199 read with sections 198 and 216(1) of the 
Ordinance. Similarly, the fact that the then Chairman Federal Board of 
Revenue and the Income Tax Officials having not refused the illegal 
directions of the Law Minister and Chairman ARU, and passing on 
                                                             
49 Ch. Zahur Ilahi's Case (PLD 1975 SC 383); Aman Ullah Khan's Case (PLD 1990 SC 1092); Nawabzada 
Muhammad Umar Khan's Case (1992 SCMR 2450); Baz Muhammad Kakar v. Federation of Pakistan through 
Ministry of Law and Justice, Islamabad (PLD 2012  SC  870); Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muham mad 
Chaudhry  v. President of Pakistan through Secretary and others (PLD 2010 Supreme Court 61)  223 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
confidential information to them, prima facia , exposes them not only to 
departmental action but also to penal consequences under section 198 
read with section 216(1) of the Ordinance.   
53.  Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, the present 
Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue is directed to ensure that the entire 
record of the present case is placed before the Federal Board of Revenue 
to proceed under the law, against the Law Minister, the C hairman ARU, 
the then Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue and all the concerned 
Income Tax Officers qua their role in ordering to inquire into, solicit, 
disclose and receive confidential information relating to the income tax 
returns of Mr Justice Faez Isa and Mrs Sarina Isa.  
54.    Keeping in view the sensitive nature of the proceedings, the 
present Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue is to further appraise the 
Federal Board of Revenue to strictly follow the law in letter and spirit, 
without fear or favour, and most importantly, to independently apply its 
mind to the facts of the matter, lest the fundamental right to a fair trial 
under Article 10 -A of the Constitution of the Law Minister, the Chairman 
ARU, the then Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue and the d elinquent 
Income Tax Officials is violated. A compliance report of the above action 
of the Federal Board of Revenue is to be submitted by present Chairman, 
Federal Board of Revenue under his signature to the Registrar of the 
Supreme Court not later than fi fteen days from receipt of this Judgment. 
The Registrar of this Court is directed to transmit a copy of this 
Judgment to the Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue for compliance.  
Conclusion  
55.  The present constitutional challenge made by the 
Petitioners re presenting the entire lawyers' community of the country, 
have been able to successfully establish that the worthy President 
grossly failed to exercise his discretion as mandated under the 
Constitution and, thus, the entire process built thereon leading to the 224 
Const. P.17 of 2019, etc.  
 
filing of the Reference was in violation of the law and the Constitution. At 
the same time, it is intrinsically important to note that, the independence 
of our judiciary is not so fragile as to be effectively threatened or 
undermined by complaints. Acc ountability of Judges is and shall remain, 
the essential lifeblood for a democratically vibrant society. Indeed, 
indiscriminate, lawful and transparent accountability of Judges would 
further bolster the independence of the judiciary, boast public trust, an d 
thus, promote the rule of law in our country. And to consider otherwise 
would be to accede to judicial autocracy.  
 
Judge  
  