IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 1308 of 2022  
(Against the order dated 19.09.2022 of the 
Lahore High Court, Multan Bench passed in 
Crl.Misc. No. 5220 -B/2022)  
 
 
Gull Din.          … Petitioner  
     Versus  
The State through P.G., Punjab and another.   … Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioner :   Malik M. Usman Bhatti, ASC.  
      
For the State :   Ch. Muhammad  Sarwar Sidhu,  
Addl. Prosecutor -General, Punjab.  
a/w Farhat Rasool, DSP City, Muzaffargarh.  
Khalid Azizi, SI/IO.    
 
Respondent No. 2:    Muhammad Yaqoob, ASI.  
 
Date of Hearing:    17.11.20222 . 
 
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, J . Notice was issued to consider whether the petitioner was 
entitled to bail due to the fact that rule 4 (2) of the Control of Narcotic 
Substances (Government Analysts) Rules, 2001 (‘ the Rules ’), which 
provides that the seized narcotic s be dispatched for analysis ‘not later than 
seventy -two hours of the seizure ’, was not complied with , as the same was 
sent after seventeen days.  
 
2. This Court i n a number of judgments has held that the said rule is 
directory, including in the case s of Tariq Mehmood v State  (PLD 2009 
Supreme Court 39), Gul Alam v State  (2011 SCMR 624)  and Muhammad 
Sarfraz v State  (2017 SCMR 1874) . And, a five-member Bench of this Court , 
in the case of Tallat Ishaq v National Accountability Bureau  (PLD 2019 
Supreme Court 112) held that the no n-compliance of a directory rule would 
not entitle the petitioner to bail. Though the Tallat Ishaq  was a case under 
the National Accountability Bureau Ordinance, 1999, i n our opinion , the Criminal Petition No. 1308 of 2022  
 
 
 2
stated principle enunciated therein would be equally applicable to c ases 
under the narcotic laws  when directory provisions are not complied with. 
Accordingly, th e ground of non -compliance with rule 4(2) of the Rules will 
not on its own be a sufficient ground to entitle the petitioner to the 
concession of bail.  
 
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner states that after framing of 
charge no progress has been made in the trial and the case is not 
proceeding because the prosecution side is delaying it. The learned 
Additional Prosecutor -General, Punjab (‘ APG’) states that as far as the 
prosecution is concerned it will expeditiously proceed with the case and will 
not seek any unnecessary adjournment. The learned counsel for the 
petitioner states that if the prosecution side abide s by the commitment 
made by the learned APG  he will be satisfied and this petition may be 
disposed of in such terms.   
 
4. The prosecution shall abide by the afore said commitment  made by 
the APG and the learned Trial Judge will not entertain any unnecessary 
requests for adjournment from the prosecution side . With such 
observations this petition is disposed of .  
 
Judge 
 
  Judge 
 
 
Judge 
Islamabad : 
17.11.2022  
(M. Tauseef)  
Approved for Reporting  
 