IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Justice Yahya Afridi  
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Justice Athar Minallah  
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
 
Suo Motu  Case No. 1 /2024  
(In the matter of letter dated 25 March 
2024 of the Six Judges of the Islamabad 
High Court)  
 
On Court Notice:    Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 
On Court’s Call:    Mr. Shahzad Shaukat, ASC,  
President Supreme Court Bar Association.  
 
Date of Hearing:    03.04.2024.  
 
ORDER  
Background  
 Six Judges of the Islamabad High Court wrote a letter dated 25 
March 2024 , which was received on 26 March 2024 , (‘the Letter ’). The 
Letter was addressed to the Chairman and the Members of the Supreme 
Judicial Council (‘ SJC’) and was copied to all the Judges of the Supreme 
Court and the Registrar of the Supreme Court, who also acts as the 
Secretary of the SJC. In view of the seriousness of the issue s raised in the 
Letter the Commi ttee constitut ed under the Supreme Court (Practice and 
Procedure) Act, 2023 decided on Monday, 1 April 2024 that the Supreme 
Court may consider the matter under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) and  a bench 
comprising ‘all available Judges at the principal seat, Islamabad be 
constituted on Wednesday, 3rd April 2024 at 11.30 am. ’ 
 
2. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AG’) is present in Court 
and read out the Press Release  issued on Thursday,  28 March 2024 by the 
Public Relations Officer of the Supreme Court. The learned AG confirmed 
the facts mentioned therein which related to the Government of Pakistan 
and the meeting of the Prime Minister , Law Minister and AG with the Chief SMC No. 1 /2024 . 
 
 2
Justice  of Pakis tan (‘CJP’), the Senior Puisne Judge , Justice Syed Mansoor 
Ali Shah (‘ SPJ’) and the Registrar of the Supreme Court , Ms. Jazeela Aslam. 
The said meeting took place on 28 March 2024 at 2 pm in the Conference 
Room of the Judges Block in the Supreme Court . The meeting lasted for 
about an hour and a half. Learned AG submitted that the Prime Minister 
had endorsed the view s of the CJP and the SPJ that the independence of 
the judiciary should never be compromised and had agreed to form an 
inquiry commission , under the Pakistan Commissions of Inquiry Act, 2017 , 
and had accept ed the names suggested by the CJP and SJP of two former 
Chief Justices  of Pakistan to head a single member inquiry commission. 
The learned AG stated that  the Prime Minister acknowledged  the gr avity of 
the matter and stated that he will be calling a meeting of the Federal 
Cabinet immediately to seek its approval for the formation of the inquiry 
commission and convened the Federal Cabinet on Friday , 29 March 2024, 
however, as some of the members were out of station the meeting was 
postponed to Saturday , 30 March 2024 . The learned AG stated that the 
promptitude with which the Prime Minister acted reflected the commitment 
and seriousness of the Government.  
 
3. The learned AG informed that pursuant t o the decision of the Federal 
Cabinet the Law Minister met the former Chief Justice  of Pakistan , Justice 
Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, at his residence in Lahore and he agreed to head 
the inquiry commission ; he was shown the proposed t erms of reference  of 
the commission and his suggestion  to empower the commission to expand 
the scope of its inquiry was accepted. The learned AG stated that the said 
commission was an independent commission , and would have functioned 
without any government control over it, and ind ependently given its 
findings . However, the commission was falsely portrayed by some 
detractors as one formed by the Executive to look into the affairs of the 
Executive . Unfortunately , an adverse propaganda attack was also launched 
on the person of Justice  Tassadu q Hussain Jillani which,  in the opinion  of 
the learned AG,  dissuaded him to undertake the exercise , and consequently 
Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani wrote letter dated 1 April 2024  recusing 
himself . 
 
4. The learned AG read out the said letter date d 1 April 2024 which 
referred to Article 209 of the Constitution and had observed that it would 
not be appropriate to address any matter within the jurisdiction of the SJC, SMC No. 1 /2024 . 
 
 3
which was a constitutional body. It was also pointed out that six judges of 
the Isl amabad High Court had written to the SJC ‘ to seek guidance ’. Justice 
Tassaduq Hussain Jillani concluded by stating that the matter did not 
come within the parameters of Article 209 of the Constitution , but the 
Honorable Chief Justice of Pakistan being the paterfamilias may address 
and resolve the issues raised in the letter at the institutional level. ’ 
 
5. The CJP referred to the meeting he and the SPJ had with the Chief 
Justice and Judges of the Islamabad High Court on Tuesday, 26 March 
2024, which had lasted for over two and a half hours . The six Judges who 
wrote the Letter were asked by the SPJ that, given that they had written to 
the SJC , the CJP and SPJ should intervene, and they said that they 
repose d full confidence in the CJP and SPJ who should atten d to the  matter 
as they deemed appropriate . 
 
6. The following day, that is, o n Wednesday, 27 March 2024 , a Full 
Court meeting of all the Judges of the Supreme Court was called by the 
CJP and all the Judges met at 4 pm in the Conference Room. T he meeting 
lasted for two hours and a quarter. A consensus developed amongst the 
majority of the Judges that in view of the gravity of the situation the CJP 
may meet the Prime Minister with regard to the concerns of interference in 
judicial work raised in the Letter. After the meeting with the Prime Minister , 
Law Minister and AG  another Full Court meeting was called by the CJP the 
same day, that is, Thursday, 28 March 2024 , at 4 pm, when the Judges 
were informed about what had transpired in the said meeting. 
 
7. The CJP stated that when the Supreme Court issues notice to the 
Government it is represented by the concerned Secretary, however, to 
impress upon the Prime Minister the gravity of the situation it was felt 
necessary to meet him; in this regard ref erence was made to Article 248 of 
the Constitution whereunder the Prime Minister and the Law Minister enjoy 
impunity and as such can not be called in Court for the exercise of powers 
and performance of functions of their office.  
 
8. The learned AG referre d to the Letter wherein it is stated that ‘ it is 
imperative to inquire into and determine ’ into the allegation s mentioned in 
the Letter. The learned AG stated that in this matter an investigation could 
be undertaken by the Police, the Federal Investigation  Agency (‘ FIA’) or by SMC No. 1 /2024 . 
 
 4
an inquiry commission constituted under the Pakistan Commissions of 
Inquiry Act, 2017 , which are the only available legal mechanism s for 
undertaking it. However, realizing the sensitivity of the matter, an inquiry 
commission headed by  a retired Chief Justice of Pakistan was considered to 
be the most appropriate . Mr. Shahzad Shaukat, President, Supreme Court 
Bar Association (‘ SCBA ’), stated that the SCBA was also of the view that 
constituting the said commission of inquiry headed by Jus tice Tassaduq 
Hussain Jillani, a former Chief Justice of Pakistan, was the only 
appropriate mechanism.  
 
9. The learned AG also stated that all the incidents mentioned in the 
Letter are about a year old or even earlier. He referred to instances , for 
which t hose in the present g overnment  cannot be held responsible and 
mentioned the death threat extended to a Judge of the Supreme Court (the 
present CJP) and that the Police did not register the FIR of the complainant 
(CJP’s wife Mrs. Sarina Isa). Instead the FI R which was eventually 
registered was by FIA and this was under the Prevention of Electronic 
Crimes Act, 2016, mentioning the offences therein and by removing the 
offence of terrorism. He stated that the Supreme Court had also issued 
contempt notice to the alleged contemnor and framed charge against him 
but then did not proceed further and the case was never fixed in Court 
again . 
 
10. Learned AG stated that the present government fully believes in the 
independence of the Judiciary but should not be he ld responsible for the 
acts of the past , and submitted that if the recorded earlier incidents had 
been attended to by the then government and by the Supreme Court this 
would have helped insulate the Judiciary from outside pressure . 
Confirming that the Government believes in the independence of the 
Judiciary he stated that there was absolutely no policy nor instruction s 
given to interfere with the working of the J udiciary or to undermine its 
independence.  
 
11. The learned AG stated that no incident is mentio ned in the Letter 
which occurred during the tenure of the present CJP, who assumed office 
on 17 September 2023 . At this stage the CJP referred to paragraph 6(e) of 
the Letter and stated that his predecessor had never consulted him on the SMC No. 1 /2024 . 
 
 5
matter nor held an y meeting with the then senior puisne judge or with the 
then next senior Judge,  Justice Sardar Tariq Masood.  
 
12. During the hearing reference was made to Article 175(2) of the 
Constitution , which stipulates that , ‘No court shall have any jurisdiction 
save as is or may be conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under any 
law’ and to the different jurisdictions of the Supreme Court: original  (Article 
184), appellate  (Article 185), advisory  (Article 186), transfer  (Article 186A) 
and review  (Article 188). The question also arose with regard to the 
Supreme Court’s constitutional and legal powers in the instant matter with 
regard to ascertaining facts. Article 203 of the Constitution, whereunder the 
High Court is empowered to supervise  and con trol all courts subordinate to 
it, was also referred to and it was noted that there is no equivalent 
provision in the Constitution empowering the Supreme Court to supervise 
and control the High Courts. Reference was also made to Article 202 of the 
Constitu tion which enables the High Court to make rules regulating its 
practice and procedure and those of the courts subordinate to it. The 
constitutional scheme thus mandates complete independence of the High 
Courts.  
Order in Suo Motu Case  
 
13. In their letter, the Judges of the Islamabad High Court have mainly 
requested to undertake “intuitional consultation”  in the background  of the 
issues raised by them “to consider how best to protect independence of the 
judiciary”  and to “put in place a mech anism to affix liability for those who 
undermine such independence and clarity for the benefit of individual judges 
the course they must take when they find themselves at the receiving end of 
interference and/or intimidation by members of the executive” . We are, 
therefore, of the view that it would be an appropriate starting point, in the 
present proceedings, to call for proposals from the main stakeholders in the 
judicial system and the independence of the judiciary, i.e., (i) the Pakistan 
Bar Council, (ii ) the Supreme Court Bar Association, (iii) the High Courts, 
and (iv) the Federal Government as to what should be the institutional 
response and mechanism  to address the issues like the ones raised in the 
letter and ensure that such issues do not arise in f uture and if they do, to 
fix liability and proceed against those responsible . In any such process the 
idea is to empower the High Courts and their respective Chief Justices to 
deal with issues relating to the Hon’ble Judges of the High Courts or the SMC No. 1 /2024 . 
 
 6
Distri ct Judiciary. We expect that the proposals shall be made after proper 
consultation within the respective bodies and be filed by 25 April 2024.  
 
14. The SCBA and the Pakistan Bar Council (‘ PBC’) are committed to 
upholding the independence of the Judiciary t herefore both these 
organizations should be arrayed as parties to assist this Court and notices 
be issued to them.  
 
15. The office shall serve the notice of this order to the Vice -Chairman of 
the Pakistan Bar Council, (ii) the President of the Supreme Cour t Bar 
Association (iii) the Registrars of the High Courts, and (iv) the Attorney -
General for Pakistan for the Federal Government. Further, as the matter 
involves questions as to the interpretation of constitutional law which 
concern the Federal Government the notices shall also be given to the 
Attorney -General for Pakistan under rule 1 of Order XXVIIA, CPC.1 
 
16. Learned senior counsel Mr. Hamid Khan and learned Mr. Khawaja 
Ahmed Hosain pointed out that they had filed petitions under Article 184(3) 
of the C onstitution with regard to the Letter and requested that the same 
be fixed with the instant case. They were reminded that the matter is 
governed by the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023 and is 
required to be first placed for consideration be fore the Committee 
constituted thereunder, and once the Committee approves their cases and 
any other such cases which may be fixed together with this matter.  
 
17. To come up on Tuesday, 30 April 2024 at 11.30 am.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
For reasons noted in my separate note, I very respectfully recuse 
myself from the bench hearing the present suo motu proceedings.  
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
                                                
1 The Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.  SMC No. 1 /2024 . 
 
 7
With utmost respect I have not been able to persuade myself to 
endorse paragraphs 1 to 12. However, I will be adding my separat e 
note.  
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
03.04.2024  
(Farrukh)  
 Yahya Afridi, J. - Invoking the original jurisdiction of this Court vested under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution  of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(“Constitution”) , and that too, on a suo motu motion, should be  scarcely 
exercised. This caution of judicial restraint should be further guarded when the 
matter for determination is inquisitorial, requiring a factual probe before a 
definite  declaration, and /or, direction is rendered by this Court.  
2. In the instant matter, none can doubt the bone fide of invoking the suo 
motu jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. However, when the 
letter of the six worthy Judges of the Islamabad High Court craves for 
formulating the administrative course of conduct for serving judges to not only 
address a ny intrusion of the executive in their judicial functions, but more 
importantly, their mode and manner of interaction with the executive, to 
judicially proceed in the present proceedings would surely lead to an adverse 
spectacle – a sight I seriously urge should be avoided.  
3.      To proceed on the proposed action of suo motu  would negate the lessons 
we have learnt from our recent judicial precedents and, thus, we must not be 
moved into action by public sentiments no matter how pressing the issue may 
appea r.  
4. One must also not ignore that the High Courts under the Constitution 
are independent establishments, envisaged to regulate not only their 
administrative functions, but also provide security to and safeguard judicial 
officers in their discharge of ju dicial functions. Law on the matter is already in 
the field. The inaction on the part of the Chief Justice or the Judges of the High 
Court not to exercise the jurisdiction and powers vested in him or them, should 
not lead this Court to super -impose the exe rcise of its jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution. This may affect the functioning of the worthy Chief S.M.C. 1 of 2024  2
Justices and worthy Judges of the High Courts, and would to my mind amount 
to interference in the independence of the High Courts.   
5. Given the above, none can dispute that the anxiety of the six worthy 
Judges of the Islamabad High Court raised in their letter dated 25.03.2024 
addressed to the Supreme Judicial Council, most certainly warrants positive 
consideration, inter alia , for inserting appropriate provisions to regulate the 
interaction of judges with the executive and the remedial response of the 
judiciary to any attempt or actual interference in its judicial functions in the 
Code of Conduct of Judges of the superior judi ciary, as provided under Article 
209(8) of the Constitution.  
6. And thus, I respectfully recuse myself from the bench hearing the 
present suo motu  proceedings.  
 
         Judge  
  
 