IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mr. Manzoor Ahm ad Malik  
Mr. Justice Mr. Sardar Tariq Masood  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
Criminal Appeal No.635 of 2019  
(Against the judgment dated 18.09.2017 passed  
by the Balochistan High Court, Quetta  in Crl. 
(ATA) Appeal No.281 of 200 7)  
 
 
 
Muhammad Yaseen  
  …Appellant (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The State  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Appellant (s): Mr. Shabbir Rajput, ASC  
 
For the State:  Mr. Baqir Shah, State counsel  
 
Date of hearing:  22.10.2020.  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
      Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Muhammad Yasin, 
appellant, was tried alongside Muhammad Hussain and Muhammad 
Hadi by the learned Special Judge Anti Terrorism Court -I, Quetta  in 
the absence of  absconding co -accused, n amely,  Qurban Ali alias 
Shutar, Zakir and Asif, for abduction and subsequent murder of Qari 
Haji Muhammad, 30/32, while he was on  a pleasure trip  with his 
companions Noor Muhammad (PW -4) and Fateh Khan on 30.3.2007 ; 
they were frisked and thrashed before confined in a cave wherefrom the 
deceased  was subsequently separated  from his companions , let off 
unscathed . Upon receipt of information,  the members of the deceased 
family set out in his search ; during the process,  they were  confronted 
and forced to retreat  by the tribesmen  that included the proclaimed 
offenders as well . Incident was reported  by deceased’s maternal uncle 
Haji Agh Muhammad (PW -1) on 5.4.2007  at Police Station  Quaid Abad , 
District Quetta . As the investigation  commenced , the appellant was 
confr onted to the witnesses in a test identification parade held under 
magisterial supervision on 16.4.2007 ; the co -accused were also picked 
up by the witnesses on different dates. Upon a disclosure,  on 9.4.2007, 
the appellant led a police contingent to a spot on Koh-e-Murdar  for the Criminal Appeal No.635 of 2019  
 2
recovery of corpse of Qari Haji Muhammad , concealed underneath a 
boulder , subsequent whereto, once again he got recovered  a .30 caliber 
pistol , secured vide inventory dated 18.4.2007 ; he later accompanied 
the Investigating Officer  to secure a casing from the spot , forensically 
found wedded  with the weapon earlier recovered . The absconders were 
proceeded against while the appellant and co -accused, upon 
indictment, claimed trial  that resulted  into appellant’s conviction 
under section 7(a) of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 read se ction s 302(b), 
148 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860  vide judgment dated 12.10.2007 ; 
he was sentenced to death and three years RI on the coordinate charge  
whereas Muhammad Hadi co -accused was convicted under secti ons 
395, 506, 148 read with section 34 of the Code ibid ; he was handed 
down sentences ranging from 3 -years to 7 -years including direction for 
payment of fine ; Muhammad Hussain co -accused was acquitted from 
the charge . Having served out  the sentences , Muham mad Hadi  has 
since been released . State Reference clubbed with convict’s appeal , 
came up before a learned Division Bench of the High Court of 
Balochistan ; with a cleavage  of opinion , it was decided by a Referee 
Judge; majority judgment dated 18.09.2017  upheld the conviction , 
however, altered the penalty of death into imprisonment for life , vires 
whereof, are being assailed through leave of the Court.  
2.  Learned counsel for the appellant contends that there is 
inordinate and inexplicable delay in  recourse t o law  which becomes all 
the more intriguing as it is prosecution’s own case that soon after 
deceased’s disappearance members of his clan set out in his search  
and that in the process they also encountered resistance and, thus, 
complainant’s silence for so long a period  raises serious question 
regarding the credibility of  the story put-forth during the trial ; he has 
referred to the statement of Noor Muhammad (PW-4)  to argue that test 
identification parade,  relied upon by the courts below, hardly carried 
any evidential significance inasmuch as the witness admittedly claimed 
to have already identified the appel lant in his previous encounters. 
Inconsequentiality of the recovery of weapon and disclosure leading to 
the discovery of the dead body from an open spa ce has been  
highlighted as missing links in the chain of circumstances . It would be 
grievously unsafe to maintain conviction on the basis of inconsistent, 
incoherent  and flawed pieces of evidence  belatedly put together , 
concluded the learned counsel. The l earned Law Officer has faithfully 
defended the impugned judgment.  Criminal Appeal No.635 of 2019  
 3
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Dr. Shamim Gul Meshwani (PW -10) examined the putrefied 
dead bod y; it was burnt from neck to head, missing limbs of the body 
included skin and muscles from head  to face . Overall condition of the 
corps e seriously hampered the possibility of identification beyond 
doubt and , according to the witness , it was ide ntified on the basis of 
clothes, a mobile phone handset and some papers found in the pocket . 
The condition of the corpse , particularly massive burns , belies the 
possibility of its presence underneath a boulder, a circumstance that 
in retrospect seriously shadows the hypothesis of disclosure by the 
appellant and, thus, jolts the very foundation of the case . Even  if it is 
assumed that the decomposed corpse was that of the deceased, its 
presence at an openly access ible place drastically diminishes 
inculpation of the disclosure, heavily relied upon by the prosecution . 
Presence of a mobile phone handset and papers left with the corpse to  
provide space to the possibility of identification by the witnesses in 
itself is a circum stance far from being plausible .  During appellant’s 
examination  under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
1898 , though the appellant w as confronted with the pointing out of the 
place wherefrom the dead body of the deceased was recovered, 
nonetheless , his alleged disclosure leading to the discovery of dead 
body is conspicuously omitted . Statement of Noor Muhammad (PW -4) 
who identified the  appellant is limited to the extent of handing over of 
Chaddar  and Chappal  purpor tedly last worn by the deceased. It is 
mindboggling as to why the appellant would undertake such an idiotic  
exercise when on the other hand he is taking pains to  conceal the d ead 
body with additional steps to  set ablaze  its face  to blur the identity . 
Even if the witness is believed, his testimony does not take prosecution 
beyond the line of handing over of the items  mentioned above . Forensic 
report does not advance prosecution case either  inasmuch  as, the 
seizure of casing after lapse of a period exceeding three weeks is a 
position that requires a pinch of salt . The story may not find a buyer. 
Argument that the appellant was roped in after deliberation and 
consultation spanning over a pretty long period of time exactly on the 
day the dead body was recovered cannot be dismissed out of hand . 
Acquittal of Muhammad Hussain though assigned a somewhat 
different role, nonetheless, inseparably within the integrity of the 
charge  is yet an other setback to the prosecution; the failure that went 
unchallenged is not without consequences.  Cleavage in judicial opinion Criminal Appeal No.635 of 2019  
 4
demands extra caution . On our own independent analysis , prosecution 
evidence otherwise deficient and inconclusive is fraught with  doubts , 
substantially failing to constitute chain of circu mstances to 
conclusively establish  appellant’s culpability beyond doubt ; appellant  
is entitled to benefit thereof.  Impugned judgment dated 18.09.2017 is 
set aside ; the appellant is acquitted from t he charge; he has already 
been ordered to be released, if not required  to be detained  in any other 
case, vide short order of even date. Appeal allowed . 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad , the 
22nd October , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 