 
  
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:   
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
MR. JUSTICE SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI  
 
 
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.248 2 OF 2020  
(On appeal against order dated 09.09.2020  
passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore in  
Writ Petition No.39841 of 2020.)  
 
 
Federation of Pakistan through the Secretary, 
Ministry of Energy (Power Division), 
Islamabad and others  … Petitioners  
   
Versus  
 
Shafiq ul Hassan and others  … Respondent s 
   
For the Petitioners  : Mr. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AG Pak.  
   
For the Respondents  : Mr. Shohaib Shaheen, ASC.  
Syed Khawar Ameer Bokhari, ASC.  
Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch., AOR . 
   
Date of Hearing  : 02.10.2020  
   
  ORDER  
   
  Umar Ata Bandial, J.  The learned Additional Attorney 
General has challenged an interim order dated 09.09.2020 passed 
in writ petit ion filed by the respondent No.1, a temporary stop gap 
appointee to the post of CEO, FESCO whereby his transfer order 
dated 28.08.2020 has been suspended . It appears this was done  
without obtaining the response of the Federal Government or the 
concerned authorities namely, FESCO and PEP CO. The said order 
also admitted the writ petition by the respondent No.1 to regular 
hearing . The first ground is  the violation of FESCO’s transfer 
policy. FESCO is a limited company and does not have any 
statutory rules governing the terms and conditions of service of its Civil Petition No.2482/2020  
 -:2:-
employees. The learned Additional Attorney General accordingly 
states that the writ petition is  not maintainable as the said transfer 
policy is non -statutory in character. The second ground noted in 
the impugned order is that respondent No.2, Federal Secretary,  
Ministry of Energy (Power ) Division was incompetent to pass the 
order dated 28.08.2020 . It is submitted by the Additional Attorney 
General that the FESCO is a wholly owned company of the Federal 
Government. That under section s 187 and 190(2)  of the 
Companies Act, 2017  the Federal Government has power to remove 
the appointe d Chief Executive of  a company. In the present case 
the respondent was a temporary stop gap appointee without any 
legal entitlement to retain the office. A s such the intervention by 
the Federal Government was perfectly valid. On the aforesaid two 
questions the writ petition wa s admitted to hearing and the 
impugned order was suspended ad infinitum . The learned 
Additional Attorney General submits that the impugned order 
suffers from legal defect s on merits and even otherwise a writ 
petition filed at the instance of an employee  of the company with 
non-statutory rules of service was not maintainable.  
2.  We notice that the suspension of the respondent’s 
transfer order has created an anomalous situation because as 
shown by the learned Additional Attorney General , a successor 
tempo rary appointee to the post of CEO, FESCO was not ified on 
4.9.2020 and was approved by the Board of Directors of the 
Company on 5 .9.2020. This aspect was not noticed by the learned 
Single  Bench while suspending the impugned order .  
3.  Be that as it may, the grant of interim relief which has 
the effect of permanence is violative o f the rule laid down by this Civil Petition No.2482/2020  
 -:3:-
Court in the case of Islamic Republic of Pakistan v. Muhammad 
Zaman Khan  (1997  SCMR  1508 ). The  constitut ional jurisdiction by 
Superior C ourts must be exercised according to the settled 
principles of law. Granting longevity to a suspensory order without 
hearing the other side  is, if at all, done exceptionally . These are  
words of caution that are necessary for ensur ing the majesty of  the 
law and preserving public trust in the courts  of law . Having said 
that, it is also the policy of this Court to interfere with interim 
orders passed by the High Court only exceptionally . This would be 
in cases of serious violation of the law or wrongful exercise of 
jurisdiction . 
4.  Regardless of the weight of the objections by the 
petitioner, w e consider  that the learned Single Judge/ the 
Honourable Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court would be 
gracious enoug h to take the aforementioned observation in to 
consid eration for  deciding the pending petition finally in the week 
commencing  05.10.2020.  If he is preoccupied with other matters 
then the writ petition shall be fixed for hearing before the 
Companies Bench of  the Lahore High C ourt in the said week  for 
decision of the matter . Disposed of .         
   
 Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad,  
02.10.2020  
Naveed /Irshad Hussain  
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING .   