Athar Minallah, J. - The application was filed for seeking an order of 
the Bench to resume the live streaming of the proceedings.  It is not 
disputed that during the last hearing held on 16.05.2024 the 
proceedings were not live streamed and no order to this effect had 
been passed by the Bench.  However, the proceedings during the 
previous hearings held on 31.10. 2023 and 14.05.2024 were streamed 
live. The questions raised through the application are; w hether live 
streaming of the proceedings befo re us could have been discontinued  
and whether , by doing so , the principles enunciated by a larger Bench 
of this Court were breached and the people at large  were deprived of 
their right, inter alia, guaranteed u nder Article 19 -A of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
("Constitution ").  
2. The respondent, Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi (‘ respondent ’), is the 
founder  and undisputed leader of a major political party, Pakistan 
Tehrik -e-Insaaf. The respondent , who at present is incarcerated in the 
Central Prison, Adiala had challenged the vires of the amendments 
brought about in the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 
(‘Ordinance of 1999 ’). The petition was entertained and heard by this 
Court , invoking its jurisdiction conferred under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(‘Constitution’ ). This Court , by a majority of 2 to 1 , allowed the 
petition and declared the amendments ultr a vires. The appeal before 
us essentially arises from and is  a continuation of the proceedings 
initiated by this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. The 
request made by the respondent to enable him to argue the matter was 
allowed vide order dated 14.05. 2024 and he made his f irst appearance 
on 16.05.2024 . It was on the said date that live st reaming was 
discontinued without an order having been passed by the Bench. In 
order to answer the aforementioned question s, it would be beneficial to 2 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
examine the principles enunciated by a larger Bench of this Court in 
Justice Qazi  Faez Isa’ s case.1 
Justice Qazi  Faez Isa’s case; principles enunciated by this Court 
regarding live streaming and the duty  of this Court  in this 
context : 
 
3. A sitting Honourable Judge of this Court had filed an application 
seeking relief of ordering live streaming of the proceedings of his case. 
The application was strongly opposed by the Federal Government and 
the respondent then was holding the public office of the Prime 
Ministe r. A larger Bench of this Court , consisting of ten judges , had 
examined the matter and the judges were unanimous that the right of 
the people to have access to information in matters of public 
importance under Article 19 -A of the Constitution was recognise d. 
Though the application was dismissed by 6 to 4 but the difference s 
were regarding the manner in which the recognised right could be 
enforced and executed by this Court. The majority was of the view that 
the modalities and details were to be decided by t he Full Court while 
the minority had ordered live streaming of the proceedings in the 
matter which was being heard. The judgment has been implemented 
by giving effect to the recognised right as will be discussed later. As 
has been noted above, the dissent was to the extent of the execution 
and mode of enforcement of the recognised right. However, the 
minority view had elaborately dealt with the principles in the context 
of the unanimously recognised right which are  summa rised as follows;  
i) The r ight conferred by Article 19 -A of the Constitution is 
operative and justiciable . 
ii) The right to have access to information in all matters of 
public importance conferred by Article 19 -A is a corrective 
apparatus,  which allows public scr utiny of the working of 
                                                             
1Justice Qazi  Faez Isa and others v. President of Pakistan and others (PLD 2023 SC 661)  3 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
public authorities and institutions and mak es them 
answerable to the public.  
iii) It ensures transparency and accountability in the 
functioning of all public authorities and institutions . 
iv) The judicial definition of the expression ‘publi c 
importance’ as interpreted by this Court in Manzoor  Elahi2 
and Benazir Bhutto cases3 is also attracted in relation to 
the expression ‘matters of public importance’ used in 
Article 19 -A. 
v) The expression ‘matters of public importance’ used in 
Article 19 -A means th ose matters that pertain to and 
affect the public at large, a whole community, and not an 
individual or a small group of individuals. It includes  
matters in which the general interest of the whole 
community, as opposed to the particular interest of 
individuals, are directly or vitally concerned.  
vi) Cases heard by this Court on its original jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , including review 
petitions and other matters arising therein, are matters of 
public importance within the meaning and scope of that 
expression used in Article 19 -A of the Constitution.  
vii) The public has a fundamental right under Article 19 -A of 
the Constitution to have access to information in its 
original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, in cluding  the right  to know and see how 
court proceedings in these cases are conducted by the 
Court.  
                                                             
2ManzoorElahi v. Federation of Pakistan ( PLD 1975 SC 66 ) 
3Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan ( PLD 1988 SC 416 ) 4 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
viii) The right conferred under Article 19 -A is a positive right. 
The right not only operates as a limitation on the power of 
the State to act in a manner that wo uld negate the right of 
the citizen to have access to information in all matters of 
public importance but also requires the State to take some 
appropriate actions to fulfil this right.  
ix) Article 19 -A of the Constitution creates a positive 
obligation on all State organs, authorities and institutions, 
including the judiciary, to take necessary measures to 
ensure  the realization of the fundamental right of citizen s 
to have access to information in matter s of public 
importance.  
x) Article 19 -A can only be interpret ed with a  progressive, 
liberal and dynamic approach and it is the  duty of every 
instit ution to explore modern means for the  enforcement 
of the right guaranteed there  under, which have been 
made available by the latest technology of the day.  
xi) It is a duty of  this Court to abide by the principles of 
openness and transparency because it has  been 
consistently held for other organs of the State that their 
functioning should manifest the said principle s. 
xii) The access of the public to the court proceedings in cases 
heard under Article 184(3) of the Constitution through live 
streaming would serve  democracy as much as it would 
make the exercise of judicial power by the court 
transparent.  
xiii) Live streaming (audio and video) of the court proceedings 
in cases heard by this Co urt on a petition or Suo Moto, 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , must be made 5 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
available for the information of the public through a link 
on the official website of the Court, in conferment of the 
fundamental right of the public  and for the fulfilme nt of 
the obligation of the Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution.  
xiv) The right to have access to court proceedings through live 
streaming is operative and justiciable even without  the 
enactment of a law that ma y provide for the regulation of  
and rea sonable restriction on such right.  
4. This Court has thus declared access of the public to the court 
proceedings in all cases in matters of public importance through live 
streaming as a recognised fundamental right  guaranteed under Article 
19-A of the Constitution. As a corollary , the cases entertained and 
heard under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , including other matters 
arising therein , necessarily fall within the ambit of the expression 
'matters of public im portance. An appeal , therefore,  arising from the 
proceedings under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is a matter of 
public importance and , thus, in each case the public has a right to 
have access to the court proceedings through live streaming. As a 
conse quence , the discretion exercised by a Bench to order live 
streaming or otherwise, has to be guided and in accordance with the 
right guaranteed under Article 19 -A. The exercise of discretion not to 
order live streaming of court proceedings by a Bench , to wh ich the 
facility is available , will be lawful and justified only in exceptional 
circumstances and for compelling reasons. Keeping in view the 
importance of the guaranteed fundamental right, the public cannot be 
deprived of access to the court proceedings through live streaming  
except in exceptional circumstances and for compelling reasons. 
Moreover, once the proceedings in a particular case have been live 6 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
streamed then they cannot be ordered to be discontinued unless the 
Court is satisfied that it was neces sary to do so in  the public interest 
for a demonstrably substantial reason. It is manifest from the 
explicitly recognised right that the public is not required to put the 
exercise of this crucial fundamental right into m otion by making a 
request or fi ling an application , because ensuring the enforcement of 
the right of the public to have access to court proceedings through live 
steaming is essentially a duty and obligation of this Court.  
5. Pursuant to the above principles enunciated in  the Justice Qazi  
Faez Isa case, the Full Court , in its meeting held on 18 -09-2023 , 
decided to start a pilot project and a committee consisting of two 
judges was constituted to execute the pilot project and to consider 
future telecast/streaming and to work out modalities re garding 
telecast/streaming of other Courts. The pilot project was successfully 
executed and as a consequence all cases heard under Article 184(3) in 
Court Room No. l have been live streamed since then. A report  dated 
16-10-2023, was forwarded by the commit tee, proposing modalities 
regarding telecast/streaming of the Courts. The framing of SOPs is 
subject to approval of the modalities  proposed by the committee in its 
report by the Full Court. However, non  framing of SOPs is not in any 
manner an impediment to  give effect to the right recognised by a larger 
Bench of this Court and this is obvious from the live streaming of all 
matters heard by the Bench No. 1 pursuant to the successful 
execution of the pilot project. Notwithstanding  the non framing of the 
rules , all cases entertained and heard under Article 184(3) in Court 
Room No. 1 are required to be live streamed in order to enforce the 
right of the people guaranteed under Article 19 -A of the Constitution 
unless the Bench is satisfied that exceptional circums tances exist to 
order otherwise and that doing so would be in  the public interest.           7 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
The public importance involved in the appeal before us . 
 
6. As already noted, all cases entertained and heard by this Court 
in exercise of  the jurisdiction under Article 184(3) are matters of public 
importance in the context of the fundamental right guaranteed under 
Article 19 -A of the Constitution. The appeal before us has arisen from 
the proceedings heard by this Court under Article 184(3) and , 
therefore, it fulfils the condition of falling in the category of a matter of 
public importance. The public importance in case of the appeal in 
hand cannot be understated. The vires of the amendments made in 
the Ordinance of 1999 were challenged by the r espondent. The role of 
the National Accountability Bureau (‘ Bureau’ ) itself is a matter of 
highest public importance.  The Bureau was  the successor  of the  anti-
corruption agency of the Ehtesab Cell (‘ Cell’) established under the 
Ehtesab Act, 1997 (‘ Act of 1 997’). By now there is sufficient 
documented evidence to show that the Cell or the Bureau, as the case 
may be, were established mainly to hold the chosen representatives of 
the people accountable for corruption and corrupt practices. It was 
extensively used for political engineering. The draconian and arbitrary 
powers were used to intimidate, harass and humiliate opponents and 
the critics of the government. The arbitrary arrests and humiliation  of 
dissenters and political opponents led to grave violation s of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed  under the Constitution. Almost all 
those who h ad held the public office of  Prime Minister had fallen 
victim to the draconian and arbitrary powers of the Cell or the Bureau, 
as the case may be. The violatio n of the right to fair trial and due 
process through  the use of arbitrary powers was highlighted by 
various constitutional courts  in the ir judgements , including this 
Court. The arbitrary exploitation of the power vested in the Cell and 
the Bureau to underm ine democracy and democratic institutions was 8 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
explicitly highlighted by this Court in the Khawaja Saad  Rafique  case4 
and the relevant portion is reproduced as follows:  
“66. Rather than doing any good to the country or our 
bodypolitic  and cleansing the fountainheads of 
governance, these laws and the manner in which they 
were enforced, caused further degeneration and created 
chaos, since the same were framed and applied with an 
oblique motive of arm twisting and pressurizing political 
opponents into submission, subjugation and compliance, 
or remove them from the electoral scene at least 
temporarily. These laws were successfully employed as 
tools to change political loyalties, for splintering and 
fracturing political parties. Pygmies were  selected, 
nurtured, promoted, and brought to prominence and 
power. People with notorious backgrounds and criminal 
credentials were thrust to rule us in various capacities 
with predictable results. Similarly, those, who caused 
death, destruction and mayhem  in our society were 
trained, financed, protected, promoted and eulogized, 
thus, turning them into Frankensteins. Meanwhile 
corruption, misconduct and malpractice in governance 
kept growing at exponential rates and became all 
pervading. None of the state i nstitutions which  so ever 
remained free from this morass.  
67. The NAO was promulgated by the Military regime of 
General Pervaiz  Musharaf on 16.11.1999, repealing the 
previously enacted Ehtesab Act, 1997. The NAB 
Ordinance from its very inception became inc reasingly 
controversial, its image has come under cloud and there is 
a wide spread perception of it being employed as a tool for 
oppression and victimization of political opponents by 
those in power. It is frequently alleged that the Bureau is 
being flagra ntly used for political engineering. 
Discriminatory approach of NAB also is affecting its image 
and has shaken the faith of the people in its credibility 
and impartiality. The bureau seems reluctant in 
                                                             
4 Khawaja Salman Rafique v. National Accountability Bureau and others (PLD 2020 SC 456)  9 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
proceeding against people on one side of the political  
divide even in respect of financial scams of massive 
proportion while those on the other side are being 
arrested and incarcerated for months and years without 
providing any sufficient cause even when the law 
mandates investigations to be concluded expedit iously 
and trial to be concluded within 30 days. Nonetheless, 
investigation is often not concluded for months and cases 
remain pending for years. It is because of lack of 
professionalism, expertise and sincerity of cause that the 
conviction rate in NAB cas es is abysmally low. The above 
is certainly not serving the national interest, rather 
causing irretrievable harm to the country, nation and 
society in multiple ways. It was in view of the above 
distressful situation that the former Chief Justice Asif 
Saeed  Khan Khosa, speaking for this Court during the 
opening ceremony of the Judicial Year 2019 -20 observed 
as follows: - 
“We as a relevant Organ of the State also feel 
that the growing perception that the process of 
accountability  being pursued in the country a t 
present is lopsided and is a part of political 
engineering is a dangerous perception and some 
remedial steps need to be taken urgently so that 
the process does not lose credibility. Recovery of 
stolen wealth of the citizenry is a noble cause and 
it must be legitimately and legally pursued where 
it is due but if in the process the constitutional 
and legal morality of the society and the 
recognized standards of fairness and impartiality 
are compromised then retrieval of the lost 
constitutional and legal mor ality may pose an 
even bigger challenge to the society at large in the 
days to come”.  
7. The distinguished human rights defender and journalist, late I .A 
Rehman , in one of his publications5 had referred to a fact sheet 
                                                             
5 NAB versus human rights, Dawn October 15, 2020)  10 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
prepared by a parliamentarian , highlighting twelve deaths for which 
the Bureau was held responsible. The former Prime Minister, 
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Shaheed and her husband Mr.Asif Ali 
Zardari, who is the current President of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan , were acquitted by this Court6 because it was declared that 
the trial was not fair on account of the bias of the judges on the 
Ehtesab Bra nch. The powers of the Bureau were subsequently used to 
prosecute, humiliate  and violate the dignity of other former Prime 
Ministers, Mian  Mohammad Nawaz Sharif, Shahid  Khaqan  Abbasi, 
Yousaf  Raza Gillani etc. It is ironic that at present the respondent has 
fallen a victim after hi s removal from the office of  Prime Minister. The 
perception that the establishment and complicit courts are responsib le 
for such grave abuses of human rights and humiliation of the 
representatives of the people does not appear to be unfounded. The 
respondent, a former Prime Minister , had claimed in an interview 
reported in leading newspaper s7 that the former Chief of Army Staff, 
General ( rtd.) Qamar  Javed  Bajwa , used to call the shots while he was 
holding the office of Prime Minister. While referring to the former Chief 
of Army Staff he had stated that, 'he was a super kin g. He was above 
every one. He was controlling NAB (National Accountability Bureau) 
and no one could be held accountable with out Bajwa’s nod '. Another 
former Prime Minister Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif was reported to 
have stated , while addressing his party’s Central Executive Com mittee , 
that according to his information someone else was “running the 
parliament”.8 These statements made by the tw o former elected Prime 
Ministers were, prima facie, confirmed by t he former Chief of Army 
Staff, General ( retd.) Qamar  Javed  Bajwa  during his last public 
                                                             
6Asif Ali Zardari v. The State ( PLD 2001 SC 5 68) 
7 Tribune, February 12, 2023  
8 Dawn September 30, 2020  11 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
address9, when he admitted interference of his institution in politics . 
He was reported to have acknowledged that the reason for criticism of 
the institution was its ‘interference in politics for the last 70 years 
which was unconsti tutional . He explicitly stated; “that is why in 
February last year the army, after great deliberation s, decided that it 
would never interfere in any political matter”. The role of this Court in  
the perpetuation of brazen violation s of fundamental rights th rough  
the use of arbitrary and draconian powers by the Bureau and its 
complicity , despite being guardian of the guaranteed rights , is a 
blemish difficult to wash away. Can there be a matter of higher public 
importance than the amendments made in the Ordina nce of 1999 
followed by declaring them unconstitutional. There is yet another 
crucial factor.  
8. When the deposed Prime Minister Zufiqar Ali Bhutto was 
arrested and sent to  the gallows by this Court he was not an ordinary 
prisoner or convict. He was a vic tim of the coercive apparatus of the 
State imposed by a uniformed usurper , who was purportedly given 
legitimacy by this Court. Likewise, Benazir Bhutto Shaheed and Mian 
Mohammad Nawaz Sharif were made to profoundly suffer on account 
of the grave abuse of t he powers vested in the Bureau. They were not 
ordinary prisoners and convicts because their persecutions were 
perceived to be motivated. They had millions of followers and the 
perception that , as representatives  of the people,  they were being 
humiliated an d harassed for other than bona  fide reasons  on the basis 
of alleged corruption and corrupt practices at the behest of unelected 
office holders was not without substance. It is ironic that yet another 
elected former Prime Minister, the respondent , is incarcerated today 
and facing multiple trials, some having ended in conviction s and also 
                                                             
9 Dawn November 2 4, 2022  12 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
set aside by appellate forums. The respondent , like other former 
elected Prime Ministers , has millions of followers across the country as 
has become evident from t he results of the last general elections. He is 
definitely not an ordinary prisoner or convict. The perception of  the 
existence of a coercive apparatus of the State cannot be ignored by a 
constitutional court, particularly having regard to the unjustified 
treatment of representatives of the people in the past. The perception 
of complicity of this Court in or by allowing the elected representatives 
to be humiliated, harassed and persecuted for other than bona  fide 
reasons is not unfounded. This Court , after more than four decades , 
has recently attempted to remedy th e grave wrong done in denying an 
elected Prime Minster, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto , the right to a fair trial but 
regrettably the damage was irretrievable . The chequered history and 
role of this Court in relation to the treatment of elected representatives 
has remained unflattering. The approach of this Court, therefore, 
should be to err in favour of the millions of followers and their 
representatives  now, lest attempts be made after decades to remove an 
irretrievable blemish. The last seventy six years of treatment of elected 
representatives leaves no other choice for a constitutional court but to 
exercise discretion in favour of caution. The Courts and the judges can 
no more bury their heads  in the sand  by ignoring the obvious realities. 
The reported restrictions on freedom of expression are manifest from 
the fact that censorship has been imposed on court reporting as well. 
The existence of the coercive apparatus of the State is also manifest 
from the repo rted grave abuses of powers and the consequent 
infringement of the guaranteed rights. In this back ground, it becomes 
inevitable for this Court to walk the  extra mile to ensure transparency  
and enforcement of  the guaranteed right under Article 19 -A of the 
Constitution  by giving access to the public to the court proceedings 13 
CMA 5172/24 in ICA 2/2023  
 
 
through live streaming. Denial of access will unjustifiably give rise to 
suspicions and erode the confidence of the people in this Court. It is 
an obligation for this Court to be seen as impartial, fair and 
independent and to dispel any perception to the contrary. The trust of 
the people will be maintained and promoted by enabling them to know 
and see for themselves the court proceedings.  
9. There is no s ubstantive reason nor exceptional circumstances 
exist for denying the public their ri ght to have access to the Court  
proceedings through live streaming. In the circumstances , denial of 
this guaranteed right will amount to violating the princi ples laid down 
in the Justice Qazi  Faez Isa case , as highlighted above.  
10. The above are the reasons for allowing the application and 
ordering access to the public to the proceedings in the case in hand 
through live streaming.  
 
       (Justice Athar Mina llah) 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
   