IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam, Chairman  
Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
Dr. Muhammad Al -Ghazali, Ad -hoc Member -I 
Dr. Muhammad Khalid  Masud , Ad-hoc Member -II  
 
Criminal Shariat Appeal Nos.9 & 19/2017 and  
Jail Shariat Petition No. 02/2020  
(Again st the judgment dated 17.02.2015 passed by the Federal Shariat 
Court Islamabad in Jail Cr. Appeal Nos.15 to 19 -I of 2014 along with 
Cr. Rev. No.2/Q/2014)   
 
 
Muhammad Sid dique  
(Criminal Shariat Appeal No.9/2017)  
Jamshaid   
(Criminal Shariat Appeal No.19/2017)  
Saif Ullah  
(Jail Shariat Petition No.02/2020)  
  …Appellant/ Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State  
(in all cases ) 
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Appellant/  Syed Rifaqat Hussa in Shah,ASC/AOR  
Petitioner (s):  (in all cases)  
 
For the Respondent(s):  Syed Baqir Shah, ASC/Standing counsel  
 
Date of hearing:  03.12.2020.  
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J :- Bakhat Bahadar, 50 , 
was found lying dead  in the bushes nearby his poultry fa rm located 
within the remit of Police Station  Vandar , District Lasbela ; the corpse 
was tied with ropes and plastic pipe ; poultry flock comprising 5000 
birds  along with Saif Ullah and Jamshed , employed as attendant s at 
the farm , were missing from the scene ; they were named as suspects  in 
the crime report , laid by deceased’s brother  Akhtar Zeb (PW -1). As the 
investigation progressed, Muhammad Siddique, Nadim Ahmed and Ata 
Muhammad  were apprehended for being priv ies to the crime ; they were 
indicted before a le arned Additional Sessions Judge at Lasbela for 
committing Qatl-i-Amd of the deceased during the course of Haraba ; 
they claimed trial that resulted into their conviction s under section 396 
read with section 34 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860  vide judgment 
dated 13.11.2013  whereunder Saifullah and Muhammad Siddique Criminal Shariat Appeal Nos.9 & 19/2017 and  
Jail Shariat Petition No.02/2020  
 2
were sentenced to imprisonment for life while Jamshed, Nadim Ahmed 
and Atta Muhammad to rigorous imprisonment for 10 years . The 
Federal Shariat Court vide impugned judgment dated 17.02.2015 
mainta ined the convictions, however, enhanced sentence of Jamshed 
appellant to imprisonment for life ; Nadim Ahmed and Atta Muhammad 
convicts  are off the scene for having served out their sentences . Leave 
has been granted in Shariat  Appeal Nos.9 & 19 of 2019 separately filed 
by Muhammad Siddique  and Jamshed , convicts  clubbed with Jail 
Shariat Petition No.2 of 2020  filed by Saifullah ; with a common thread,  
these  are being decided through this single judgment.  
2.  Learned counsel for the convicts contends that the accused 
have been roped in the case on the basis of a misconceived and 
misplaced suspicion , subsequently structured upon  various  pieces of 
fake evidence , contrived belatedly to drive home the charge ; that 
confession statement Ex.P W-8/C is manifestly bogus , fabricated  to 
secure conviction s in the absence of any tangible or reliable evidence . 
Contrarily, the learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the 
impugned judgment by arguing that Saifullah and Jamshed convicts  
were employed at the poultry farm , their  absence from the scene after 
the brutal murder of Bakhtar Bahadar deceased is in itself a 
circumstance that speaks volumes about their guilt; according to him, 
subsequent recoveries and evidence furnished by independent 
witnesses  regarding transportation of poultry birds at the weigh ing 
station  under the supervision of Ata Muhammad  accused , confirmed 
by Malkat Khan (PW -9), an independent witness , squarely frame d the 
accused in the web of incriminatory circumstances  that include seizure 
of sale receipts  of the stolen flock from  the possession of Nadim Ahmed 
whose disclosure led to the arrest of co -accused . Different pieces of 
evidence revolving around the confessional statement Ex.PW -8/C by 
Jamshed  convict successfully drove home charge against all the 
accus ed beyond a shadow of doubt, concluded the learned Law Officer.    
3.  Heard. Record perused.  
4.  Prosecution case is structured upon various pieces of 
circumstantial evidence that prominently includes confessional 
statement of Jamshed appellant, recorded b y a Judicial Magistrate  
(PW-8) on 11.04.2011 ; he was arrested on 7.4.2011  on the day  when 
the dead body was spotted at the crime scene . Statement of Malkat 
Khan (PW -9), taken at its best, at the most possibly proves that Ata Criminal Shariat Appeal Nos.9 & 19/2017 and  
Jail Shariat Petition No.02/2020  
 3
Muhammad  convict accompanied  a poultry flock, incapable of being 
identified ; he confronted the witness with a plea of alibi; according to 
him, on the fateful day, he attended a marriage ceremony as far away 
as in Karachi  on 7.4.2011 and signed the marriage certificate as a 
witness on th e said date ; he himself appeared as a witness in disproof 
of charge with the support of two other witnesses to establish his plea .  
  Saifullah petitioner and Jamshed appellant  were 
surprisingly not confronted with their alleged employment at the 
poultry f arm, a grievous omission that escaped notice by both the 
courts below . According to the prosecution, the stolen flock was sold at 
an outlet under the name and style of Al-Habib Agency , though 
associated with the investigation, however, none from the outlet  was 
produced during the trial  to prove the sale and instead prosecution 
remained content with some computer generated receipts , genesis 
whereof is shrouded in mystery.   
  Prosecution appears to have rested its case on the judicial 
confession, retracted  by Jamshed appellant  at the first available 
opportunity . We have gone to the confession al statement (Ex.PW -8/C) 
to find it exasperating ly comprehensive as it contains  even minutest 
details , remotely  connected with the incident ; spreading over six pages , 
it is compendium of the prosecution case  that cannot be read without 
disquiet . A deponent struggling to cleans his breast  so as to ventilate 
the remorseful conscience , in the ordinary course of events would 
prefer to confine himself  to the brevity of his crime  instead of catering 
prosecution  needs to successfully prosecute its case , otherwise placed 
in difficult straits . The exercise would essentially require either a 
prompter or an acquiescent  scribe. The cautions administered to 
Jamshed appellant, on a printe d form, mention  that he was tortured by 
police  during custody and, thus, in the totality of circumstances, it is 
difficult to assume, without potential risk of error that statement 
(Ex.PW -8/C) was a voluntary declaration of guilt  that too without any 
meani ngful  corroboration . Once found suspect qua its maker, the 
confessional statement (Ex.PW -8/C) cannot be even considered vis -à-
vis the co -accused . Fraught with doubts, compounded by inherent 
infirmities  cumulatively fail  to safely structure the charge . 
Cons equently,  conviction s cannot be maintained . Criminal Shariat 
Appeals No.9 & 19 of 2019 are  allowed; Jail Shariat petition No.2 of 
2020  is converted into appeal and is also allowed; impugned judgment Criminal Shariat Appeal Nos.9 & 19/2017 and  
Jail Shariat Petition No.02/2020  
 4
is set aside; the appellants are acquitted of the charge and have  
already  been ordered to be released if not required to be detained in 
any other case  by our short order of even date .   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairman  
 
 
Member   Member  
 
 
Member   Member  
Islamabad, the  
3rd December , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 