IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
  
 
 PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar      
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 9 OF 2023  
(Holding General Elections of National Assembly and 
Provincial Assemblies on same date)  
 
 
Sardar Kashif Khan  …Petitioner (s)  
  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, Law and 
Justice Division through its  Secy. to 
the Law and Justice Division and 
others   
 
 
…Respondent(s)  
 
 
For the Petitioner (s) :  Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC 
   
Respondent(s)  : Not repres ented.  
   
   
Date of Hearing  : 19.04.2023 
 
O R D E R 
 
   Mr. Shah Khawar, learned ASC represents a 
concern ed citizen who has approached  the Court to highlight the 
alternate means of a political dialogue  for ending the impasse  on 
the issue of holding  General Elections to  the Punjab and KP 
Provincial Assemblies . Whereas the Court vide its judgment dated 
04.04.2023 had directed the General Elections to Pun jab 
Provinci al Assembly  to be held on 14.05.20 23, there is resista nce 
to compliance with the said direction by the Election Commission 
of Pakist an, Federal Governme nt and the Ministry of Defence. The 
grounds of their reservations are not germane to the present 
petition.  Const.P.9 of 2023   
   2
2.  Learned counsel has argued that for ensuring  
peaceful, honest , just and fair election s there must be 
understa nding a nd mutual respect among the political parties 
that parti cipate  in the general electio ns. He contends that 
historically  the holding of s imult aneous  elections to the National 
Assembl y and four Provincial Assembl ies has secured a more 
durable out come tha n the staggered  election s held in 1970 and 
1977 as are being envisaged presently for the said two Provincial 
Assemblies.  
3.  Prima faci e, the submission  made by the lea rned 
counsel appears t o have substance because  elections are 
contest ed in the political are na and these can be best conducted 
with the feedback and input of all electoral political forces in the 
country  would conte st in such elections.  However, the Court 
considers that the alte rnative rou te proposed by the learned 
counsel can not operate to negate or erase the date fixed by  the 
Court  in its judgment dated 04.04.2023 for the holding of  General 
Elections to the Punjab Provincial Assembly  which is in  line with 
the dictates of the Co nstitution . This is for the reason that 
political dialogue  must not be made a mean s for avoiding the 
impera tive obligation under Articles 11 2 and 224 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973  
(“Constitution ”) to hold a general election to a  provincial 
assembly with 90 days of its dissolution . Therefore , time is  of the 
utmost essence  in exploring the course suggested by the learned 
counsel. Correspondingly, we appreciate the initiative taken by 
the petitioner to propos e the initiat ion of a political  dialogue  as a 
means for sett ling a practical and feasible date on whic h general Const.P.9 of 2023   
   3
elections , that satisfy the requirement  of Article 218(3) o f the 
Constitution , are held.  
4.  Keeping the time constrain t in vie w, notice is  issued 
to the respondents  No.3 to 12 in this petition as well as  to the 
Jamat -e-Islam i th rough its Ameer  for arranging their 
representation through their duly authorized  and instructed 
senior office  beare rs of the respective parties to appear in -person 
before the Court  tomorrow . Notice shall also be issued to the 
Federation of Pakistan , the Election Commission of Pakistan  and 
the Attorney General for Pa kistan under Order  27A of the C PC. 
Office shall sen d the notic es through the various modes provided 
in law including special messenge r and shall re quest the 
electronic and print me dia to convey the Court ’s order t o the 
respective  political par ties.  
5.  To come up tomorrow i.e. 20.04.2023 at 11 :00 am . 
 
 
 
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Islamabad  
19.04.2023  
 Sd/- 
Judge  
 