IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
Constitution Petitions No.39 & 90 of 2011  
 
Ch. Nasir Iqbal & others  (in Const.P.39)  
Imran K han, Chairman, PTI etc  (in Const.P.90)  
Petitioner(s)  
VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan, thr. Secretary Law & 
others  (in Const.P.39)  
Federation of Pakistan  (in Const.P.90)  
Respondent(s)  
 
For the Petitioner(s)  :  
(In Const.P.39/2011)   Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
(In Const.P.90/2011)   Nemo  
 
On Court’s Notice  : Mr. Ifran Qadir, Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, DAG  
  
For the ECP  : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha, ASC  
Syed Sher Afghan, DG (Elections)  
 
For M/O Overseas & OPF  : Raja Muhammad Far ooq, ASC  
Dr. M. Sarwar Zahid, Chief  
Mr. Fayyaz Ahmed Malik. Deputy Chief  
Mr. Khurram Shiraz, L.O. OPF  
 
For the NADRA  : Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC  
Mr. Tariq Malik, Chairman  
Mr. Saqib Jamal, Sr. LO  
For M/O Foreign Affairs  : Mr. Iftikhar Anjum, DG, Oversea s Pakistanis  
 
For M/O Finance  : Mr. Sadaqat Ahmed, SO (L)  
 
Dates of Hearing  : 26 & 29.04.2013  
 
ORDER  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ . — These Constitution 
Petitions have been filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
of the Islamic Republic of Paki stan, 1973, on behalf of Ch. Nasir 
Iqbal and other Expatriate Pakistanis and by Mr. Imran Khan, 
Chairman, PTI and others, instituted as back as on 21.04.2011 Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  2 
and 19.12.2011. The relief claimed in both the mentioned 
Constitution Petitions is somehow an iden tical, therefore, from 
one of the Constitution Petition bearing No.39 of 2011, the same 
has been reproduced herein below: - 
“It is therefore most humbly prayed that the instant 
petition may kindly be accepted and respondents be 
directed to take all those st eps which are necessary for 
implementation of the fundamental right of vote to all 
overseas Pakistanis including arrangements in Consulates 
and Embassies of Pakistan all over the world before the 
next General Election for National and Provincial 
Assemblies  and an opportunity be provided to overseas 
Pakistanis of casting their votes.”  
 
2.  Both the said petitions came up for hearing before this 
Court on different dates commencing from 21.12.2011 when an 
order in the Constitution Petition No.90 of 2011, was p assed. As 
we intend to dispose of both these Constitution Petitions for the 
reasons to be recorded later but consider it appropriate to 
reproduce the order noted hereinbefore in extenso  for the sake of 
comprehending the background of the issues involved in  the 
matters: - 
 “This petition has been filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. The issue 
being raised herein is about declaring that the citizens of 
Pakistan in terms of Article 51 of the Constitution but living 
outside the country, have the fundamental right of 
franchise, therefore, denying such right to the citizens, 
who are reportedly about eight millions living outside the 
country, raises the question of public importance.  
 
2. It may be noted that the citizens ma y be within or 
outside the country have a right to elect their 
representatives for the Parliament and any such person 
who is not residing in the country at the time when the Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  3 
polling takes place, cannot be denied the right of franchise 
solely for the reason  that he is not available in the country.  
 
3. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner states 
that there are three categories of the citizens residing 
outside the country and are being deprived of their right of 
franchise. He has explained the three ca tegories as 
follows: - 
 
 a) Those who are citizens of Pakistan but living 
outside the country or born outside the country 
being national of Pakistan and the passport is issued 
to them by the Government of Pakistan, and they 
are earning their livelihood out side the country and 
making remittances to support their dependants in 
the country;  
 
b) The Officers/Officials of the Diplomatic 
service;  
 
 c) Those citizens, who were originally Pakistanis 
but have acquired the nationality of the other 
country and mainta ining/ holding both the 
nationalities.  
 
4. He has also pointed out that as back as in the year 
1993, Constitution Petition No.26 of 1993 was filed before 
this Court claiming the same relief as it has been prayed 
for by him and in that matter, a larger Ben ch of this Court 
vide judgment dated 15.11.1993 had forwarded the matter 
to the Government of Pakistan for consideration. According 
to him till date there had been correspondence between 
different Ministries but so far no final decision in this 
regard has taken place. He has read before us paras 8, 9 
and 10 of the judgment. For the sake of convenience, the 
same are reproduced herein below: - 
  
   “8. The leaned counsel for the petitioner finally 
suggested that this matter which has already been 
brought to t he notice of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and the Government should in the 
first instance be examined in depth by the Chief 
Election Commissioner and finally by the 
Government with a view to facilitate the exercise of 
franchise by the eligible Pakistani s living abroad. In 
this context the provisions on the subject contained 
in the other comparable Federal Constitutions may 
also be examined and appropriate steps taken 
depending upon the extent of resources of the 
Government.  
 Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  4 
9. We consider that this is a  reasonable 
suggestion and before dealing with the question in 
the abstract on the legal and constitutional plane, it 
would be proper that this exercise is undertaken in 
the first instance by the authorities constitutionally 
entrusted with the task.  
 
 10. As regards the extra territoriality of the laws, 
we may point out that the Constitution already 
provides that “obedience to the Constitution and the 
Laws is the obligation of every citizen wherever he 
may be”. This suggests the Pakistanis living abroad 
to the laws of the land even those which do not 
have extra territoriality. With these observations, 
the Petition is disposed of.”  
 
5. The learned counsel has also referred to a write -up, 
purported to have been issued by the Electronic 
Government Directorate,  Ministry of IT & Telecom, 
Government of Pakistan and has referred to its different 
captions which are as under: - 
 
 a) Grant of Right of vote to Overseas Pakistanis;  
 
  b) Representations of Overseas Pakistanis in the 
National and Provincial Assemblies;  
 
   c) Action taken on the issues.  
 
From the last mentioned caption ‘ action taken on the 
issues ’ following items being important and relevant to 
subject are noted for reference: - 
 
i) Giving a right to vote to citizens residing 
overseas has precedent in man y countries, e.g. 
France, United States, etc.  
 
ii) Determination/delimitation of a constituency 
for each Province (as proposed in the said summary) 
may not be possible for Overseas Pakistanis citizens.  
 
iii) Many Overseas Pakistanis especially in the 
United States are not allowed to keep their 
Pakistanis citizenship if they become naturalized 
citizens there, in such a situation, they will not be 
able to vote for representation in Pakistani 
legislatives.   
 
iv) The Election Commission of Pakistan has re -
constituted the S pecial Committee on right of vote 
to overseas Pakistanis under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, Election Commission of Pakistan including 
the representative from Prime Minister’s Secretariat, 
Ministry of Overseas Pakistanis, M/o Foreign Affairs, 
M/o Law & Ju stice, M/o Parliamentary Affairs, M/o 
Finance, National Database & Registration Authority Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  5 
(NADRA), Overseas Pakistanis Foundation (OPF) and 
offices of Election Commission of Pakistan.  
 
6. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan, however, 
requests that he nee ds some time to consult Ministry of 
Law & Justice, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of 
Overseas Pakistanis and the Election Commission of 
Pakistan and states that after taking instructions from 
these departments, he would be in a better position to 
make his submissions.  
 
7. In above view of the matter, the case is adjourned. 
In the meantime, office is directed to issue notice to the 
respondents to file their replies/concise statements to the 
petition within a period of two weeks. Copy of this order 
along with memo of the petition and its annexures be 
supplied to the respondents during course of the day. On 
receipt of replies/concise statements from the 
respondents, office shall put up the matter in Court for 
hearing.     
 
3.  A perusal of the above orde r finds mention ed an 
earlier effort made by the overseas Pakistanis in the case of  Miss 
Yasmin Khan and another v. Election Commission of Pakistan, 
Islamabad through Secretary an another  (1994 SCMR 113) when 
the said Constitution Petition was admitted to regular hearing on 
04.10. 1993, and notices were issued to all concerned. Finally , by 
a Larger Bench of this Court, the above petition was disposed of 
on 15.11.1993. The relevant para therefrom finds mention ed in 
the order, reproduced hereinabove.  
4.  Syed Sher Afgan, Director General (Elections), ECP, 
stated that according to his knowledge the observations of this 
Court in the case of Yasmin  Khan (ibid) were considered by the 
Cabinet in 1996 -1997 but approval was not granted for extending 
the Right to Expat riate Pakistanis but refused to extend them Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  6 
Right of Franchise , to be exercised outside the country. However, 
he had not pla ced on record any such decision.  If, same is 
available, he  may place the same on record so we may 
incorporate the same in the reason s, which shall be recorded 
later.  
5.  It is to be noted that the ECP, following the 
background of the matter commencing from the judgment in the 
case of Yasmin Khan  (ibid), constituted a Committee in October, 
1997, to consider these issues. Unfortunately,  the final decision 
could not be taken, as it is reported that on the part of the 
Government, no progress could be made.  
6.  Again on 17.11.2009, a Special Committee was 
constituted to consider the following two questions:  
“i. Whether right of vote to over seas Pakistanis should 
be granted to them and if so, what method including 
personal voting and voting through fax, etc. should 
be adopted after examining threadbare the 
feasibility of the method so agreed upon by the 
Committee;  
 
ii. Whether granting repres entation to overseas 
Pakistanis in the National and Provincial Assemblies 
by reserving seats therein and electing the 
representatives of overseas Pakistanis on such seats 
through proportional representation system is a 
suitable option.”  
  
7.  This Committe e, headed by the Secretary, ECP, had 
furnished its report on 20.01.2012, we are not aware regarding 
the proceedings or implementation of the recommendations of the 
Committee subsequent thereto, thus, we asked the Director 
General (Elections), ECP, to place  the same on record. In the Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  7 
meanwhile, from time to time, hearing continued and on 
25.04.2013, CMA No.2389 of 2013, was presented under the 
signature of the learned Attorney General for Pakistan, wherein as 
many as 27 concerns were shown for consideration of this Court.  
8.  Notice of the above CMA was issued to the Chairman, 
NADRA, who had submitted reply. The relevant para  therefrom is 
reproduced herein below:  
 
“6. NADRA has already requested Election Commission 
of Pakistan through its letter dated 1st April 2013 to convey 
its final decision of opting e -Voting solution or otherwise 
before 5th April 2013. With each passing day, smooth and 
seamless deployment of proposed solution is becoming an 
increasingly challenging task. From 1st April till date i.e. 
26th April 2013, NADRA has yet to receive a green signal 
from ECP. Hence, the resultant loss of time which was the 
most precious commodity in our hands. However, holding 
the Honorable Supreme Court in highest esteem and 
considering it a privilege to be of assi stance in enabling 
overseas Pakistanis to exercise their right of adult 
franchise, NADRA remains unwaivered in its resolve and 
wholeheartedness to comply with any direction passed by 
the Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan.”  
 
9.  The Ministry of Foreign Af fairs in its reply finally g ave 
its reaction in respect of the concerns shown on behalf of the 
Government, which reads as under: - 
“The Ministry of Foreign Affairs reassures the Honorable 
Court that it will use all of its available resources to 
implement th e decision of the Honourable Supreme Court 
and the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP), on granting 
the right to vote to Overseas Pakistanis.  
 
The Ministry has previously also submitted to the 
Honourable Supreme Court its position on the subject in 
CMA N o.1973/2013 on 11 April, 2013.  Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  8 
 
In this regard, in anticipation of the decision of the 
Honourable Supreme Court and the ECP, the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs has already taken practical steps which 
include, seeking the necessary permission from the 
governme nts of the nine short -listed countries enumerated 
by the ECP.  
 
In this context, the following 07 countries have already 
conveyed their permission for conducting polling in their 
respective territories with the proviso that the date and 
timing of the electi on should be conveyed to them in a 
timely manner in order to enable them to make the 
necessary security/administrative arrangements. The 07 
countries which have conveyed their permission are:  
 
 (i) Australia;  
 (ii) Bahrain;  
 (iii) Canada;  
 (iv) Kuwait;  
 (v) Oman;  
 (vi) Saudi Arabia; and  
 (vii) UK. 
 
The response of the remaining two countries – UAE and 
USA – is awaited. Our Heads of Mission in these two 
countries are in touch with the concerned host authorities.  
 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs being an inte gral part of the 
overall governmental machinery was consulted in drafting 
of the CMA No.2389/13. The apprehensions and 
reservations contained therein, relate to the capacity 
limitations of the Missions. It was therefore, deemed 
necessary to apprise the Cou rt about the constraints, which 
may impede the smooth conduction of the polling process. 
Therefore, bringing these capacity issues to the attention of 
the Honourable Court was considered necessary and is in 
conformance with the duty of the Foreign Ministry . 
 
Nonetheless, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reiterates its 
commitment and reassures the Honourable Court and the 
ECP that it stands ready with all its resources at its disposal 
to carry out any task assigned to it for the realization of the 
right to vo te to Overseas Pakistanis.”   Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  9 
 
10.  The Ministry of the Overseas Pakistanis disclosed as 
under: -  
“10. It is again submitted that the Ministry of Overseas 
Pakistanis is in coordination with the relevant Ministries 
and would provide all possible assistance t hrough its CWA 
Missions working under the respective Heads of Missions 
i.e. Ambassadors/High Commissioners in line with the 
directions of the Honourable Supreme Court.”  
 
11.  On behalf of Ministry of Finance, Mr. Sadaqat Ahmed, 
Section Officer (Litigation)  appeared and stated that the Finance 
Ministry is ready and willing to provide funding as per the 
direction of this Court or the ECP.  
12.  Syed Sher Afgan, Director General (Elections), ECP, 
stated that the issue under discussion had been considered by th e 
Chief Election Commissioner as well as by the Commission, which 
is reproduced hereunder:  
  “6. In view of the above, if the learned Members agree, 
we may respectfully inform the Supreme Court tomorrow 
that although we welcome their observations in relat ion to 
giving Overseas Pakistanis the right to vote, the ECP is of 
the considered view that this initiative should not be 
hurriedly implemented for the forthcoming elections.”  
 
13.   It is to be noted that on 26.04.2013 , the Court started 
dictating the ord er and meanwhile learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan so also Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, Sr. ASC, for the 
ECP sought time to seek instructions in this behalf from the 
Election Commission of Pakistan.  Now today (29th April) the 
learned Attorney General f or Pakistan appeared and has 
presented under his signatures a statement (CMA No.2454 of Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  10 
2013) which is the outcome of a meeting held by him with the 
ECP.  For convenience, the same is reproduced herein below: - 
“1. That the undersigned held a meeting with t he Chief 
Election Commissioner and all the members of the Election 
Commission of Pakistan (ECP).  The ECP has appreciated 
the role of the Supreme Court of Pakistan (SCP) keeping in 
view the utmost concern, desire and expectation which the 
apex Court has wi th the former qua enabling the Overseas 
Pakistanis to cast their votes outside their constituency 
and country.  On this premise the voters residing within 
their country but residing outside their constituency or 
province deserve at the least a similar trea tment.  Surely 
all this is possible depending on finances and time frame.  
2. That during the meeting, the ECP unanimously 
agreed to accomplish the desired task while requesting the 
Government of Pakistan to prepare requisite proposals for 
effecting the req uired legislation which may be made 
applicable to the aforesaid voters after the forthcoming 
General Elections in the country.  
3. That the ECP has also expressed its satisfaction with 
regard to the efforts made so far by various departments 
of the federal government in carrying out the necessary 
steps in extending cooperation to achieve the desired 
results in the shortest possible time thereby enabling the 
ECP to agree to the applicability of the aforesaid legislative 
proposals in the above terms.”  
 
14.  A perusal of the statement reproduced hereinabove 
clarifies that the ECP recognizes the right to exercise franchise to 
expatriate Pakistanis on well known principle of law that they 
deserve at least a similar treatment and facilitation qua the voters 
residin g within the country but outside their constituency or 
province.  
15.  However, reservations for extending the facility to 
expatriate as expressed is the non -availability of the requisite 
legislation in respect whereof the ECP has agreed to accomplish Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  11 
the d esired task by requesting the Government of Pakistan to do 
the needful but after the forthcoming General Elections in the 
country added with the reason of non -availability of finances and 
the paucity of time in view of the facts noted hereinabove.  View 
point of the Ministry of Finance and other Ministries has 
categorically noted on the previous dates of hearing wherein they 
had expressed their desire to accomplish the task by providing 
finances as per the directions of this Court or the ECP and likewise 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Chairman NADRA and the Ministry of 
Overseas Pakistanis had also given positive response in this 
behalf.  It is equally important to note that the ECP has expressed 
its satisfaction with regard to the efforts made so far by variou s 
departments of the Federal Government in carrying out the 
necessary steps in extending co -operations to achieve the desired 
results in the shortest possible time thereby enabling the ECP to 
agree to the applicability of the aforesaid legislative proposal s in 
the above terms.  
16.  We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners, 
the Representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Overseas 
Pakistanis, Finance as well as the ECP and the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan. However, the learned  Attorney General for 
Pakistan, questioned the maintainability of the petitions, as 
according to him, neither the Fundamental Right of the petitioners 
is involved nor the ECP being an independent institution is obliged 
to provide them the facility to exerc ise the Right of Franchise 
outside the territory of Pakistan  and, if any Overseas Pakistani 
comes on the day of polling he can exercise the Right of 
Franchise. The jurisdiction of this Court has also been objected to Const.Ps.39 & 90/2011.  12 
by him in granting the relief.  He furt her argued that it is the job 
of the ECP to arrange the Elections, therefore, no direction can be 
issued to the ECP for providing the facilities to Expatriates to 
exercise their Right of Franchise outside the Pakistan. He further 
stated that as the legisla tion has to be promulgated and it is not 
the job of this Court but of the National Assembly, which is 
presently stands resolved and until an Assembly is elected, no 
legislation is possible besides this Court cannot take upon itself to 
legislate the laws.  
17.  Thus, under the circumstances, we are of the opinion 
that once on having recognized that facility can be extended to 
the expatriates to exercise right of franchise, the ECP’s further 
efforts/input is required to achieve the object in the forthcoming 
General Elections can conveniently be achieved.  
18.   Therefore, for the reasons to be recorded later, we 
dispose of both the petitions with the observations that let the 
ECP make all possible efforts to achieve the object, as has been 
noted hereinabove so  the expatriates may also participate in the 
forthcoming General Elections in exercise of their fundamental 
rights conferred under Article 17(2) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  
 
 
 
 CJ. 
  
 
 
Islamabad  J.  
29.04.2013  
*Hashmi * J.  
 
  