IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Mian Shakirullah Jan  
Mr. Justice Mahmood Akhtar Shahid Siddiqui  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
Mr. Justic e Amir Hani Muslim  
 
SUO MOTU CASE NO. 24 of 2010  
 
[Regarding Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010]  
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASES NO.57701 -P, 57719 -G, 57754 -P, 58152 -P, 
59036 -S, 59060 -P, 54187 -P & 58118 -K of 2010  AND 1291 -K & 
1292 -K of 2011  
 
[Applica tions by Abdu l Rasheed & others]   
 
On Court notice:   Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, A.G. Balochistan  
Mr. M. Azam Khattak, Addl. AG, Balochistan  
Syed Arshad Hussain Shah, Addl. A.G., KPK  
Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser, Addl. AG Punja b  
 
For M/o Religious  Hafiz Sher Ali, JS, HAJJ  
Affairs  
 
For FIA:    Syed Tehseen Anwar Ali Shah , DG 
    Mr. Muhammad Azam, Director Law  
 
Date of hearing :   29.07 .2011    
 
ORDER  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  – The instant 
case relates to massive corrup tion in the Hajj arrangements for the 
Hajj 2010. A Committee of the Parliamentarians , namely, Moulana 
Muhammad Qasim, MNA, Chairman Standing Committee for Religious 
Affairs (National Assembly), Syed Muhammad Saleh Shah, Senator, 
Chairman Standing Committee  for Religious Affairs (Senate), Pirzada 
Syed Imran Ahmad Shah, MNA, Mr. Bilal Yaasin, MNA and Dr. Khalid 
Mehmood Soomro was  constituted by the Prime Minister  who visited SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  2 
Saudi Arabia so as to observe the Hajj arrangements . Vide letter dated 
01.09.2010 the  said Committee reported to the Prime Minister that 
corruption and malpractices were committed by the officials  of the 
Ministry of Religious Affairs in the Hajj arrangements  in the hiring of 
buildings for the Hujjaj . A copy of the letter was also sent to o ne of us 
(Chief Justice).    
 
2.  Senator Khalid Mehmood Soomro also requested this Court 
(Chief Justice) through electronic media in TV Programme “ Duniya  
Mere Aage”  relayed by a private channel to initiate probe into the 
matter. Likewise, prior to the requ est made by the Parliamentarians, a 
letter from H.E. Prince Bander Bin Khalid Bin Abdul Aziz al -Saud was 
also received by this Court alleging corruption and embezzlement in 
Hajj arrangements on the part of the officials responsible in hiring 
accommodation for the Hujjaj in regard to the buildings which were 
situated distantly from the Haram on exorbitant rates in place of 
buildings available on much less rent which were nearer/closer to the 
Haram. Giving importance to this letter as it was received from a 
highly respectable personality of brotherly country, on 29.10.2010 the 
following order was passed: -  
“…This issue seems to be serious and may cause bad 
name for our Government. Call for comments from 
Secretary, Religious Affairs and this matter be also 
brought into the notice of Foreign Affairs.”  
 
3.  Comments were also called from the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs in this regard. It is important to note that as per news clippings 
titled “Hajj Accommodation Scam” published in the Daily Dawn dated 
07.11.2010, a Senator demanded a ‘House Committee’ to probe into 
the allegations contained in the letter of the Saudi Prince, addressed to 
the Chief Justice about exorbitant rent being charged from Pakistani SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  3 
pilgrims for their accommodations in Makkah. This news item further 
added that the issue has rattled many people and concerns have been 
expressed in both Houses of Parliament, therefore, Government must 
probe the matter to make the truth known to the people and take 
appropriate action if necessary and streamline th e accommodation for 
them in future. Similarly, the ‘Daily Nawa -i-Waqt’ in its edition 
published on 10.11.2010 carried a report titled “Hajj Intizamat  main 
honewali  corruption”, alleging that the former DG, Hajj Rao Shakeel 
Ahmed was appointed to the office  in violation of the rules, with a view 
to facilitate him in indulging in corruption. The said DG has a tainted 
past with corruption case pending against him in the Accountability 
Court, Lahore. The report further alleged that notwithstanding the fact 
of genuineness or otherwise of the Prince’s letter, its contents are 
accurate, inasmuch as exorbitant rent has been charged from the 
pilgrims for providing them cheap accommodation located at a 
distance of 3 to 3 ½ KM from the Haram. The report bemoans of the 
corrupt practices being resorted to by the officials who were looking 
after the interest and welfare of the pilgrims.  
 
4.  The parliamentarians, print media and electronic media not 
only highlighted the corruption in regard to the hiring of buildings 
located distantly from ‘Har am’ at exorbitant rent and charging the 
pilgrims ostensibly at high rate of S.R.3600 demanded prob e into the 
matter. This issue also published in largely circulated newspapers 
including Daily ‘Dawn’, The ‘News International’, ‘Jinnah’ , ‘Jang’ and 
Daily ‘Naw -e-waqt’ with editorials.  
 
5.   During the Hajj, some of the Hujjaj submitted applications 
to Khalil -ur-Rehman Ramday, J., (as he then was) complaining ill SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  4 
treatment during the Hajj. Mr. Ramday forwarded such applications to 
the Chi ef Justice with the following remarks: -  
“A large number of persons came to me in Makkah 
Mukarramah and even in Mina complaining of grave 
mismanagement in the Hajj arrangements regarding 
the buildings hired in Makkah and Madina and the 
accommodation in Min a. The stories narrated were 
pathetic. Complaints were made even in writing. I 
appear to have misplaced those written complaints, 
but two of them are available with me, which I am 
placing before you for such action as may be deemed 
appropriate to eliminate  the sufferings of thousands 
of Hajis who collect penniesall their lives to perform 
Hajj and this is how the money earned by them 
through their blood and sweat is wasted.”  
 
6.  Vide order dated 02.12.2010, the matter was ordered to 
be heard on the judicia l side. In the meanwhile, the Court was 
informed during the hearing of the case that Rao Shakeel Ahmed , had 
been facing criminal proceedings in Reference No. 76 of 2007 pending 
adjudication before the Accountability Court No. II, Lahore wherein 
evidence o f 18 out of 32 witnesses was recorded. Court was further 
informed that investigation in NAB case on the charge of assets 
beyond known sources of income was pending against him. The said 
investigation was pending since 2004 and at one stage, one 
investigati ng officer recommended for cancellation of the case on the 
ground that no case was made out, but the NAB Headquarter declined 
the recommendation and ordered for reinvestigation of the case. It is 
important to note that his name was also placed on the ECL a t the 
time when he was selected out of a panel of three persons as DG Hajj. 
This fact was revealed to the Court by Mr. Khushnood Akhtar Lashari, 
the then Secretary Establishment, who placed on record summary of SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  5 
the appointment of Rao Shakeel Ahmed  as DG Ha jj. According to the 
summary, his name was considered along with two other officers, 
namely, Mr. Nayyar Mahmood and Mr. Sajjad Haider Afzal by a 
Departmental Selection Committee for said appointment. It may not 
be out of context to observe that in the summ ary, it was categorically 
mentioned that two NAB cases were pending against Rao Shakeel 
Ahmed . However, the Prime Minister approved him to be appointed as 
Director General Hajj, Jeddah.  
 
7.  According to a report, which was filed by Mr. Nasar Hayat, 
the t hen Additional Secretary that Rao Shakeel Ahmed  himself had 
applied to Federal Minister for Interior, Government of Pakistan, Mr. A. 
Rehman Malik for deletion of his name from the ECL. Interestingly, 
perusal of the letter indicates that on an SMS message b y the Interior 
Minister, the name of Rao Shakeel Ahmed  was removed from the ECL 
though cases were pending against him before NAB.  
 
8.  The then Minister for Hajj and Religious Affairs, Syed 
Saeed Kazmi, who is presently in custody, was also involved, in t he 
Hajj Scam, he, therefore, appeared before this Court voluntarily along 
with his counsel. Another Minister of the Government, Mr. Azam Khan 
Swati, Minister for Science and Technology, who was complainant, in 
response to the notice also appeared before th e Court and filed reply 
and undertook to furnish material connecting the officials with 
corruption. He was directed to appear before the FIA authorities where 
the case has been registered. The DG FIA Mr. Wasim Ahmed along 
with Director Law and different in vestigation officers did participate in 
the proceedings.  
 SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  6 
9.  Since it was a high profile case relating to massive 
corruption, hue and cry was raised against it all over the country as 
well as abroad against the Minister of the Federal Government and 
other  High Officials. The Members of the Parliament and the Hujjaj 
also started appearing before the Court during proceedings and joint 
application signed by 1 22 Hujjaj was also filed before this Court raising 
painful voice, highlighting the corruption and the miseries the pilgrims 
had to suffer during the Hajj. Keeping in view the prestige and honour 
of the country, and to ensure above the board accountability of the 
wrongdoers responsible for massive corruption, it was only possible if 
the investigation on the  criminal side was carried out by appointing 
experienced officer as Investigating officer, having capability of dealing 
with the case, without being influenced by any authority. Therefore, it 
was pointed out to the DG, FIA that instead of investigating the  case 
from grade 16 officer, who did not show any interest in the 
investigation, and his performance was unsatisfactory, should appoint 
some senior officer in order to see that investigation is carried out 
transparently, in accordance with law without cari ng status of the 
accused.  
 
10.  A perusal of the record suggests that on the dates of 
hearing, the affected Hujjaj one by one started submitting applications 
before this Court. In this behalf, one Muhammad Ali, a retired officer 
of grade 21, who performed  Hajj 2010 , narrated painful story of 
miseries he and his family members faced during the Hajj, particularly 
in respect of the events, which took place in Mina as well as in Makkah 
due to the acts and deeds of the functionaries responsible for making 
Hajj arrangements . He portrayed a sordid picture of events, which 
according to him had taken place for obvious reason of malpractice, SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  7 
corruption and mismanagement on the part of the functionaries 
responsible in that behalf.  
 
11.  At this point of time, it tran spired that the Ministry of Hajj 
had charged SR 700 from each Haji for providing them suitable 
accommodation in Mina and admittedly they were not provided 
accommodation despite collecting the rent from them .  Therefore, by 
order dated 13.12.2010 the Secret ary, Religious Affairs was directed 
to refund the amount of SR 700 to the said pilgrims and submit 
certificate to this effect before the next date of hearing. We may 
observe that in pursuance of the  aforesaid  directions, the Government 
of Pakistan had reim bursed an amount of 470 million rupees to about 
25000 Hujjaj, which amount was charged form them  towards rent  but 
they were not provided accommodation and were made to suffer the 
agony of non -accommodation. On the said date, Mr. Wasim Ahmed, 
DG, FIA submit ted report, which report was incorporated in the order 
of that date wherein it was stated as under: -  
“11. Mr. Waseem Ahmed, Director General, FIA has 
submitted his report, concluding paras therefrom are 
reproduced herein below : - 
“3. in the light of the  facts brought on record the 
role of those, senior and junior, already under 
arrest needs to be probed further to ascertain their 
involvement in the corruption and 
mismanagement.  
4. It seems from the facts and circumstances of 
the case that Secretary was h aving no control on 
the affairs of the Directorate General of Hajj, 
Jeddah. DG/Hajj appears to have assumed 
unchecked authority in all administrative and 
financial matters. The hiring procedure after 
repatriation of Shakeel Ahmed Rao, completed 
under the s upervision of Secretary MORA, was also 
not in accordance with the policy. This reflects 
gross mismanagement and loses control on the 
part of Secretary MORA.  SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  8 
5. Incriminating evidence is yet to be collected 
from Saudi Arabia, especially, once Ahmad Faiz s/o  
Muhammad Shafi is arrested and interrogated.  
6. Accurate determination of those involved in 
crime, both directly or indirectly hinges on the 
finding of the FIA team that is proceeding to 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, where all transactions 
took place, funds (i ll-gotten money) were 
transferred/remitted and the concerned officials 
and private persons were located. ” 
 
He further stated that Mr. Hussain Asghar, Director, FIA 
with the rank of DIG, Police has been appointed as head 
of the Investigating Team, who with his team is 
proceeding today to Saudi Arabia for conducting further 
investigation. ”  
 
 
12.  Mr. Hussain Asghar, Director FIA with the rank of DIG 
Police, was assigned the task to head investigation in the Hajj Scam. 
He took over the charge and accelerated the investigation by collecting 
evidence . During the course of investigation, he also visited Saudi 
Arabia. In addition to Mr. Hussain Asghar, another officer was 
associated to accelerate investigation. One of the Federal Minister was 
supporting the allega tion of corruption against the other Federal 
Minister. This Court wanted to ensure that the investigation of the case 
must be conducted in a transparent manner and also desired that the 
facts be brought into the notice of the Prime Minister, who may 
person ally look into the matter and ensure that the investigation is 
conducted without influence of any official against whom allegations of 
corruption and or corrupt practices have been leveled.  
 
13.  When the investigation was in progress and sufficient 
incriminating evidence was collected by the investigation team headed 
by Mr. Hussain Asghar, Syed Jawaid Ali Shah Bokhari, was posted as SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  9 
Additional Director General, FIA, and the officers earlier assigned 
investigation were disassociated without assigning reaso n. Mr. Hussain 
Asghar who was heading the investigation team had started unfolding 
different aspects of the case and had collected sufficient material 
during investigation against influential persons, well placed in the 
Government. On appointment of Syed J awaid Ali Shah Bokhari, he was 
assigned investigation but he disassociated himself for which his 
explanation was sought.  His reply was to the effect that as his 
promotion was due in grade 22, therefore, he wanted to avail the 
chance. However, separate obse rvations have been made  against him 
directing the Government to initiate departmental proceedings against 
him as he had refused to perform his duties. We would not like to 
comment upon this aspect of the case at this stage as it might cause 
prejudice to th e Mr. Jawaid Bukhai in the departmental proceedings 
pending against him.  
 
14.  As far as Hussain Asghar is concerned, he also appeared 
and had placed before the Court Notification of his transfer to Gilgit -
Baltistan as Inspector General Police, therefore,  explanation of Malik 
Muhammad Iqbal, DG FIA who had, in the meanwhile had taken over  
the charge,  was sought. This Court was of the view that, he being a 
senior officer instead of ensuring to accelerate progress of the 
investigation in the right direction started hampering the investigation 
after taking over the charge and things had come to a stand still. After 
the transfer of Mr. Hussain Asghar, no progress in the investigation 
was made and the DG, FIA, was called upon to explain as to why in 
the mid of t he investigation when the case was proceeding towards its SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  10 
logical end, he spared and relieved Mr. Hussain Asghar without 
bringing into the notice of this Court.  
 
15.  The D.G, FIA, has stated that he had no objection if       
Mr. Hussain Asghar was re -posted to complete investigation and in this 
regard Malik Muhammad Iqbal, then D.G, FIA, had sent a letter for 
reposting of Mr. Hussain Asghar, but no response was received from 
the competent authority. On 10.6.2011, the then Secretary 
Establishment and D.G, FIA, appeared in Court and sought time to 
enable them to approach the competent authority for reposting of Mr. 
Hussain Asghar in the FIA. The case was adjourned and again on 
25.7.2011 when it was taken up no progress was shown to have been 
made, therefore,  on the said date, following order was passed: -    
   
 
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry,  C.J. On the 
last date of hearing the following order was passed: 
- 
“…..The Secretary Establishment is present and confirmed 
about obtaining sparability report of the Office r from the 
Director General, FIA through Secretary Interior and on 
getting positive reply from him, he was posted out. 
However, both of them, i.e. the Secretary Establishment 
and the Director General, FIA stated that some time be 
given to them so that they  may again approach the 
Competent Authority for re -posting of Mr. Hussain Asghar 
in the FIA. The case is adjourned. To be fixed after two 
weeks.”  
2. It appears that compliance has not been made 
so far as a result whereof no progress in the 
investigation of  the Hajj scam case is being made as 
no responsible or serious officer has been posted. 
Undoubtedly this Court has time and again politely 
expressed its desire that a person who is capable to 
deliver should be posted to carry out the SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  11 
investigation but it s eems that orders of this Court 
are being flouted intentionally.  
3. Under the circumstances we direct the 
Secretary, Establishment Division, that he should 
immediately, during the course of the day, issue 
transfer orders of Mr. Hussain Asghar as Director F IA 
enabling him to resume his duty as such and 
continue to investigate the case otherwise he should 
appear and face the proceedings for non -compliance 
of the order. In the meanwhile, he shall also put up 
the list of the officers available at that time when  Mr. 
Hussain Asghar was posted as I.G. Gilgit Baltistan 
because it seems that in order to disassociate him 
from the present proceedings he was posted out on 
taking a report about the sparability from the DG FIA 
who also dishonestly gave the report knowing well 
that Mr. Hussain Asghar is conducting investigation 
of an important case in which not only the pilgrims 
have been looted but it has also brought a bad name 
to the country. It is important to note that after Mr. 
Hussain Asghar was posted out no further  progress 
has been made in the case.  
4. On the issuance of the notification during the 
course of the day DG FIA is directed to provide him 
every cooperation and assistance alongwith his team 
which was already conducting the investigation.  
5. Adjourned for tomorrow i.e., 26.07.2011.  
 
16.  Under the above circumstances, Secretary Establishment 
forwarded a summary for the reposting of Mr. Hussain Asghar  and as 
the needful was not done, therefore, he was asked to comply with the 
Court order by issuing the Notif ication. Accordingly , he obeyed the 
judicial order and issued the Notification of transfer of Mr. Hussain 
Asghar  on 26.07.20121, but it seems that so far he had not reported 
to the FIA Headquarter as according to the learned Attorney General 
for Pakistan  no direct contact had been established so far with him SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  12 
except information collected form the documents from the Chief 
Secretary, Gilgit -Baltistan that the said administration had declined to 
relieve him without provision of replacement.  
 
17.  The learned Attorney General for Pakistan  in this respect 
has placed on record following report dated 2 8.7.2011: - 
“REPORT ON BEHALF OF DIRECTOR GENERAL FIA  
Respectfully Sheweth:  
  In continuation of previous report submitted on 
27.07.2011, the following steps have bee n taken in pursuance of 
the directions given by the apex Court on 28.07.2011 : -  
i. ADG Mr. Muhammad Manzoor tried to contact from 
his cell number 0321 -9480003 with Mr. Hussain 
Asghar on his cell phone number 0345 -3056663 & 
0355-5550161 but the same were not  responding.  
ii. DIG HQ Gilgit Baltistan Police was contacted to know 
about IGP (Mr. Hussain Asghar). He informed that 
the IGP was in Skardu but he is having no contact 
with him. The DIG however, Faxed a copy of the 
Service Department, Government of Gilgit Ba ltistan 
Notification dated 26.07.2011 addressed to IGP, 
containing directions that “the Chief Minister Gilgit 
Baltistan has verbally directed you not to relinquish 
the charge of IG Police Gilgit Baltistan without 
approval of the competent authority (Chief Minister, 
GB) and without provision of your replacement” 
(Annex -A) 
iii. DIG HQ was asked to establish contact with IGP and 
inform him about the orders of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of Pakistan, dated 27.07.2011. He was also 
asked to communicate with SP Skardu for lo cating 
Mr. Hussain Asghar and deliver the message to IGP 
by utilizing wireless communication network.  SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  13 
iv. The copies of the orders of Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan dated 27.7.2011 have separately been 
faxed to the Chief Secretary, Government of Gilgit 
Baltistan (fax no.05811 -920144) and the Inspector 
General Police G.B. (fax no.05811 -930015) for 
immediate compliance (Annex - C & D).   
v. Director General FIA gives an assurance to the apex 
court that as and when Mr. Hussain Asghar reports 
for duty in FIA, the in vestigation of Hajj Scam cases 
will be handed over to him and the investigation 
team, already working with him, will be re -attached 
with the officer. He will also be facilitated in all 
manners to carry out the investigation of the Hajj 
Scam cases.  
Sd/- 
Syed Tahsin Anwar Ali Shah  
Director General/FIA  
28.07.2011 ” 
 
 
18.  Interestingly in compliance with the order of this Court Mr. 
Sohail Ahmed, the then Secretary Establishment, who issued 
notification of transfer of Mr. Hussain Asgar, was made OSD vide 
notification dated 26.7.2011, copy of which has been placed on record 
which reads as follows: - 
“Mr. Sohail Ahmed, a BS -22 officer of Secretariat 
Group, presently posted as Secretary, Establishment 
Division, is transferred and posted as OSD, 
Establishment Divisio n, with immediate effect and 
until further orders.”  
 
19.  This Court is of the view that if a civil servant  like Mr. 
Sohail Ahmad , who had stood for supremacy of the Constitution and 
Rule of Law has obeyed the judicial order , he could  not have been 
penaliz ed by making him O.S.D. It is well settled that placing an officer 
as OSD is tantamount to penalizing him because the expression ‘OSD’ 
is not known to either the Civil Servant Act, 1973 or the Civil Servant’s 
Appointment Promotion and Transfer Rules, 1973.  We may deal with SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  14 
this aspect of the case in subsequent part of this order. O n 27th July, 
2011 all these facts were incorporated in the order, which is self 
explanatory, therefore, the same is reproduced herein below: - 
“Syed Tehseen Anwar Ali Shah, DG FIA has appeared 
and states that the orders passed by this Court 
dated 25.07.2011 and 26.07.2011, pursuant to 
which Establishment Division has issued Notification 
on 26th July, 2011, transferring Mr. Hussain Asghar 
from the office of Inspector General, Gilgit Baltistan 
to Director, FIA enabling him to conduct investigation 
of the Hajj scam case, shall be fully implemented. 
According to him the investigation team which was 
headed by Mr. Hussain Aghar earlier has also joined 
him in investigation. He, however, fur ther states that 
Mr. Hussain Asghar so far has not reported to the 
FIA Headquarters. The DG FIA has submitted that he 
was out of station i.e. in Karachi and has reached 
last night and could not contact Mr. Hussain Asghar. 
He, however, ensures that Mr. Huss ain Asghar will 
reach Islamabad immediately on relinquishing the 
charge and shall take over the charge of the Director 
FIA either by air if any flight is available or he could 
be asked to reach Islamabad by Road.  
 
2. In view of the above, we postponed the  hearing of 
the case for this purpose till tomorrow to see 
whether Mr. Hussain Asghar has assumed the charge 
as Director FIA in compliance with the orders of this 
Court dated 25.07.2011 and 26.07.2011.  
 
3. It has been reported in the Electronic and Print 
Media that Mr. Sohail Ahmed, Secretary 
Establishment has been removed from his office and 
has been made OSD. This development has taken 
place soon after the issuance of the Notification by 
him transferring Mr. Hussain Asghar from the office 
of the Inspecto r General of Police Gilgit Baltistan to 
Director FIA to enable him to continue the 
investigation of the Hajj corruption scam. In fact the 
Secretary Establishment in compliance with the 
orders of this Court, has issued the notification of 
transfer of Mr. Hu ssain Asghar as Director FIA.  
 
4. We may observe that prior to passing of the 
orders on 25th and 26th July, 2011, the observations 
were made by this Court at times requiring the 
Competent Authority to transfer and post Mr. 
Hussain Asghar as Director FIA t o enable him to 
conduct the investigation in Hajj Scam case which 
case has not only brought bad name to the country 
but also reveals that senior government officials and 
influential persons are involved in the scam who 
have pocketed huge amounts. After the  transfer of SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  15 
Mr. Hussain Asghar to the Gilgit, the investigation in 
the scam had come to a stand still. Despite repeated 
efforts, Mr. Hussain Asghar, who was previously 
conducting the investigation and has made break 
through was not brought back as Directo r, FIA as a 
result whereof this Court was left with no option but 
to pass the orders in exercise of its Constitutional 
Jurisdiction. During the course of proceedings on 
26th July, 2011, it has also been revealed that Mr. 
Sohail Ahmed, Secretary Establishme nt had floated a 
summary to the Competent Authority regarding 
transfer of Mr. Hussain Ashgar, as Director FIA but 
no action was taken on it by the Competent 
Authority.  
 
5. Needless to observe that this Court is of the 
considered view that once a judicial order is passed, 
it has binding effect on the Executive as well as 
Judicial functionaries in terms of Articles 5 and 190 
of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan. 
Therefore, the attention of Mr. Sohail Ahmed, 
Secretary Establishment was drawn to wards these 
Constitutional provisions, non -compliance of which 
would have exposed him liable to contempt 
proceedings. This fact finds place in our order passed 
in the earlier past of the day on 26.07.2011. 
However, Mr. Sohail Ahmed, Secretary Establishment  
has complied with the order after tea break when the 
Court assembled for further hearing and placed the 
copy of the notification in terms of order of this 
Court. The language of the notification clearly speaks 
this fact that the notification was issued in  
compliance with the orders of this Court which act on 
his part was in discharge of his Constitutional 
commitment as required under Article 190 of the 
Constitution. Such officer cannot be penalized inter 
alia on the ground that he issued the notification i n 
violation of the rules. The Secretary Establishment 
has issued the notification in compliance with the 
order of this Court dated 25.07.2011 and 
26.07.2011. If such officer is made OSD it will not 
send a good message to the country.  
 
6. We have already e xpressed at number of times 
that transfer and posting is the domain of the 
Executive Authority; however, keeping in view the 
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, instead 
of passing orders ourselves, we had send the issue 
of transfer/reposting of M r. Hussain Asghar as 
Director FIA to the Government through Attorney 
General for Pakistan but it did not work. Under these 
circumstances, we examined the administrative 
orders ourselves in exercise of the powers of Judicial 
Review and have passed the order s on 25.07.2011 
and 26.07.2011, which have resulted in making Mr. 
Sohail Ahmed as OSD. It is not only Mr. Sohail SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  16 
Ahmed, Secretary Establishment, who had suffered 
for obeying the lawful orders and if such acts are 
allowed to continue, it will have serious i mpacts on 
the officials/authorities and will send message to 
them that if they comply with orders of Supreme 
Court without seeking prior approval of the 
Competent Authority, they will be posted out or they 
shall be proceeded against departmentally. 
Moreove r, it would discourage upright, honest and 
committed officers as well. Therefore, under these 
circumstances, this Court cannot leave such officers 
at the mercy of the Executive to deal with them in a 
manner they like. There is no cavil that the Executive 
has to exercise powers under the Rules but such 
discretion has to be exercised judiciously as has 
been spelt out in the case of Tariq Aziz -ud-Din: In 
re. (2010 SCMR 1301).  
 
7. The manner in which Mr. Sohail Ahmed, Secretary 
Establishment has been penalized  persuade us to 
have strong reasons to believe that it was an act 
designed to frustrate the orders of this Court. The 
immediate reaction shown by the Competent 
Authority was not called for, because Mr. Sohail 
Ahmed has obeyed the judicial order, which he w as 
bound under the Constitution, which is a sacred 
document and every authority in the country is 
bound to follow it; if any authority makes a 
departure from any of its provisions, it is likely to 
lead to chaos in the country which may lead to 
serious cons equences. Such an eventuality ought to 
be avoided by all persons in authority. Under the 
Constitution, if this Court passes orders, it should be 
complied with and no approval of any authority in 
Executive is required for its implementation. The 
rules or ev en statutes, which are subordinate to the 
Constitution could not place bar on the authority of 
this Court to seek the enforcement of its orders.  
 
8. However, when we enquired from the Attorney 
General from Pakistan as to whether he had seen the 
notificati on under which Mr. Sohail Ahmed, Secretary 
Establishment has been made OSD, he has stated 
that he came to know about it only through 
Electronic media and newspapers. We may note here 
that the Registrar of this Court has also placed a 
note for our perusal, indicating the events which 
took place after the issuance of the notification of 
transfer of Mr.Hussain Asghar.  
 
9. At this stage, we have asked the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan, in whose presence this order 
has been dictated, to contact the Compe tent 
Authority and convey the above order and also 
ensure that Mr. Sohail Ahmed be reinstated as 
Secretary Establishment and the notification/ order SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  17 
of his being posted as OSD be withdrawn. The 
Attorney General shall submit the report in writing in 
this be half i.e. whatever he has communicated to the 
Competent Authority and the reply he has received 
in response thereto.  
 
10. We postponed the hearing till 11.30 a.m. today 
for compliance of the above order.  
 
11. When the matter is taken up again after 11.30 
a.m. the learned Attorney General for Pakistan has 
placed on record the copy of the Notification 
No.F.No.41/335/2009 -E-I, dated 26th July, 2011 in 
pursuance whereof Mr. Sohail Ahmed, Secretary 
Establishment was made OSD with immediate effect 
and until furt her orders. He has informed that the 
Chief Executive/Prime Minister of Pakistan was out of 
town and no sooner he arrived back to Islamabad, 
he had gone to attend the Cabinet meeting already 
scheduled for today, therefore, he could not establish 
contact wit h him. He, however, had spoken to the 
Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister and had 
asked him to bring to the notice of the Prime Minister 
the observations made by this Court today in the 
order passed in Court, who has assured that he will 
convey him. Since the case is being adjourned, we 
asked the learned Attorney General for Pakistan that 
he should personally meet with the Prime Minister 
today along with certified copies of the order passed 
by this Court and explain him the intrinsics of the 
Constitut ional and legal provisions along with the 
observations made herein above and that whatever 
reaction he gives should be reduced in writing and 
be placed before us tomorrow. The learned Attorney 
General shall also produce before us the relevant file 
includin g the summary on the basis of which the 
notification referred to herein before has been 
issued.  
 
12. The learned Attorney General has also informed 
that the DG FIA has been deputed by him to contact 
Mr. Hussain Asghar, enabling him to come back and 
resume  the charge of Director FIA, therefore, he has 
gone to his office to implement the directions, which 
were passed in his presence in the Court.  
 
Put up on 28.07.2011 for further hearing. ” 
20.  The judiciary including the High Courts and the Supreme 
Court i s bound to protect and preserve the Constitution as well as to 
enforce fundamental rights conferred by the Constitution either 
individually or collectively, in exercise of the jurisdiction conferred SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  18 
upon it either under Article 199 or 184(3) of the Constit ution. We are 
fully cognizant of our jurisdiction, it is one of the function of the 
judicial functionaries to decide  the matters strictly in accord ance with 
the Constitution and law . We are conscious of our jurisdiction, and 
exercise the same with judicial  restraint . But such restraint cannot be 
exercised at the cost of rights of the citizens to deny justice to them. 
The scheme of the constitution makes it obligatory on the part of 
superior Courts to interpret constitution, law and enforce fundamental 
rights. There is no cav il with the proposition  that ultimate arbiter is the 
Court which is the custodian of the Constitution,  as it has been noted 
herein before and without repeating the same, this Court had initiated 
proceedings in the instant case as is evide nt from the detailed facts 
and circumstances noted hereinabove to ensure that corruption and 
corrupt practices by which the Hujjaj were looted and robed has 
brought bad name to the country . On account of intervention of this 
Court some relief has been gran ted to the Hujjaj as the Government 
on directions of the Court had paid SR 700 to each Haji . It was the 
result of a competent , honest and upright Director FIA who was 
heading the investigation team which was unearthing material  against 
the culprits.  
 
21.  As noted hereinabove, initially the Court was not 
approached by the Hujjaj but by the Parliamentarians themselves and 
we ourselves through the learned Attorney General for Pakistan  had 
asked the Prime Minister to look into th e matter which was of highly 
sensitive nature. This indicates that instead of passing appropriate  
orders against anyone this Court exercise d restraint . 
22.  Since the evidence was collected and the actual accused 
persons were likely to be brought to book and the investigation was SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  19 
going  on, when in the mid of the stream , a competent officer who was  
already  working in the FIA,  and was not transferred under the 
direction of this Court , was disassociated from investigation and was 
transferred.  
23.  This Court is of the considered view that a democratic 
system must prevail in the Country which  aspect has been highlighted 
in the case of Sindh High Court Bar Association’s Case  (PLD 2009 SC 
879) wherein all the actions of the military dictator were declared 
unconstitutional besides the election s held in February, 2008 was also 
under threat of being declared illegal were validated to promote will of 
the electorate . Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar , who was not recognized 
as lawful Chief Justice but the oath he administered to the President of 
Pakistan was declared valid by this Court in order to save the system 
by holding inter alia  as under: - 
189.  Referring to the holding of general elections of 
February, 2008, the swearing in of the elected 
members and the formations of the governments at 
the Federa l and, the Provincial levels', the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan submitted that the 
people had spoken and the mandate so given by 
them needed to be respected, therefore, any 
declaration by the Court, which would, in any way, 
affect the democratic s ystem would not he in the 
interest or welfare of the people. In a somewhat 
similar situation, in Asma Jilani's case, the Court held 
as under: - 
 
"The National Assembly has met and ratified 
the assumption of power by the new President 
who is an elected repr esentative of the people 
and the leader of the majority party in the 
National Assembly as now constituted."  
  
190. We make it clear that the present decision is 
confined to the questions in issue before this Court, 
namely, the constitutionality of Proclama tion of 
Emergency, PCO No. 1 of 2007 and Oath Order, 
2007, etc. It is noteworthy that the elections of 18th 
February, 2008 were held after dissolution of the 
National Assembly and Provincial Assemblies on 
completion of their term of five years under the 
Constitution. Accordingly, in pursuance of the said SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  20 
elections, Assemblies came into existence and 
governments at the Federal and Provincial levels 
were formed. Further, the elections were held after 
the revocation of emergency and not during the 
currency of PCO No. 1 of 2007. The fact that the 
initial announcement regarding holding of elections 
may have been made under an instrument issued by 
General Pervez Musharraf in pursuance of the actions 
of 3rd November, 2007 in no way affects the process 
whereby elect ions were held and the people of 
Pakistan expressed their will. Nor are the elections 
affected by Article 6 of the Revocation of 
Proclamation of Emergency Order, 2007 which 
purported to provide that the .general elections to 
the National Assembly and Provi ncial Assemblies 
would be held as scheduled, and thereafter the 
National and Provincial Assemblies would meet on 
the dates to be specified by the President for the 
election of Speaker and Deputy Speaker and for 
transaction of such other business as the Pre sident 
may specify, in no way, affects the validity of the 
general elections. We, -therefore, hold that the 
elections of 18th February, 2008 were held in 
accordance with the Constitution and the law. This 
Court acknowledges and respects the mandate given 
by the sovereign authority i.e. the 'electorate to the 
democratically, elected government on 18th 
February, 2008 and would continue to jealously 
guard the principle of trichotomy of powers 
enshrined in the Constitution, which is the essence of 
the rule of l aw. 
  
191. This Court hopes that all institutions, on the 
well known principles of good governance, and 
without transgressing their constitutional bounds, 
will endeavour to eradicate corruption and 
selfenrichment, and will devote themselves to the 
service of the people. Needless to add that the 
Courts will, at all times, remain vigilant in this behalf 
and will always come to the rescue of any 
beleaguered citizen or class of citizens whenever and 
wherever an occasion 'arises.            
  
192. In any case, it  is made clear that any 
declaration made in this judgment shall not, in any 
manner, affect the holding of the general elections, 
formation of governments and the swearing in of the 
elected representatives of the people, viz. President, 
Prime Minister, Parl iament, Provincial Governments, 
or anything duly done by these institutions in the 
discharge of their functions. However, any validation 
whether with retrospective effect or otherwise, shall 
remain subject to judicial review on the well 
recognized principl es of ultra vires, non -conformity 
with the Constitution or violation of the Fundamental 
Rights or on any other available ground.  SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  21 
 
 
24.  A perusal of above paragraphs from the  case of Sindh High 
Court Bar Association’s Case makes it clear that as the people  of this 
country had voted , the ir elected representatives should not be 
disqualified and declared the Parliament as validly elected. The oath  of 
the President was also saved by making observation noted 
hereinabove to avoid chaos and anarchy in the country.  Not only for 
the present but for the all times to come it was observed that 
henceforth there shall be no extra constitutional dispensation and the 
Judges of the Superior Courts were bound down not to take oath under 
any other dispensation. Relevant paragr aph therefrom is reproduced 
herein below: - 
In the Code of Conduct prescribed for the Judges of 
the Superior Courts in terms of Article 209(8) of the 
Constitution, a new clause shall be added 
commanding that no such Judge shall, hereinafter, 
offer any suppo rt in whatever manner to any un -
constitutional functionary who acquires power 
otherwise than through the modes envisaged by the 
Constitution and that any violation of the said clause 
would be deemed to be misconduct in terms of the 
said Article 209 of the Constitution;  
 
25.  It is important to note that above para has been 
incorporated in the code of conduct by the Supreme Judicial Council 
and Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are bound by 
the same.  
 
26.  Subsequent thereto while in 18th Cons titutional 
Amendment Article 6 was amended almost incorporating the same 
provision s and later on so many occasions in the judgments this Cou rt SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  22 
express ed that except the rule of law and the Constitution no other 
system is acceptable.  
 
27.  The power of jud icial review which was exercised  in the 
case of Sindh High Court Bar Association  (supra ) has been accepted by 
the Government as it has not supported the actions of 3rd November, 
2007. As far as Parliament is concerned, we have  also admired it as a 
body, wh ich for the first time in the history of the country did not 
validate the actions taken on 3rd November, 2007, whereas in the past 
the situation had been different. A number of judgments can be cited 
for assuming jurisdiction and exercise of power of judic ial review 
available to this Court under the Constitution, to which we need not 
make reference here, but going through the same one can well 
understand that this Court has always been enjoy ing the jurisdiction of 
judicial review against administrative acti ons of the executive which is 
a settled law by now. If any reference is required, right from Madison 
up to the case of Sindh High Court Bar Association, there are chain of 
authorities where the Supreme Court has assumed jurisdiction of 
judicial review, whi ch even otherwise is the final arbiter of disputes in 
order to maintain check and balance. For th ese reasons , the 
independence of the judiciary has been guaranteed  and the very 
preamble of the Constitution provides that the people of Pakistan  and 
the indep endence of judiciary shall be fully secured. The judiciary 
cannot compromise at any cost its independence as guaranteed under 
the Constitution, as such compromises would lead us to the situation 
of the last so many years. It is for the first time the judic iary asserted 
its authority and as a result thereof the democratic system is 
prospering in the country. In the case of Dr. Mubashir Hasan  v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265) whereby NRO was declared SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  23 
to be illegal, unconstitutional and void ab initi o, this Court has 
exercised its constitutional jurisdiction of judicial review.  
 
28.  At times , present case was fixed for the purpose of seeking 
implementation of the order, but we postponed in order to ensure that 
the democratic system under the Constit ution must prevail and av oid 
chaos. However, when the cases of massive corruption, not only one, 
but so many came for hearing, therefore, this Court in the exercise of 
its constitutional jurisdiction had enforced fundamental rights of the 
citizens under Ar ticles 4, 9, 14 and 25 of the Constitution. It is quite 
heartening to observe that even the worthy Parliamentarians had also 
approached this Court, like in the case of Rental Power Projects where 
one of the sitting Ministers namely, Makhdoom Syed Faisal Sa leh 
Hayat had approached the Court. Likewise, Ms Marvi Memon, MNA, 
approached this Court in the matter of Breach of embankments of 
rivers in floods causing damages. Similarly, Khawaja Muhammad Asif 
MNA brought the case of OGDCL , all of them acknowledge pow er of 
judicial review of this Court. In matters of the steal Mills, LPG case, 
National Police Foundation, NICL, Hajj arrangements and RPPs are 
under consideration including the Bank of Punjab case where, in 
exercise of the power of judicial review for the enforcement of 
fundamental rights millions of rupees have been recovered which were 
being looted by government officials and others. Undoubtedly, 
whenever the Court will notice that there is corruption or corrupt 
practices, it would be very difficult to co mpromise or digest it because 
the public money of the country cannot be allowed to be looted by any 
one whatsoever status he may have.  
29.  The jurisdiction of this Court is always exercised judiciously 
and with  judicial  restraint. All those cases which a re quoted SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  24 
hereinabove clearly indicate that in the matter of exercise of power of 
judicial review in Pakistan we have not travelled so far  as is the 
position in the neighboring country . By now, the parameters of the 
Court ’s power of judicial review of admi nistrative or executive action or 
decision and the grounds on which the Court can interfere with the 
same are well settled. Indisputably, if the action or decision is 
perverse or is such that no reasonable body of persons, properly 
informed, could come to or has been arrived at by the authority 
misdirecting itself by adopting a wrong approach or has been 
influenced by irrelevant or extraneous matters the Court would be 
justified in interfering with the same. [ Commissioner of Income Tax v. 
Mahindra  (AIR 1984  SC 1182)]. The exercise of constitutional powers 
by the High Court and the Supreme Court is categorised as power of 
judicial review. Every executive or administrative action of the State or 
other statutory or public bodies is open to judicial scrutiny and  the 
High Court or the Supreme Court can, in exercise of the power of 
judicial review under the Constitution, quash the executive action or 
decision which is contrary to law or is violative of Fundamental Rights 
guaranteed by the Constitution. With the exp anding horizon of Articles 
dealing with Fundamental Rights, every executive action of the Govt. 
or other public bodies, if arbitrary, unreasonable or contrary to law, is 
now amenable to the writ jurisdiction of th e Superior Courts and can 
be validly scruti nised on the touchstone of the Constitutional 
mandates. [ Common Cause, A Regd. Society v. Union of India  (AIR 
1999 SC 2979)].  In the case of Union Carbide Corporation v. Union of 
India [AIR 1992 SC 248 = 1991 SCR (1) Supl. 251], the Court while 
taking up t he issues of healthcare and compensation to the victims, 
supervised the distribution of the money among the victims of Bhopal SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  25 
gas tragedy and monitored the hospitals set up to treat the victims.  In 
Vishaka v. State of Rajasthan  [AIR 1997 SC 3011] = [(1997) 6 SCC 
241], the Court laid down guidelines to make the workplace safer for 
women making a grievance redressal mechanism in all private and 
public offices mandatory.  In the case  of Vineet Narain v. Union of India  
(AIR 1998 SC 889) , commonly known as Hawal a case, the Supreme 
Court of India had taken over the charge of CBI to ensure transparent 
investigation into corruption and corrupt practices under its own 
supervision. In the case of Zahira Habibullah Sheikh v. State of 
Gujarat  [(2006) 3 SCC 374], the Cou rt reopened several cases and set 
up a special investigation team where the police deliberately botched 
up the probe to help perpetrators of the post Godhra mob violence 
against Muslims in 2002, including overseas investigations into the 
Sohrabuddin fake e ncounter case of 2005 whereby several senior 
police officers and key politicians were put in the dock. In the case of 
Rubabbuddin Sheikh vs State Of Gujarat  [(2010) 2 SCC 200] petitioner 
wrote a letter to the Chief Justice of India complaining about the ki lling 
of his brother in a fake encounter and disappearance of his sister -in-
law at the hands of the Anti Terrorist Squad (ATS) Police (Gujarat) and 
Rajasthan Special Task Force (STF). Taking notice of this letter , the 
Court forwarded it to the Director Gen eral of Police, Gujarat to take 
further action. The CID (Crime) conducted an enquiry and the 
statements of a number of witnesses, including the petitioner, were 
recorded.  The learned Attorney General for India submitted that in 
view of the serious nature o f the offence in which some highly placed 
police officials of the State of Gujarat were alleged to be involved, 
orders may be immediately passed directing the CBI to take charge of 
the investigation and report to this Court. The CBI Authorities were SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  26 
direct ed to investigate all aspects of the case relating to the killing of 
the deceased including the alleged possibility of a larger conspiracy. 
The report of the CBI Authorities was directed to be filed in th e Court 
when th e Court would pass further necessary orders in accordance 
with the said report, if necessary.  Ultimately, it was held that  
accusations were directed against the local police personnel in which 
high police officials of the State were involved.  Therefore , it was 
directed that  if investigation was allowed to be carried out by the local 
police authorities, all concerned including the relatives of the deceased 
may feel that investigation was not proper and in th e circumstances it 
would be fit and proper that the petitioner and the relatives of the 
deceased should be assured that an independent agency should look 
into the matter and that would lend the final outcome of the 
investigation credibility.  In the case of Center for Pil v. Union of India  
[Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 24873 of 2010 decid ed on 
16.12.2010], the Court ordered probe into a mega crore scam against 
the sitting Telecom Minister. In the case of Center for Pil v. Union of 
India [Writ Petition (C ) No. 348 of 2010, decided on 03.03.2011] , the 
Court quashed the illegal appointment o f P J Thomas as Central 
Vigilance Commissioner because of a charge -sheet pending against 
him in Kerala. The Court also laid down guidelines for future 
appointments to this post . In the case of Radhy Shyam v. State of UP  
(Civil Appeal No. 3261 of 201, decid ed on 15.04.2011) , the Supreme 
Court quashed Government’s notification to acquire land for the 
planned industrial development in District Gautam Budh Nagar through 
Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority , which appeared to be 
a device to grab the la nd of the poor farmers. In the case of Nandini 
Sundar v. State of Chattisgarh  [Writ Petition (Civil) No. 250 of 2007  SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  27 
decided on 05.07.2011 ], the Court disbanded and disarmed Special 
Police Officers involved in anti -Naxal operations in many states . Thus, 
the Supreme Court of India has been monitoring public distribution 
system, treatment at hospitals and conservation of forests for more 
than two decades. It also set up a  judicial commission to examine the 
public distribution system and direct ed the Governmen t to provide 
more facilities in the poorer districts.   
30.  Our own judgment in  the case of  Bank of Punjab v. Haris 
Steel (PLD 2010 SC 1109) highlights the jurisdiction and powers of this 
Court. Relevant paras therefrom are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“26.  In questioning the jurisdiction of this Court, 
Mr. Irfan Qadir, the learned Prosecutor General for 
the NAB submitted, as has been noticed above, that 
this Court had no jurisdiction to control investigation 
of a criminal case and the reason offered by him in  
support of the said submission was that such a 
control over the Investigation of a criminal case by 
this Court could be "PREJUDICIAL TO THE 
ACCUSED." The only judgment cited by him to 
buttress his said plea was the case of Malik Shaukat 
Dogar and 12 other s v. Ghulam Qasim Khan 
Khakwani and others (PLD 1994 SC 281).  
 
28. …………… Therefore, the dictum laid down in 
Khawaja Nazir's case was not applicable to the 
present situation and seeking its application to the 
facts and circumstances of the present case was 
misplaced. While we are on the subject, we would 
like to refer to a judgment of this Court delivered in 
the case of Advocate. General Sindh v. Farman 
Hussain and others PLD 1995 SC 1 which judgment 
was then cited with approval in a recent judgment of 
this Court, namely, Zahid Imran and others v. The 
State and others (PLD 2006 SC 109). The principle 
which had been highlighted in the said judgments 
was that they/approach of a Court of law while 
dealing with criminal matters had to be dynamic 
keeping in view t he facts and circumstances of each 
case and also the surrounding situation obtaining in 
the country. ……… In view of the facts and 
circumstances of the present case summarized 
above, it would have been felonious and 
unconscionable on the part of this Court if it had 
refused to intervene to defend the fundamental 
rights of such a large section of the public and 
leaving it only to the concerned officials of the NAB SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  28 
who had done nothing at all in the matter for almost 
TWO YEARS; who had remained only the silent  
spectators of this entire drama and had only 
witnessed the escape of the accused persons to 
foreign lands. It is to check and cater for such kind 
of gross negligence, non -feasance and malfeasance 
that the framers of the Constitution had obligated 
the High  Court under Article 199 and this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution to intervene 
in the matter exercising their power to review 
administrative and executive actions. This is then 
what the Constitution had expected of this Court 
through its Art icle 184(3) and this is exactly what 
this Court had done.  
 
29. It may be mentioned here that in order to ensure 
peace in a society, the laws are required to keep pace 
with the changing times and as has been noticed above 
with reference to the case of Advoc ate-General, Sindh 
(supra) even the approach of the courts has to be 
dynamic keeping in view the ever -changing ground 
realities. It was for this very reason that even in the 
matter of investigations, a role was carved for the courts 
by addition of subsecti on (6) in section 22 -A of the 
Cr.P.C. through the Amending Ordinance No. CXXXI of 
2002 of which provisions, the learned Prosecutor -General 
appears to be ignorant. A reference may also be made to 
a judgment delivered by a 17 Member Bench of this Court 
in Mu bashir Hasan's case (PLD 2010 SC 265) especially to 
the discussion on the question of investigation as 
contained in para 102 thereof .....................  
 
30. ………… Investigation, therefore, means nothing 
more than collection of evidence. Needless to say t hat it 
is evidence and evidence alone which could lead a court 
of law to a just and fair conclusion about the guilt or 
innocence of an accused person. It is, therefore, only an 
honest investigation which could guarantee a fair trial and 
conceiving a fair t rial in the absence of an impartial and a 
just investigation would be a mere illusion and a mirage. 
It is, hence, only a fair investigation which could assure a 
fair trial and thus any act which ensures a clean 
investigation which is above board, is an act  in aid of 
securing the said guaranteed right and not in derogation 
thereof. However, before we part with this aspect of the 
matter, we may add that if the learned counsel had cared 
to go through various orders passed by this Court in the 
main Constitution  Original Petition No.39 of 2009, he 
would have discovered that the said orders were 
restricted only to ensuring that the investigating agency 
did what it was required by law to do; did it honestly, 
fairly and efficiently; did not sleep over the matter as it 
had done for almost TWO YEARS and that not a word had 
been said by this Court about what evidence to collect 
and what evidence not to collect or about the worth or 
veracity of the collected evidence. ” 
 
31.  We have all respect for the Parliament and the  Executive 
as we know that the Parliament has to legislate the law and SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  29 
Constitution to confer jurisdiction upon the superior courts to interpret 
it. The Parliament is not only making laws but at the same time has 
amended the constitutional provisions by br inging 18th and 19th 
Constitutional Amendments by deleting amendments made by military 
dictator. This Court has never declared that the Parliament is not 
empowered to legislate law at the same time.  
32.  We may observe that this Court has initiated presen t 
proceedings at the instance of the Parliamentarians and public at large 
to ensure that the corruption and corrupt practice committed in the 
Hajj arrangements should be unearth ed. Mr. Hussain Asghar who was 
already working as Director in the FIA was not a sked to be transferred 
to the FIA. In fact it was D.G, FIA, who assigned him investigation of 
the case considering him a person of integrity, professionalism, upright 
and honest not likely to compromise his integrity and undoubtedly he 
has made a lot of pr ogress. Muhammad Iqbal, D.G, FIA, has admitted 
his omission by sparing him and that is why he has sent letter s to 
competent authority for bringing him back so that he may complete 
the task of investigation assigned to him. It was not a case where the 
Court  was of the opinion that he should be posted back. Transfer and 
posting is not within the domain of the Court, but under exceptional  
circumstances stated  hereinabove and in exercise of the powers 
conferred on this Court by the Constitution to ensure that t he money 
looted from the Hujjaj is recovered and the persons /officials  
responsible for bringing bad name to the country are brought to book 
so that it may serve as a deterrent orders of the nature are passed.  
33.  Hussain A sghar  Director FIA was performin g his functions 
independently, whereas  the investigation of the case was conducted by 
him under the supervision of the Court , on such facts and SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  30 
circumstances his reposting on the same assignment would in no way 
create any problem. This Court passed an orde r on 27.07.2011 for his 
reposting in pursuance thereof n otification was issued by the Secretary 
Establishment Mr. Sohail Ahmed , who has neither committed any 
wrong nor has deviated from the rules nor has abused his power in 
any manner, on the contrary has obeyed the orders of this Court. If  
such a straight  forward and upright senior officer or an officer like 
Hussain Asghar  is penalized then it would amount to discouraging such 
officers, who would be obeying the orders of this Court. Such a n act on 
the par t of the competent authority would be violative of the Articles 3 
and 5(2) of the Constitution . It is a settled law that no officer can be 
posted as OSD. This aspect has been highlighted in the Estacode at 
serial No. 23 under the caption “Procedure for Cre ation of Posts of 
Officer on Special Duty (O.S.D.) and Making Appointments thereto. 
The relevant conditions are reproduced below: -  
(1) Government Servants (member of a regularly constituted 
service or otherwise permanent) waiting for posting 
orders;  
(2) Deputat ion of a government servant (member of a 
regularly constituted service or otherwise deputed) for 
duty or course of instruction or training in Pakistan or 
training abroad, for a period exceeding two months, in 
accordance with the instructions contained in t he Ministry 
of Finance O.M. No. 3005 -EGI/52, dated 7.5.1952 
(Annex);  
(3) For doing work of a special nature, e.g. examination 
and/or implementation of reports of 
Commissions/Committees, etc.  
(4) For overcoming technical difficulties.  
 
34.  Admittedly, the case of Sohail Ahmed does not fall in any 
of the above categories. When we refer  to Article 3 of the Constitution, SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  31 
we are clear in our minds that the State shall ensure the elimination of 
all forms of exploitation and the gradual fulfillment of the fundamental 
principle, from each according to his ability to his work. There was no 
complaint of whatsoever nature against Mr. Sohail Ahmed except that 
he had obeyed the order of this Court in terms of various Articles of 
the Constitution. In the case of Shah Nawaz Mar ri v. Government of 
Balochistan  [2000 PLC (C.S.) 533 ], the appointment of OSD has 
been discussed as under : -  
“Now turning towards the main question of posting an 
officer as O.S.D., we are inclined to hold that this term is 
absolutely extraneous to section  10 of the Balochistan 
Civil Servants Act, 1974 read with Balochistan Civil 
Servants (Appointment, Promotion and Transfer) Rules, 
1979. For the sake of convenience of intervening period 
for posting from one place to the other place, such 
practice is permis sible as Government of Balochistan has 
itself expressed while furnishing querries called for which 
have already been re -produced hereinabove, therefore, 
we declare that in future the Government officers should 
not be placed for a longer period than 30 days  as OSD 
and their services may be utilised in the best interest of 
public instead of allowing them to remain sitting idle and 
getting the service benefits  without performing their 
duty.”  
 
In the case of Sajjad Ahmad Javed Bhatti v. Federation of Pakistan  
(2009 SCMR 1448) this Court has held as under: - 
“7.  However, at times, civil servants are also made 
O.S.D. or kept without any posting, in case they have 
become persona non grata. Therefore, the posting of such 
officers as O.S.D. for considerably long peri od is 
deprecated by the Courts. See the case of Lt. -Col. (R) 
Abdul Wajid Malik (supra). It may be unfair and unjust to 
keep a government servant on tenterhooks without getting 
any work from him. The right to work is a valuable right of 
a person as visualiz ed by Article 3 of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, a provision meant to ensure 
social and economic justice to the people of Pakistan.  
8.  This Court in the case of Pakistan and others v. 
Public at large and others PLD 1987 SC 304 observed  that 
right to work was very valuable right which could not be 
denied: The Supreme Court of India in the case of P.K. 
Chinnasamy v. Government of Tamil Nadu and others AIR 
1988 SC 78 also took the view that: - 
“In a democratic polity as ours, the bureaucrac y 
work as the pivot for running the administration. So SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  32 
far as the State is concerned, matters of policy and 
the ultimate responsibility for running the 
administration is obviously of the apex body --the 
council of Ministers and the Executive Head --the 
Gover nor. It cannot be lost sight of that every public 
officer is a trustee and in respect of the office he 
holds and the salary and other benefits which he 
draws, he is obliged to render appropriate service to 
the State. The scheme postulates that every public  
officer has to be given some posting commensurate 
to his status and circumstances should be so as to 
render commensurate service in lieu of the benefits 
received by him from the State. If an officer does not 
behave as required of him under the law he is 
certainly liable to be punished in accordance with law 
but it would ordinarily not be appropriate to continue 
an. officer against a post and provide no work to him 
and yet pay him out of Consolidated Fund.  
We direct the respondent -Government of Tamil Nadu 
to give an appropriate posting to the appellant within 
one month from today and once he is given such 
posting, he must be assigned normal official work to 
be discharged by him as contemplated under the 
rules and procedure in respect of the post the 
appellan t is assigned. We hope and trust that the 
appellant shall be given a proper assignment 
commensurate to his position in the service and the 
State Government in its action would exhibit no bias 
or mala fides. We make it clear that we have not 
examined the co rrectness of such allegations as we 
are sure given an opportunity the State Government 
would exhibit ideal conduct as an employer and 
establish by its conduct that the allegations were 
baseless."  
 
10.  ………… In the case of Langston v. AUEW 1974 WLR 
185, he (Lord Denning) expressed his opinion as follows: - 
 
 "We have repeatedly said in this Court that a man 
has a right to work which the Courts will protect. See 
Nagle v. Fielden (1966) 2 QB 633 and Hill v. C.A. 
Parsons and Co. Ltd. (1972) Ch. 305.  
In these day s an employer, when employing a skilled 
man, is bound to provide 'him with work. By which I 
mean that the man should be given the opportunity 
of doing his work when it is available and is ready 
and willing to do it. A skilled man takes a pride in his 
work.  He does not do it merely to earn money. He 
does it so as to make his contribution to the well 
being of all. He does it so as to keep himself busy 
and not idle. To my mind, therefore, it is arguable 
that in those days a man has, by reason of 
implication in  the contract, a right to work. That is, 
he has a right to have the opportunity of doing his 
work when it is there to be done."  
 SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  33 
35.  In the case of Lt. Col. (R.) Abdul Wajid Malik v. 
Government of the Punjab  (2006 S C M R 1360) it has been held as 
under: -  
“12. We have also examined the concept of OSD in 
depth. It is well -settled by now that ordinarily a 
Government employee should not be posted as OSD 
except under the compelling circumstances, exigency of 
service and in the public interest but the tenure o f such 
posting should not be more than thirty days. We are 
conscious of the fact that being purely administrative 
matter it falls within the jurisdictional domain of 
Competent Authority to exercise its right in the interest 
of the public but it must not be  lost sight of that the 
posting of an employee as OSD would also be an extra 
burden on Government exchequer but such an employee 
receives salary without rendering any service which 
cannot be afforded. ”  
 
36.  Similarly, in the case of Saleemullah Khan v. F ederation of 
Pakistan  (2004 SCMR 690), it was held as under: -  
“The petitioner, however, placed on record a list of senior 
officers who were being continued as Officers on Special 
Duty (O.S.D.) in the Establishment Division for 
interminable period without  assigning to them any 
responsibilities. This is a pathetic state of affairs. It is high 
time that the issue is properly addressed by the Federal 
Government. The Attorney -General for Pakistan shall take 
up the matter with the Establishment Division which s hall 
immediately undertake an exercise to review the cases of 
all such officers in order to consider the suitability for their 
further posting. The Federal Government may also like to 
evolve a policy for periodic review of such cases.”  
 
In Syed Ajmal Huss ain Bokhari v. Commissioner  (1997 PLC (C.S.) 
754), it was held that there was a common practice prevalent both in 
Federal and Provincial Governments to ke ep the civil servants without 
posting as a measure of punishment for considerably long periods by 
making them OSDs, etc., without getting normal work, which is a 
fraud on the statute and abuse of executive power and could not be 
countenanced and was required to be discontinued by the Government 
forthwith.  SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  34 
37.  In the light of the above , a civil servant cannot be made  
OSD if the competent authority is not satisfied with his performance, 
though the authority has the power to order his transfer but he cannot 
be penalized as has been done in this case.  In the case of Zahid 
Akhtar v. Government of Punjab  (PLD 1 995 SC 530), it has been held 
that the normal period of posting of a Government servant at a 
station, according to Rule 21 of the Rules of Business is three years, 
which has to be followed in the ordinary circumstances, unless for 
reasons of exigencies of services a transfer before expiry of the said 
period becomes necessary in the opinion of the competent authority . 
In the case of Abid Hussain v. Ajaib Ali Shah Naqvi  [2004 PLC (C.S.)  
1036] , the civil servant was performing his duties efficiently and to the  
satisfaction of the Department, but his transfer was got approved from 
the Prime Minister in violation of law , therefore, his transfer orders 
were set aside on the ground that the Prime Minister (of AJK) neither 
relaxed the Government policy nor mentioned  any compelling reasons 
which prevailed with him in ordering the transfer. In Gobardhan Lal v. 
State of UP  [2000 (2) AWC 1515 = 2000 (87) FLR 658],  it has been 
held that transfers and postings of Government servants is in the 
discretion of the senior offic er of the concerned department, who has 
to pass such orders on administrative grounds only and not for 
political, or other extraneous consideration .   
38.   The discretionary powers vesting in an authority are to be 
exercised judiciously and in reasonable manner . In the case of Tariq 
Aziz-ud-Din: in re  (2010 SCMR 1301), it has been held that the 
authorities cannot be allowed to exercise discretion at their whims, 
sweet will or in an arbitrary manner; rather they are bound to act 
fairly, evenly and justly.  Reference may  also be made to the cases of SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  35 
Abid Hussain v. PIAC  [2005 PLC (CS) 1117], Abu Bakar Siddique v. 
Collector of Customs  (2006 SCMR 705),  Walayat Ali v. PIAC  (1995 
SCMR 650).  It is an unwritten rule of the law, constitutional and 
administrative, th at whenever a decision -making function is entrusted 
to the subjective satisfaction of a statutory functionary, there is an 
implicit obligation to apply his mind to pertinent and proximate 
matters only, eschewing the irrelevant and the remote. [ Smt. Shalini  
Soni v. Union of India {(1980) 4 SCC 544 }]. 
39.   Now, the question is whether re -posting of Mr. Hussain 
Asghar, who was already working in FIA as requested by DG, FIA in his 
two letters and has been waiting for the order by the competent 
authority , if allowed to conduct investigation of the case in which 
influential and high -ups are involved as is evident from the facts stated 
hereinabove would paralyze the Government  or would it depict its 
resolve to conduct investigation in a corruption case in a transp arent 
and fair manner ? The Government functionaries make transfers and 
postings of hundreds of thousands of Government servants from time 
to time, but no interference is shown to have been made by any of the 
judicial functionaries in the same as it is not within their domain. 
However, when a transfer is made contrary to the relevant rules and 
against the public interest and without allowing the officer to complete 
his tenure, the Court is empowered to examine such administrative 
action by applying the princ iple of judicial review. Similarly, former 
Secretary Establishment Mr. Sohail Ahmed who followed the dictates of 
Article 5(2) read with Article 190 of the Constitution by obeying order 
of the Court cannot be penalized by placing him as OSD. However, 
placin g his services against the same post or where he has been made 
OSD or post ing him against any other position commensurate with his SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  36 
status as held in Abdul Wajid Malik’s case  (supra) is within the domain 
of the competent authority, but allowing him to conti nue as OSD is 
contrary to the policy as well as the law laid down by this Court 
discussed hereinabove keeping in mind that he had not completed his 
tenure as Secretary Establishment and no disciplinary proceedings 
were pending against him nor it is alleged  anywhere that he has been 
made OSD in the public interest because no reaction of the competent 
authority has been filed despite our repeated observations.  
40.  Thus, for the foregoing reason s, we hold and direct as 
under: -  
(1) The Notification dated 26th July, 2011 issued by the 
Secretary Establishment Division, Government of Pakistan, 
whereby Mr. Hussain Asghar, presently posted as 
Inspector General, Gilgit -Baltistan under Kashmir Affairs 
and Gilgit -Baltistan Division, was transferred and posted as 
Director , FIA under Ministry of Interior in pursuance of the 
order of this Court dated 25th July, 2011 passed in the 
instant case , shall  be implemented in letter and spirit by 
the Government, i.e. the Secretary Interior and Secretary 
Establishment by adopting all appropriate measures;  
(2) The Notification No. F. 41/335/2009 -E-I dated 26th July, 
2011, placing Mr. Sohail Ahmed as OSD is not sustainable  
in law . However, it is the prerogative of the competent 
authority to post him either as Secretary Establishment or 
give him any other assignment commensurate with his 
status, performance , ability  and work etc., as early as 
possible, but not later than a period of 7 days from the 
date of receipt of this order. If no order o f his posting and 
transfer is passed  on or before th e stipulated period , the 
aforesaid Notification placing  him as OSD shall cease to 
have effect and he shall be deemed to be Secretary 
Establishment until otherwise transferred and posted  
elsewhere by the competent authority ;  
 SMC 24/2010 DT. 29.07.2011  37 
(3) The DG, FIA shall take all nec essary steps to ensure that 
no sooner Mr. Hussain Asghar reports for duty, the 
investigation team working earlier with him will be 
provided to him and shall be extended all the facilities so 
that  he can  complete  investigation of mega corruption in 
Hajj arrangements. In the meanwhile, DG, FIA shall also 
submit report for our perusal after every 7 days of the 
progress in the investigation of the case.  
 
41.  The case is adjourned to date in office.   
 
 
    IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
 
 
 
MIAN SHAKIRULLAH  JAN, J.  TARIQ PARVEZ, J.   KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN, J.   
 
 
 
 
MAHMOOD AKHTAR SHAHID SIDDIQUI, J.   AMIR HANI MUSLIM, J.  
 
 
 
 
ISLAMABAD,  
July 29, 2011  
 
 APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 
 
 