IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
     
Present : 
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
 
 
CMA No. 908  of 2014 in Constitution Petition No. 52 of 2013  
[COMPLIANCE REPORT OF ORDER OF THIS COURT DATED 03.12.2013 PASSED IN  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.52 OF 2013 REGARDING PRICE ESCALATION OF 
ATTA/FLOUR]  
 
Liaquat Baloch, Secretary Jamat -e-Islami    Applicant (s) 
VERSUS  
Secretary, M/o Commerce & Trade     Respondent(s)   
 
For the Applicant(s) :  Mr. Taufiq Asif, ASC  
     Mr. Saifullah  Gondal, Advocate  
 
Amicus Curiae:    Malik M. Rafique Rajwana, ASC  
 
For the Federation:   Syed Attique Shah, Addl.AGP.  
     Dr. Shakeel Ahmed Khan,  
     Food Security Commissioner  
     Mr. Abdur Rauf Chaudhry, Chief,  
     Agricultural Policy Institute  
     Mr. M. Aslam Shaheen, Chief  
     Nutrition, Planning Commission  
     Mr. Ayazuddin, Dy. DG, PBS  
     Ms. Rabia Awan, CSO, PBS  
     Mr. Shaukat Zaman, Director, PBS  
      
For Balochistan Govt:   Mr. M. Farid Dogar, AAG  
 
For KPK Govt:    Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi, Addl.AG  
     Mr. Asmatullah, Dy. Dir.  
 
For Punjab Govt:    Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, Addl.AG  
      
For Sindh Govt:    Mr. Qasim Mirjat, Addl.AG   
  
Date of Hearing:    22.04.2014  
 
     ORDER  
 
   On the last date of hearing, we had for our own 
information constituted Committees for the four Provinces. The 
Committees have made on ground visits. From their reports, it does 
appear that fundamental rights to life as given in Article 9 and a life 
of dignity as envisioned under Article 14 of the Constitution may not be available presently to a substantial number of citizens . This 
situation appears to be accepted by the learned Law Officers.  It 
would however , be appropriate if we can have empirical  data before 
us based on professionally and scientifically sound bas es so that 
further proceedings and order s are grounded in facts which have 
been validated . For this purpose, the names of certain institutions 
have been mentioned by some of the learned counsel before us. Dr. 
Shakeel Ahmed Khan, Food Security Commissioner has also 
provided some information. The same  is for the purpose of our 
tentative assessment but again it is necessary that a more 
comprehensive survey is conducted by qualified professional s or 
institution s having appropriate expertise .  
 
2.  We would ther efore , like to consider as to how relevant 
data can be made available to us. Some information based on data 
gathered by the Pakistan Bureau of Statistics has been provided to us 
but the same is outdated. We also note that instances have been 
provided by Dr . Shakeel Ahmed Khan which v ary vastly . While in 
one instance the price of essential food items per month has been 
given as Rs.6 ,200/ -, there is another case where this amount comes 
to Rs.14 ,858/ -. We may also add that these figures are in respect of 
the b are, essential food items required for survival of a family of four 
comprising 2 adults and 2 children. These figures do not even 
consider the needs of such family in respect of electricity, water, gas, 
traveling, school fees, clothing, shelter and a numbe r of other items 
which are necessary for a reasonable life with dignity.  
 
3.  The Governments of the Provinces and the Federation 
are charged with the responsibility of ensuring that the fundamental 
rights of the citizens of the State are met. Even amongs t the principles of policy, it has been stipulated in Article 38( a) of the 
Constitution that the State shall secure the well -being of the people . 
We are listing this petition for hearing during the next week on 
which date the Governments shall be heard and  their actions to 
alleviate the abject condition of the citizens will be taken into 
account . We will also consider the possibility of seeking a study by 
professionally/  scientifically sound bodies or individuals to assist us 
in understanding if and to what  extent, there may be deficiency in 
assuring the fundamental rights of the citizens , noted above. 
Adjourned to 02.05.2014 .    
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
ISLAMABAD, THE   
22nd April 2014  
Zubair  
 
 
 