IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
 Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.29388 -K OF 2013  
(Application by Mohabat Shah son of Kabul Sh ah for  
recovery of Yaseen Shah)  
For the applicant   : In person.  
 
On Court Notice   : Mr. Tariq Mehmood Khokhar, Addl. AGP  
Maj. Gen.(R) Arif Nazir, Addl. Secy, M/o Defence  
Mr. Anzar Rizvi, Sr. Joint Secy. M/o Defence.  
Mr. M. Irfan, Director Legal, M/o Defen ce. 
Mr. Zakir Hussain Afridi, IG Prisons.  
Mr. Attaullah, Supdt, Jail Malakand.  
Date of hearing   : 26-11-2013  
 
    The Secretary Defence, reportedly has been advised medical rest, 
therefore , he is not in attendance in response to ou r direction dated 25 -11-2013. This may 
be noted that in respect of one Yaseen Shah  S/o Qabil Shah missing person, 
Superintendent, Judicial Lockup Malakand vide letter dated   -12-2012 submitted before 
the Peshawar High Court , acknowledg ing that he alongwith other 34 undeclared in ternees 
had been handed over to the Army Authorities without any Internment orders. He further 
stated in the letter that when he took over the charge of Internment Centre Malakand  on 
19-9-2011, 66 undeclared internees including Yaseen Shah S/o Qabil Shah r /o Katlang 
were handed over to the Arm y Authorities without any Internment orders, the list of 
which was submitted to the Inspector General of Prisons KPK vide letter No.1954 dated 
29-11-2011. Later on , 31 undeclared internees were handed over to him and r est of 35 
detenues who were not declared as internees  by the Interning A uthorities including 
Yaseen Shah , were shifted out of Internment Centre Malakant by the Army Authorities.  HRC.29388 -K/13  2
2.  The hearing of the case was postponed from time to time and mostly on 
every date of hearing , the learned Addl. Attorney General for Pakistan has assured that 
the said Yaseen Shah will be produced before the Court. On the last two dates of hearing s 
i.e 22-11-2013 & 25 -11-2013 when no progress was shown, learned Addl. Attorney 
General was directed to make sure the production of Yaseen Shah , in view of the 
evidence which has been furnished in writing by the Superintendent, Judicial Lockup 
Malakand, that he is no t a missing person but  is in the custody of the Army. Thus having 
left with no option, the Secretary Defence, Superinten dent Judicial Lockup, Malakand 
and Inspector General of Prisons were directed to remain in attendance.  The Secretary, 
however, failed to appear for the reason which has been disclosed by one Maj. G en. 
(Retd) Raja Arif Nazir, Addl. Secretary Defence (appointed on contract) but no document 
has been placed on record about his proceedings on leave under the medical advice. He is 
hereby directed to produce the leave sanction order alongwith the charge report of a ny 
other incumbent who, in view of Rule 28 of the Revised Leave Rules 1980, has taken 
over the charge of the post. It is equally important to note that the Superintendent, 
Internment Centre Malakand , has furnished a list of undeclared internees who were ta ken 
away by the Army Authorities, their names are reproduced herein below : - 
Sl. No. Name with parentage  Declared/  Un 
declared  Internees  Remarks  
1. Shah HussainS/o Umar Khitab  Undeclared  The charge of internment 
centre Malakand was taken 
on 04 -02-2012 by the 
Army authority through 
Naib Subidar Amanullah 
Beg since then the where 
about of these undeclared 
detenues are not known to 
Jail authorities.  
2. Sultan Zeb S/o Aurang Zeb  Undeclared   
3. Ijaz S/o Miraj Muhammad  Undeclared   
4. Qamar Zeb S/o Awal Khair  Undec lared   
5. Abdar Ali S/o Yar Muhammad  Undeclared   
6. Nawab Ali S/o Abdul Matin  Undeclared   
7. Khalid -ur-Rehman S/o Jamil -ur-Rehman  Undeclared   
8. Yousaf S/o Akhtar Munir  Undeclared   
9. Hashim S/o Ghulam Rasool  Undeclared   
10. Muhammad Sabir S/o Pir Said  Undeclared   
11. Abdu Bakar S/o Liaq -ur-Rehman  Undeclared   
12. Hamid Ayoub S/o Muhammad Ayoub  Undeclared   
13. Habib Ullah S/o Hazrat Muhammad  Undeclared   
14. Amjid Hussain S/o Saeed Gul  Undeclared   
15. Akhtar Ali S/o Naik Muhammad  Undeclared   HRC.29388 -K/13  3
16. Abdul Wadood S/o Abdul Qayoom  Undeclared   
17. Zakir Ullah S/o Majid Ullah  Undeclared   
18. Naeem -ur-Rehman S/o Sher Zada  Undeclared   
19. Muhammad Ilyas S/o Muhammad Sadiq  Undeclared   
20. Abdul Salam S/o Arshed Ali  Undeclared   
21. Numan S/o Abdul Waris  Undeclared   
22. Sardar Al S/o Rozi Mand  Undecl ared  
23. Rahmat Ullah S/o Naser Ullah  Undeclared   
24. Zakir Khan S/o Akhtar Gul  Undeclared   
25. Faisal Khan S/o Tahir Khan  Undeclared   
26. Alam Khan S/o Rahmat Khan  Undeclared   
27. Nadar Khan S/o Said Rahman  Undeclared   
28. Kalim Khan S/o Hazrat Hussain  Undeclared   
29. Haroon Rasheed S/o Fazal Ghafoor  Undeclared   
30. Rasheed Ahmad S/o Shad Muhammad  Undeclared   
31. Yase en Shah S/o Qabil Shah  Undeclared   
32. Sartaj Hussain S/o Khan Sherin  Undeclared   
33. Muhammad Khan S/o Yousaf Khan  Undeclared   
34. Sajjad Khan S/o Bakhti Rawan  Undeclared   
35. Zafar Khan S/o Faqir Khan  Undeclared   
   
As sufficient evidence has been made available to conclude that 34 +1=35, named herein 
above, are in custody of Army, therefore, the Army authorities are bound, under the law, 
to produce them before the C ourt of Law and has no authority to retain their custody un -
authorisedly.  
3.  As there is no authorized person on behalf of the M/o Defence, to comply 
with the direction, therefore, we direct the Addl. Attorney General to take up the matter 
with the M/o D efence with the direction to  produc e the above named persons under the 
Constitution and law from the custody of the Army during course of the day and submit 
his report in this behalf at 1.00 p.m.   
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Lahore the, 
26th November, 2013.  
Not approved for reporting.  
     