IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhel  
 
 
Criminal Appeal No s.15-Q & 16-Q of 2020  
(Against the judgment dated 03.09.2018 passed by the High Court of 
Balochistan , Quetta  in Cr. A.  No.390 of 2016) 
 
 
Muhammad Iftikhar  
(in both cases)  
  …Appellant (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
The State  
(in both cases)  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Appellant (s): Syed Ayaz Zahoor, Sr.ASC  
 Mr. Gohar Yaqoob Yousa fzai, AOR  
 
For the State : Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Qazi,  
 Addl. A.G. Balochistan  
 
For the Complainant : Mr. Ahsan Rafique Rana, ASC  
 
Date of hearing:  01.11.2021 . 
 
ORDER  
 
   Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Syed Zulfiqar, 42, was 
shot dead  during the night between  27/28-1-2015  within the precincts 
of Police Station Qaidabad, Quetta; the appellant  conveyed information 
to deceased’s brother Jawad Hussain (PW -1) who attended the casualty 
in Civil Hospital Quetta . A solitary fire shot on the right side of face  was 
opined a s fatal. The complainant named the appellant as suspect  
without citing any motive for the crime .  
 Indicted before the learned Addl. Sessions Judge -II Quetta, the 
appellant claimed trial, pursuant whereto, the prosecution produced  a 
number of  witnesses , complainant  being the most prominent of them, 
who reiterated his case in the witness -box. The appellant confronted 
prosecution evidence  with a denial, blaming the deceased, a drug 
addict, to have committed suicide, albeit in the premises they lived 
together.  The learned trial Judge proceeded vide judgment dated 
24.11.2016 to convict the appellant under clause (b) of section 302 of Criminal Appeal Nos.15 -Q & 16 -Q of 2020  2
the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced the appellant to 
imprisonment for life with a direction to pay compensation, upheld by  a 
learned Judge -in-Chamber of the High Court of Balochistan vide 
impugned judgment dated 03.09.2018 , being assailed through leave of 
the Court .  
2.  Learned counsel for the appellant contends that entire 
prosecution case is structured upon a misconceived and misplaced 
suspicion as there is no eye witness of the occurrence and no other 
than the appellant himself informed the complainant about the suicidal 
death of the deceased being his friend with whom he lived in the same 
premises ; he has further argued t hat it  was appellant himself who 
brought the deceased to the hospital in a bid to save his live; mere fact 
that the deceased lived  with the appellant by itself is no proof  that the 
appellant committed the crime. Contrarily, the learned Law Officer , 
assiste d by counsel for the complainant , argued that the deceased 
resided with the appellant and it was within his exclusive knowledge as 
to what befell upon him  as the story of suicide is negated by medical 
evidence whereunder  the medical officer ruled out poss ibility of suicide 
pursuant to cross -examination conducted on behalf of the appellant; he 
adds that recovery of a .9 mm pistol wedded with the casing secured 
from the spot, in the totality of circumstances, constituted proof beyond 
doubt  sufficient to sust ain the conviction.  
3.  Heard. Record perused  
4.  Complainant is not an eye witness of the crime nor anyone  
else came forward to disclose the circumstances leading to the 
unnatural death of the deceased . It is also a common ground that the 
appellant not o nly took the deceased to the hospital but also informed 
the complainant at an odd hour of the night . Local e of injury being the 
face below the right eye  with blackened margin s is a possible choice for 
a person hell bent to take his own life. There is no po sitive opinion by 
the medical officer that ruled out the possibility of suicide; the 
conviction is based upon an indiscreet suggestion by defence lawyer  
with a grievous inaptitude and, thus, the appellant should not be 
allowed to be victim of a bad choice of his defence . Totality of 
circumstances fails to qualify to sustain the capital charge . Mystery of 
the occurrence is fraught with doubts  and, thus, it would be unsafe to 
maintain the conviction . Criminal Appeal No.15 -Q of 2020  is allowed ; 
the impugned ju dgments of the courts below are set aside; the appellant Criminal Appeal Nos.15 -Q & 16 -Q of 2020  3
is acquitted of the charge; he has already been ordered to be released 
forthwith, if not required to be detained in any other case.  
 Criminal Appeal No.16 -Q of 2020 stands dismissed as not 
pressed.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Quetta , the 
1st November , 202 1 
Azmat /- 