IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani  
Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali  
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ather Saeed  
 
 
Constitution P etition No. 73 of 2011  
(Against the appoint of Chairman, National Accountability Bureau)  
 
 
 
  
Ch. Nisar Ali Khan  
…Petitioner                                          
 
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
                … Respondents  
 
 
For the petitioner:  Mr. Mohammad Akram Sheikh,     
Sr. ASC  
     Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
assisted by Barrister Sherjeel Adnan 
Sh. Advocate, Ch. Hasan Murtaza 
Mann, Advocate and Syed Faraz 
Raza, Advocate  
 
For respondent No. 3:  Sardar Muhammad Latif Khan 
Khosa, Sr. ASC  
 Chaud hry Akhtar Ali, AOR  
 
On Court’s notice:  Mr. Irfan Qadir, Attorney -General 
for Pakistan  
 assisted by Barrister Sheryar Riaz, 
Advocate  
 
Dates of hearing:    27.05.2013 & 28.05.2013  
 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
 
   Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, J. : The facts of this case are quite 
simple and uncomplicated and they may be stated straightaway. In 
order to fill an existing vacancy in the office of the Chairman, Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 2 
National Accountability Bureau the President of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan wrote a letter to the then Leader of the 
Oppos ition in the National Assembly (the petitioner) on 09.10.2011 
proposing the name of Admiral (Retd.) Fasih Bokhari (respondent 
No. 3) for the said position. The said letter reads as follows:  
 
    “PRESIDENT  
Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
 
Subject: - APPOINTMEN T OF CHAIRMAN, NATIONAL 
ACCOUNTABILITY BUREAU (NAB).  
 
 
 It is proposed to appoint Admiral (Retd) Fasih Bokhari, 
NI(M), S.Bt, as Chairman NAB. A copy of his CV is enclosed.  
 
2. Leader of the House and the Leader of the Opposition in 
the National Assembly ar e requested to consider the aforesaid 
proposal and convey their views urgently.  
 
 
 
(ASIF ALI ZARDARI)  
PRESIDENT  
 
 
Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani,  
Prime Minister/  
Leader of the House in the National Assembly,  
Islamabad.  
 
Ch. Nisar Ali Khan,  
MNA/Leader of the Oppo sition in the National  
Assembly,  
Islamabad.  
 
President’s Sectt’s F.No.20(201)/Dir(A -II)/2011, dated: 9th October, 2011 ” 
 
 
On 13.10.2011 the petitioner wrote back to the President on the 
subject and the contents of the petitioner’s letter written to the 
President are reproduced below:  
 
“National Assembly of Pakistan  
 
Leader of the Opposition  
Islamabad  
13th October, 2011  
 Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 3 
Dear Mr. President,  
 
Assalam -o-Alaikum,  
 
With reference to your letter dated October 8, 2011, without 
expressing an opinion on the suitabil ity or otherwise of the 
proposed nominee mentioned in your letter, I would like to point 
out the following: - 
 
I have repeatedly suggested (letters dated September 23 
and 24 to the Prime Minister and letter dated March 21, 
2011 by my Secretary to your Secre tary refer) that a panel 
of possible candidates for Chairman should be drawn up 
mutually in the first instance which can then be discussed 
through a participatory consultative process to facilitate 
development of a consensus amongst the consultees. Such 
consensus is a necessity in the light of the judgment dated 
March 10, 2011 of the august Supreme Court of Pakistan 
in Constitutional Petitions 60 and 61 of 2010 [the Justice 
(Retd) Deedar Hussain Shah case] wherein it has been 
held that “the spirit of such c onsultation appears to be 
that it should aim at developing a consensus and it should 
manifestly be shown that a serious, sincere and genuine 
effort is made towards evolving a consensus because 
otherwise the consultation would neither be meaningful 
(n)or pu rposive nor consensus -oriented.”  
 
A panel of possible candidates is also necessary for 
purposes of consultation with the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan in respect of the appointment of Chairman NAB, 
as recommended by the august Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in Khan  Asfandyar Wali and others v. Federation 
of Pakistan and others, Dr. Mobashir Hassan and others 
v. Federation of Pakistan and others, Bank of Punjab v. 
Haris Steel Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. and others and forcefully 
reiterated in the latest judgment referred to above.  
 
One of the 4 major points of dispute between the 
Government and the Opposition regarding the Holders of 
Public Office (Accountability) Bill which is pending before 
the National Assembly Standing Committee for Law and 
Justice for nearly 2 ½ years  relates to the qualification for 
appointment of the Chairman of the proposed new 
National Accountability Commission. The Government Bill 
provides that the Chairman should be a person who is, or 
has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or is qualified to 
be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court. PML(N)’s view 
is that the Chairman should be a serving Judge of the 
Supreme Court. The fact that the Government has 
proposed the appointment of a person (who is not a judge 
nor qualified to be a judge) is contradicto ry to its own 
position. It appears that the Government has no intention 
to pass the new accountability law.  
 
Mr. President, if the objective of the entire exercise is to 
select a nominee with impeccable reputation, integrity and 
credibility and unquestion able impartiality, there is no reason 
whatsoever for hesitation on the part of the Government to engage Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 4 
with the Opposition in a thorough, concrete and meaningful 
consultation.  
 
In the light of the above, I am of the view that a panel of 
possible candidat es should be drawn up mutually and the 
nominee finalized after meaningful, purposive and consensus -
oriented consultation.  
 
 With regards,  
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
(CH. NISAR ALI KHAN)  
 
Mr. Asif Ali Zardari,  
President,  
Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
President’s Ho use 
Islamabad ” 
 
The President responded to the petitioner’s letter on 15.10.2011 
informing the petitioner about his decision to appoint respondent 
No. 3 as the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau and the 
President’s letter of that date reads as under:  
 
“PRESIDENT  
Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
 
F.No.20(201)/Dir(A -II)/2011  
October 15, 2011  
 
Dear Ch. Nisar Ali Sahib,  
 
 With reference to your letter dated 13th October, 2011 
containing some points regarding the appointment of Chairman, 
National Accountabilit y Bureau, I wish to draw your attention to a 
self-explanatory section 6(b) of National Accountability 
Ordinance, 1999, reproduced hereinafter for ready reference: - 
 
“6. There shall be constituted a National 
Accountability Bureau for the whole of Pakistan.  
 
  b) Chairman, National Accountability Bureau;  
  
(i) There shall be a Chairman NAB to be 
appointed by the President in consultation 
with the Leader of the House and Leader of 
the Opposition in the National Assembly for Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 5 
a non extendable period of four years o n 
such terms and conditions as may be 
determined by the President and shall not 
be removed except on the grounds of 
removal of Judge of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan:  
 
Provided that the present incumbent 
of the office of Chairman, NAB shall 
complete the pe riod of four years from the 
date of his initial appointment.  
 
(ii) The Chairman NAB may, in writing under 
his hand, address to the President, resign 
his office.  
 
(ba) A person shall not be appointed as 
Chairman NAB unless he: - 
 
(i) is a retired Chief Justice o r Judge of 
the Supreme Court, or a Chief 
Justice of a High Court; or  
 
(ii) is a retired officer of the Armed 
Forces of Pakistan equivalent to the 
rank of a Lieutenant General: or  
 
(iii) is a retired Federal Government 
Officer in BPS -22 or equivalent”.  
 
2. The existing provisions of law have been strictly followed 
and adhered to and the proposed nominee falls under sub -clause 
(ii) of clause (ba) of section 6 of the aforesaid Ordinance. There is 
no deviation from the existing legislation, in any manner.  
 
3. The sense of various judgments of the superior courts is 
that the consultation shall be meaningful and for this purpose 
there is no necessity of sending a panel of nominees. Therefore 
meaningful consultation can be done even on a single person and 
for that  purpose you are taken on board quite candidly. Sending 
of a panel for consultation does not have any legal cover as well, 
there being no legal requirement as such. I have consulted the 
Leader of the House in the National Assembly on the subject who 
has co ncurred to the proposal.  
 
4. In order to implement the judgments of the superior 
courts referred to in your letter a bill is proposed by the Federal 
Government and is pending in the Parliament wherein process of 
consideration of the bill by Members of the  Parliament is taking 
place. Therefore in the existing legal parlance, the name of 
proposed nominee is in line with the provisions of the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 which is existing law at the point 
of time.  
 
5. It is pertinent to mention he re that no comments have 
been given on the profile and integrity of the nominee, which in 
fact is the material aspect of the consultation.  
 Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 6 
6. In the light of aforegoing lego -factual position, it is 
expected that the nominee would serve the institution in  the best 
manner. I take this opportunity to thank you for taking part in 
the consultative process, as mandated by law.  
 
 With regards,  
 
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
(Asif Ali Zardari)  
Ch. Nisar Ali Khan,  
MNA/Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly,  
Islamabad ” 
 
On the following day, i.e. 16.10.2011 respondent No. 3’s 
appointment as the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau was 
notified. Within six days of issuance of that notification the 
petitioner filed the present Constitution Petition before this Court 
challenging the appointment of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, 
National Accountability Bureau.  
 
2. We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, the 
learned counsel for respondent No. 3 and the learned Attorney -
General for Pakistan at some length. In support of this petition Mr. 
Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC appearing for the petitioner 
has argued that by virtue of the provisions of section 6(b)(i) of the 
National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 the President is to 
appoint the Chairman, Nati onal Accountability Bureau in 
consultation with the Leader of the House and the Leader of the 
Opposition in the National Assembly and in the case of 
appointment of respondent No. 3 no proper consultation had taken 
place between the President and the petiti oner and, thus, the 
mandatory legal requirement in that respect had not been 
complied with. For elaboration of this contention the learned 
counsel for the petitioner has placed a heavy reliance upon the 
judgment handed down by this Court in the case of Shahid Orakazi 
and another  v. Pakistan through Secretary Law, Ministry of Law, Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 7 
Islamabad and another  (PLD 2011 SC 365) wherein the word 
“consultation” had been interpreted, its connotations had been 
elaborated and proper requirements for the same had been lai d 
down. He has also referred to the case of Alexia Morrison  v. 
Theodore B. Olson  (487 US 654) in this regard. He has gone on to 
submit that the response of the petitioner to the President’s letter 
dated 09.10.2011 had never been considered by the President  with 
any degree of seriousness and the President had proceeded to 
appoint respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau without even properly satisfying himself as 
to whether the petitioner was agreeable to such appointment or 
not. Mr. Sheikh has maintained that the President had acted in the 
matter with undue haste which had clouded the bona fide of the 
exercise. He has further contended that, as suggested and 
recommended by this Court in the case of Shahid Orakazi (supra ), 
in case of a  disagreement in the matter of appointment of a 
nominee the matter had to be referred to the Hon’ble Chief Justice 
of Pakistan in his capacity as a neutral arbiter but that course was 
not resorted to in the present case. He has gone on to submit that 
a sug gestion or recommendation made by this Court needs to be 
extended due respect and deference and even if it is treated as an 
obiter  dictum  still it has a binding force. In this respect he has 
referred to a few passages (at pages 605 to 609) from the book 
titled Fundamental Law of Pakistan written by Mr. A. K. Brohi. He 
has also relied in this regard upon some observations made by this 
Court in the case of All Pakistan Newspapers Society and others  v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2004 SC 600). On th e issue 
of “consultation” Mr. Sheikh has also read out and referred to 
different passages from the judgments delivered by this Court in 
the cases of Capt. (Retd.) Abdul Qayyum, Executive Engineer  v. 
Muhammad Iqbal Khokhar and 4 others  (PLD 1992 SC 184), Khan 
Asfandyar Wali and others  v. Federation of Pakistan through 
Cabinet Division, Islamabad and others  (PLD 2001 SC 607), Bank 
of Punjab and another  v. Haris Steel Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. and others  Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 8 
(PLD 2010 SC 1109), Dr. Mobashir Hassan and others  v. Feder ation 
of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2010 SC 265) and also from some 
judgments from the Indian jurisdiction. With these submissions 
the learned counsel for the petitioner has prayed that the 
appointment of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National 
Accountabi lity Bureau may be set aside on account of lack of 
proper consultation as contemplated by the provisions of section 
6(b)(i) of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999.  
 
3. Sardar Muhammad Latif Khan Khosa, Sr. ASC appearing for 
respondent No. 3 has re ad out the “Formulations/Points for 
Determination” contained in Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 
3231 of 2013 filed by him and has submitted that there is no 
dispute in this case that respondent No. 3 is qualified to be 
appointed as the Chairman, Nation al Accountability Bureau under 
section 6(b)(i) read with section 6(ba)(ii) of the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999. He has also referred to the 
Curriculum Vitae  of respondent No. 3 which had been sent by the 
President to the petitioner along with hi s letter dated 09.10.2011 
manifesting that the said respondent had a meritorious record of 
serving the nation in different capacities, he had a good academic 
background and he was a person amply fit to be appointed to the 
said office. He has argued that th e petitioner had been duly 
consulted by the President vis-à-vis the proposed appointment of 
respondent No. 3 and in his letter dated 13.10.2011 the petitioner 
had said nothing adverse to the respondent’s fitness or suitability 
for the proposed appointment and, therefore, on 15.10.2011 the 
President was quite justified in deciding to appoint respondent No. 
3 as the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau because it was 
by then apparent to the President that the petitioner had no 
objection to the appointment  of respondent No. 3. Mr. Khosa has 
pointed out that the office of the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau was lying vacant for some time and there 
was a pressing urgency to fill that vacancy and, thus, the President Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 9 
could not wait for an indefinite p eriod and allow more time to pass 
while attending to the suggestions made by the petitioner in his 
letter dated 13.10.2011, particularly when the petitioner had said 
nothing adverse to the proposed appointment of respondent No. 3 
and the suggestions made b y the petitioner traveled beyond the 
pale of the provisions of the National Accountability Ordinance, 
1999. As regards the interpretation of the word “consultation” 
rendered by this Court through various judgments he has 
maintained that the courts have no jurisdiction to add to or 
subtract from the words used by the legislature in a legal 
instrument and, thus, through the medium of interpretation this 
Court could not enlarge the functions of the President beyond what 
was required of him by the statute itsel f. In this respect he has 
referred to the judgments passed by this Court in the cases of Asif 
Ali Zardari and another  v. The State  (PLD 2001 SC 568), Syed Zafar 
Ali Shah and others  v. General Pervez Musharraf, Chief Executive of 
Pakistan and others  (PLD 20 00 SC 869), Khan Asfandyar Wali and 
others  v. Federation of Pakistan through Cabinet Division, 
Islamabad and others  (PLD 2001 SC 607) and Air Marshal (Retd.) 
Muhammad Asghar Khan v. General (Retd.) Mirza Aslam Baig, 
Former Chief of Army Staff and others  (PLD 2013 SC 1) maintaining 
that in the past this Court had on occasions traveled beyond the 
words used in a statute and had added to the prescribed legal 
requirements which exercise fell beyond the jurisdiction of this 
Court. While referring to the judgment s delivered by this Court in 
the cases of Bank of Punjab and another  v. Haris Steel Industries 
(Pvt.) Ltd. and others  (PLD 2010 SC 1109), Shahid Orakazi and 
another  v. Pakistan through Secretary Law, Ministry of Law, 
Islamabad and another  (PLD 2011 SC 365)  and Sindh High Court 
Bar Association through its Secretary and another  v. Federation of 
Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, Islamabad 
and others  (PLD 2009 SC 879) he has submitted that the said 
judgments may either be revisited by thi s Court qua interpretation 
of the word “consultation” or the same may be treated as delivered Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 10 
per incuriam. Mr. Khosa has produced before us photocopies of 
some press reports tending to show that the petitioner’s own 
political party and its head had offere d no objection or resistance 
to the appointment of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau and, thus, it has been maintained by him 
that the petitioner could not raise any such objection against the 
said appointment on his own. It has lastly been submitted by him 
that respondent No. 3 has been serving as the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau for the last about one year and three 
quarters and he is about to complete one half of his fixed term of 
office of four years and, there fore, at this late stage his 
appointment may not be disturbed by this Court.  
 
4. Mr. Irfan Qadir, the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan 
appearing on Court’s notice, has argued that many judgments 
rendered by this Court after 03.11.2007 need to be revi sited by the 
Court and in this context he has made a specific reference to the 
judgment delivered in the case of Sindh High Court Bar Association 
through its Secretary and another  v. Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, Is lamabad and others  (PLD 
2009 SC 879). He has also referred to the history of accountability 
laws in Pakistan and has maintained that the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of Pakistan cannot be declared or treated as a consultee or 
an arbiter in the matter of appointme nt of the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau as long as the National Accountability 
Ordinance, 1999 does not expressly stipulate or recognize his role 
as such. In the end the learned Attorney -General has submitted 
that in the past appointments of man y Chairmen and other officers 
of the National Accountability Bureau have been interfered with by 
this Court which has given rise to some misgivings amongst 
various national institutions and, therefore, this time the Court 
may exercise restraint in the matt er and allow respondent No. 3 to 
complete his term of office as he has already completed about one 
half of it.  Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 11 
 
5. After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and the 
learned Attorney -General for Pakistan at some length and after 
going through the p recedent cases cited and the material produced 
by them we have observed that the jurisdiction of this Court to 
entertain the present petition filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution has not been contested by any of the parties and have 
found that th e pivotal issue involved in the present case is as to 
whether proper consultation had taken place between the 
President and the petitioner in his capacity as the Leader of the 
Opposition in the National Assembly before appointment of 
respondent No. 3 as th e Chairman, National Accountability Bureau 
or not. Section 6 of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 is 
attracted and applicable to this issue and the relevant parts of the 
same provide as follows:  
 
“6. National Accountability Bureau : 
 
(a) … … …  
 
(b) Chairm an, National Accountability Bureau:  
 
(i) There shall be a Chairman NAB to be appointed by the 
President in consultation with the Leader of the House 
and the Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly 
for a non -extendable period of four years on such ter ms 
and conditions as may be determined by the President and 
shall not be removed except on the grounds of removal of 
Judge of Supreme Court of Pakistan:  
 
Provided that the present incumbent of the office of 
Chairman NAB shall complete the period of four ye ars 
from the date of his initial appointment.  
 … … …”  
 
The word “consultation” appearing in section 6(b)(i) reproduced 
above has already been interpreted by this Court in many a 
judgment and the last of such judgments was that delivered in the 
case of Shah id Orakazi and another  v. Pakistan through Secretary 
Law, Ministry of Law, Islamabad and another  (PLD 2011 SC 365). 
In paragraphs No. 36 and 37 of that judgment this Court had 
observed and concluded as follows:  Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 12 
 
36. The scope and interpretation of the word  ‘consultation’ 
used in section 6(b)(i) of the National Accountability Ordinance, 
1999 have been intensely debated before us and, therefore, we 
must clarify the position in that regard. Section 6(b)(i) of the 
National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 provide s for 
appointment of Chairman, National Accountability Bureau “by 
the President in consultation with the Leader of the House and 
the Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly”. Before 
passage of the 18th Amendment of the Constitution the word 
‘cons ultation’ had repeatedly been used in the Constitution 
particularly in the context of appointment of Chief Justices and 
Judges of the superior judiciary and in the case of Al-Jehad Trust 
and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 1996 SC 
324) thi s Court had held that a ‘consultation’ has to be “effective, 
meaningful, purposive, consensus -oriented , leaving no room for 
complaint of arbitrariness or unfairplay” and an identical 
interpretation of that word had also been advanced in the case of 
Al-Jeha d Trust and another v. Federation of Pakistan and others 
(PLD 1997 SC 84). Subsequently in the case of Sindh High Court 
Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan and 4 others  (PLD 2009 
Karachi 408) the High Court of Sindh had held that for a 
consultation t o be meaningful and purposive an “attempt 
should be made to reach at some consensus ” and that the 
required consultative process should be in writing. The last 
occasion on which this Court had interpreted the word 
‘consultation’ was in the case of Sindh Hig h Court Bar Association 
and another v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2009 SC 
879) wherein this Court had observed that “ by all means the first 
priority has to be directed to evolving consensus between the 
consultees by mutual discussion of the mer its and demerits 
of the concerned candidate .” In India it was held in the case of 
Justice K. P. Mohapatra v. Sri Ram Chandra Nayak and others  
(AIR 2002 SC 3578) that ‘consultation’ means “meeting of minds” . 
The context in the case of the National Accountab ility Ordinance, 
1999 and the National Accountability Bureau created and 
established thereunder has, however, been found by us to be 
somewhat different from the above mentioned constitutional 
context. In the past not too distant complaints of persecution o f 
the political opposition in the country by the government of the 
day through utilization of the National Accountability Bureau or 
its predecessor institutions had unfortunately been too many and 
willingness of the heads of such institutions to slavishly carry out 
and execute the vendetta of the government of the day against its 
opponents had also been shamefully rampant. It was in that 
background that at a time when there was no Parliament in 
existence this Court had recommended in the case of Khan 
Asfand yar Wali and others v. Federation of Pakistan and others  
(PLD 2001 SC 607) that in the matter of appointment of 
Chairman, National Accountability Bureau consultation ought to 
be made by the President with the Chief Justice of Pakistan and 
that recommendati on had been given effect to through the 
National Accountability Bureau (Amendment) Ordinance XXXV of 
2001 but subsequently through the National Accountability 
Bureau (Amendment) Ordinance CXXXIII of 2002 the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan had been excluded from  the consultees and 
he was substituted by the Leader of the House and the Leader of 
the Opposition in the National Assembly who were to be 
consulted by the President before making an appointment of 
Chairman, National Accountability Bureau. That deletion ha d Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 13 
come about because by that time the Parliament had once again 
come into existence and consultation with the Leader of the 
Opposition in the National Assembly was expected to go a long 
way in allaying fears and apprehensions of the political opposition 
regarding its possible persecution and victimization by the 
government of the day through the National Accountability 
Bureau and its Chairman. The spirit of the amended provisions, 
thus, was that the Leader of the Opposition in the National 
Assembly would be  taken on board, his opinion would be given 
due weight and consideration and he would have an effective say 
in the matter of appointment of Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau so that the political opposition in the 
country may not have an occasion to  cry foul in the matter .  
 
37. As time progressed another dimension stood added to the 
issue when, apart from apprehended persecution of the political 
opposition, the National Accountability Bureau, which happens to 
be a premier and high -profile anti -corru ption institution of the 
country, started being perceived as an institution which was 
possibly being misused for covering up corruption at high places 
and such cover up was perceived to be controlled and managed 
through appointment of its handpicked Chairm an. It was in that 
backdrop that in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan and others v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2010 SC 265) this Court 
reiterated its earlier recommendation and suggestion with regard 
to consultation with the Chief Justice of Paki stan in the matter of 
appointment of Chairman, National Accountability Bureau. That 
recommendation and suggestion was once again repeated by this 
Court in the case of The Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries 
(Pvt.) Ltd. and others (supra ). It must be a ppreciated that 
consultation with the Leader of the Opposition in the National 
Assembly and consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan are, 
in the developing scenario, essentially meant for separate noble 
and laudable purposes which are both directed towards achieving 
the very objects for which the National Accountability Bureau was 
established, i.e. elimination of corruption by persons holding 
public offices and achievement of such objects through a process 
which is just, fair, impartial and evenhande d. The purpose of 
consulting the Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly 
essentially is to pacify the apprehensions of the political 
opposition in the country regarding its possible victimization and 
persecution and that purpose cannot be served if the opinion of 
the Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly in respect 
of a proposed appointment is brushed aside or bulldozed which 
would surely be incentive -incompatible . The spirit of such 
consultation appears to be that it should aim at dev eloping a 
consensus and it should manifestly be shown that a serious, 
sincere and genuine effort is made towards evolving a 
consensus because otherwise the consultation would neither 
be meaningful or purposive nor consensus -oriented . Similarly, 
corruption being an unfortunate bane of our society in the 
current phase of our history and even the high public offices 
being not immune from serious allegations in that regard, leaving 
the matter of appointment of the head of the most important anti -
corruption inst itution in the country in the hands only of those 
very persons who could possibly, in future or present, be a 
subject of inquiries, investigations or trials for corruption would, 
apart from giving rise to the issue of conflict of interest, defeat the 
very object of the relevant law and would, thus, also prejudicially 
affect, directly or indirectly, the Fundamental Rights of the 
citizens at large. This is where the Chief Justice of Pakistan Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 14 
comes in as a consultee in his capacity as a guardian and 
defender o f the constitutional and legal rights of the people at 
large. The Chief Justice of Pakistan can also play a salutary role 
in the matter of such appointment particularly when there is a 
serious difference of opinion between the other consultees over a 
propo sed appointment of Chairman, National Accountability 
Bureau. The role of the Chief Justice of Pakistan as a neutral 
arbiter in disagreements, differences or disputes over matters of 
national importance already stands recognized by the 
Constitution itself t hrough Articles 152 and 159(4) thereof. Under 
Article 152 of the Constitution if there is a disagreement between 
the Federation and a Province over the terms of acquisition by the 
Federation of any land belonging to the Province then the terms of 
that acqu isition are to be determined by an arbitrator appointed 
by the Chief Justice of Pakistan. Likewise, under Article 159(4) of 
the Constitution if any question arises whether any condition 
imposed by the Federal Government on any Provincial 
Government in resp ect of entrustment of functions with respect to 
broadcasting and telecasting is lawfully imposed or whether any 
refusal by the Federal Government to entrust such functions is 
unreasonable then that question is to be determined by an 
arbitrator appointed by  the Chief Justice of Pakistan. It may 
advantageously be mentioned here that Mr. Shahid Orakzai 
petitioner has drawn our attention to the provisions of Article 213 
of the Constitution regarding appointment of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and with refere nce to the first proviso to clause 
(2B) of that Article he has pointed out that if the required 
‘consultation’ between the Prime Minister and the Leader of the 
Opposition in the National Assembly in that respect does not 
result in a ‘consensus’ then the ma tter is to be referred to a 
neutral and bipartisan body. We feel that the spirit of that 
provision of the Constitution can also be pressed into service in 
the matter of appointment of Chairman, National Accountability 
Bureau in case of a lack of consensus between the statutory 
consultees. We, therefore, reiterate the importance of consulting 
the Chief Justice of Pakistan in the matter of appointment of 
Chairman, National Accountability Bureau and expect that the 
recommendations and suggestions repeatedly ma de by this Court 
in that regard through different judgments handed down by it 
from time to time shall be given effect to in all future 
appointments to that office. We entertain no manner of doubt 
that anybody interested in making an honest and good 
appoint ment to that office would not feel shy of consulting the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan in that connection.”  
(underlining and bold letters have been supplied for emphasis ) 
 
It, thus, stands settled that a constitutionally or statutorily 
required “consultation” has to be effective, meaningful, purposive, 
consensus -oriented, leaving no room for complaint of arbitrariness 
or unfair play and in order to establish that a consultation was 
meaningful and purposive it should manifestly be shown that a 
serious, sincere a nd genuine effort was made towards evolving a 
consensus. It also stands equally settled that the first priority in 
any consultation has to be directed towards evolving a consensus Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 15 
between the consultees by mutual discussion of the merits and 
demerits of th e concerned candidate and that consultation 
practically amounts to an effort made towards meeting of minds. In 
this backdrop we find that although the process of consultation did 
take place in the present case between the President and the 
petitioner in hi s capacity as the Leader of the Opposition in the 
National Assembly yet the question is as to whether in the process 
of such consultation any serious, sincere and genuine effort was 
made to reach a consensus or not. In this context we note that on 
09.10.20 11 the President had proposed to the petitioner the name 
of respondent No. 3 for the relevant appointment and on 
13.10.2011 the petitioner had momentarily withheld his opinion 
regarding suitability or otherwise of respondent No. 3 for the 
proposed appointm ent and had instead made a few suggestions 
regarding the process through which consultation between him 
and the President ought to take place. At the end of his letter dated 
13.10.2011 the petitioner had written to the President as follows:  
 
“In the light of the above, I am of the view that a panel of possible 
candidates should be drawn up mutually and the nominee 
finalized after meaningful, purposive and consensus -oriented 
consultation”.  
 
It was, thus, quite clear that through that letter to the President 
the petitioner, while making a few suggestions regarding the 
process to be adopted, had reserved his right to give his views 
about suitability or otherwise of any nominee. The letter sent by 
the President to the petitioner on 15.11.2011 quite clearly shows  
that while rejecting the petitioner’s suggestions regarding the 
process to be adopted for consultation he had decided to appoint 
respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau 
without actually soliciting the petitioner’s opinion about 
respondent No. 3 after rejection of the suggestions made by the 
petitioner regarding the process to be adopted. In our considered 
view once the President had decided to ignore, disregard or reject 
the suggestions regarding the process made by the petitioner the Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 16 
President ought to have written to the petitioner that the 
suggestions made by him regarding the process were not 
acceptable to him and that the petitioner should give his opinion 
regarding suitability or otherwise of respondent No. 3 in black and 
white. Unfortunately the President did not deem it important or 
necessary to do that and he decided to proceed with appointment 
of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National Accountability 
Bureau. It is but obvious that no serious, sincere and genuine 
effort w as made by him towards evolving a consensus over the 
particular nominee and no mutual discussion regarding the merits 
or demerits of the nominee was deemed by the President to be a 
necessary part of the consultative process. In this view of the 
matter the process of consultation undertaken in the present case 
cannot be termed or accepted as meaningful, purposive or 
consensus -oriented.  
 
6. The argument of the learned counsel for respondent No. 3 
that in his letter dated 13.10.2011 the petitioner had not off ered 
any adverse comment regarding suitability of respondent No. 3 for 
the relevant office and, therefore, there was hardly any occasion for 
the President to seek the petitioner’s opinion in that regard again 
has been found by us to be an argument which ig nores many facts 
staring in the face. It is a fact that in his letter dated 13.10.2011 
the petitioner had reserved his comments about suitability or 
otherwise of any nominee shortlisted after the process of 
consultation suggested by him and this is so evid ent from the 
combined reading of the first and the last paragraphs of that letter. 
Asking for a panel of possible candidates itself was indicative of the 
fact that the petitioner entertained reservations against the 
nomination of respondent No. 3. It is al so a fact that after the 
appointment of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau the petitioner had lost no time and had 
challenged his appointment through the present petition which 
was filed within six days of the appointment. It is also a hard fact Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 17 
that during the entire period of pendency of this petition the 
petitioner has been pursuing the matter diligently. It also cannot 
be ignored as a fact that despite the appointment of respondent 
No. 3 having been made about a year and th ree quarters ago the 
petitioner has still vehemently and forcefully argued the matter 
before this Court through his learned counsel. The argument of the 
learned counsel for respondent No. 3 regarding an implied 
concurrence or acquiescence on the part of th e petitioner has, 
thus, been found by us to be unacceptable. It appears that the 
momentary withholding of his opinion by the petitioner about 
suitability or otherwise of respondent No. 3 was taken advantage of 
by the President without appreciating that a p roper consultative 
process could have thrown up many other good options as well and 
such an exercise could have served the National Accountability 
Bureau as well as the society better.         
 
7. The learned counsel for respondent No. 3 has asserted that 
in view of the peculiar background regarding vacancy of the office 
of the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau there was a 
pressing urgency involved in the matter and that is why after 
disagreeing with the suggestions regarding the process made by 
the petitioner the President had proceeded to appoint respondent 
No. 3 as the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau by 
assuming that the petitioner held no views adverse to suitability of 
the said respondent for the relevant office as he had expressed 
none in his letter to the President dated 13.10.2011. However, in 
the factual background of the case this assertion of the learned 
counsel for respondent No. 3 has failed to impress us. The 
background is that on 01.09.2010 it was declared by this Court in 
the c ase of Bank of Punjab and another  v. Haris Steel Industries 
(Pvt.) Ltd. and others  (PLD 2010 SC 1109) that discharge of 
functions of the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau by the 
then Acting Chairman was illegal and a direction was issued by 
this Cou rt that a regular appointment to the vacant office of the Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 18 
Chairman, National Accountability Bureau be made within the 
next thirty days. As a result of that judgment of this Court Mr. 
Justice (Retired) Syed Deedar Hussain Shah, a former Judge of 
this Court,  was appointed by the President as the Chairman, 
National Accountability Bureau. The appointment of Mr. Justice 
(Retired) Syed Deedar Hussain Shah was challenged before this 
Court through two Constitution Petitions which were allowed by 
this Court on 10.03 .2011 through the judgment reported as 
Shahid Orakazi and another  v. Pakistan through Secretary Law, 
Ministry of Law, Islamabad and another  (PLD 2011 SC 365) and 
through that judgment the appointment of Mr. Justice (Retired) 
Syed Deedar Hussain Shah was se t aside and a direction was 
issued that a fresh appointment to the vacant office of the 
Chairman, National Accountability Bureau be made “without any 
delay”. Instead of complying with that direction of the Court and 
appointing any Chairman of the National Accountability Bureau 
within the directed period the said Bureau was allowed by the 
President/Federal Government to keep running under the charge 
of a Deputy Chairman and such running of the Bureau was 
challenged before this Court. On 21.06.2011 the said c hallenge 
was allowed and through the judgment reported as Al-Jehad Trust 
and another  v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2011 SC 
811) it was declared that a Deputy Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau could not perform the functions of the 
Chairm an of that Bureau at a time when the office of the Chairman 
was lying vacant. It had specifically been observed and directed by 
this Court in that judgment as follows:  
 
“8. For what has been discussed above the Federal 
Government is directed to fill the v acant offices of the Chairman, 
National Accountability Bureau and the Prosecutor -General 
Accountability within one month of announcement of this 
judgment positively failing which respondent No. 5 shall ipso facto  
and without further ado stand denuded of hi s authority to 
continue exercising the delegated powers of the Chairman, 
National Accountability Bureau and performing any other 
function not conferred upon him by the National Accountability 
Ordinance, 1999. If in such an eventuality the National 
Accounta bility Bureau practically ceases to exist or function 
under the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 then the Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 19 
blame for the same shall rest squarely upon the shoulders of the 
Federal Government. This Constitution Petition is disposed of 
with the directi ons issued and the observations made above.”  
 
The direction issued by this Court regarding filling the vacancy in 
the office of the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau “within 
one month of announcement of this judgment positively” was not 
complied wit h and instead Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 
2815 of 2011 had been filed before this Court seeking extension of 
the time fixed by this Court for the purpose but that miscellaneous 
application was dismissed by this Court on 25.07.2011. Later on 
Civil R eview Petition No. 151 of 2011 was filed before this Court by 
the Federal Government seeking review of dismissal of Civil 
Miscellaneous Application No. 2815 of 2011 but that review 
petition was also dismissed by this Court on 04.10.2011. It is, 
therefore, quite obvious that despite a clear and unambiguous 
direction of this Court regarding appointment of a Chairman, 
National Accountability Bureau within one month of 21.06.2011 
the Federal Government had not done the needful and it had 
instead been trying to prolong the matter by seeking extension of 
time for doing the needful. Throughout this period the operation of 
the above mentioned direction had never been suspended by this 
Court. It is after dismissal of the review petition filed by the Federal 
Governmen t on 04.10.2011 that the President had initiated the 
process of appointment of the Chairman, National Accountability 
Bureau on 09.10.2011 and after receipt of the petitioner’s letter 
dated 13.10.2011 the President had decided to appoint respondent 
No. 3 to  the said office on 15.10.2011 which decision was followed 
by a notification of appointment dated 16.10.2011. This factual 
background clearly shows that the Federal Government had failed 
to comply with the time line directed by this Court and had slept 
over the matter for about three and half months whereafter the 
process of appointment of the Chairman, National Accountability 
Bureau was initiated on 09.10.2011 and the same was completed 
on 16.10.2011. The haste shown by the President after writing his 
letter dated 09.10.2011 to the petitioner is not understandable as Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 20 
the Federal Government had already slept over the matter for 
about three and a half month and if the petitioner had reserved his 
comments about suitability or otherwise of respondent No. 3 for 
the relevant office and had made some suggestions regarding the 
process then if the President had disagreed with the process 
suggested by the petitioner then he ought to have written to the 
petitioner that his suggestions were not acceptable and that he 
should now offer his opinion about suitability or otherwise of 
respondent No. 3 for the relevant office. The factual background 
mentioned above is sufficient to expose the hollowness of the stand 
taken by the learned counsel for respondent No. 3 regarding th e 
urgency involved in the matter. Apart from that if the President 
had already slept over the matter for about three and a half 
months then consuming a few more days for making the 
consultative process meaningful, purposive and consensus -
oriented would not  have hurt anybody. A conclusion is, therefore, 
irresistible and unavoidable that the President had failed to make 
any serious, sincere and genuine effort to evolve a consensus with 
the petitioner over the matter of appointment of respondent No. 3 
as the C hairman, National Accountability Bureau. In the 
circumstances of the case detailed above we have entertained no 
manner of doubt that proper consultation as required by the 
provisions of section 6(b)(i) of the National Accountability 
Ordinance, 1999 and as interpreted by this Court in various 
judgments, particularly in the case of  Shahid Orakazi and another  
v. Pakistan through Secretary Law, Ministry of Law, Islamabad and 
another  (PLD 2011 SC 365), had not taken place in the present 
case before appointment of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, 
National Accountability Bureau.  
 
8. A lot of emphasis has been laid by Mr. Muhammad Akram 
Sheikh, Sr. ASC appearing for the petitioner upon the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice of Pakistan being a consultee in the matter of 
appoin tment of the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau and Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 21 
suggestions and recommendation having been made by this Court 
in that regard in various judgments including the judgment 
delivered in the case of Shahid Orakazi and another  v. Pakistan 
through Secre tary Law, Ministry of Law, Islamabad and another  
(PLD 2011 SC 365). As against that the learned counsel for 
respondent No. 3 as well as the learned Attorney -General for 
Pakistan have argued with vehemence that the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice of Pakistan does not  figure in the provisions of section 
6(b)(i) of the National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 as a 
consultee and that this Court had no jurisdiction to add a 
consultee to the process of appointment of a Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau where the rele vant law did not make him 
so. We have found all such submissions to be missing the point. It 
goes without saying that a suggestion or a recommendation made 
by this Court in a judgment, though entitled to due respect, 
deference and consideration, does not t ravel beyond a suggestion 
or a recommendation and it does not by itself assume the status of 
law. By its nature and form a suggestion or a recommendation is 
simply what it is, nothing more and nothing less. In this view of 
the matter this aspect of the cas e may not detain us any further.  
 
9. Production of photocopies of some press reports by the 
learned counsel for respondent No. 3 tending to show that the 
political party to which the petitioner belongs and the head of that 
political party had offered no o bjection or resistance to the 
appointment of respondent No. 3 as the Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau has been found by us to be irrelevant 
because a Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly does 
not merely represent his own political part y in the National 
Assembly but he represents the entire Opposition in the National 
Assembly which may include members belonging to many political 
parties and also independent members. Apart from that for the 
purposes of section 6(b)(i) of the National Acco untability 
Ordinance, 1999 it is only the opinion of the Leader of the Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 22 
Opposition in the National Assembly which is relevant for the 
President and not the opinion  of any political party to which the 
Leader of the Opposition may belong or of its head. It m ay also be 
observed in this context that respondent No. 3 has not filed any 
concise statement before this Court and the photocopies of the 
press reports produced before us during the arguments have 
neither been properly filed nor proved.  
 
10. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan has requested, 
and the learned counsel for respondent No. 3 has also joined him 
in submitting, that this Court may show restraint and may not 
interfere in the matter of appointment of respondent No. 3 as the 
Chairman, National  Accountability Bureau at a stage when he has 
already served in that office for about a year and three quarters 
and also because in the past this Court has been interfering with 
such appointments which interference, according to them, has 
created misgiving s amongst different national institutions. After 
due consideration of the matter we have not been able to persuade 
ourselves to accede to such a request or accept such a submission. 
This Court is obliged and bound to decide every case upon its own 
merits a nd merely because some appointments to the same or 
related offices had been illegally made in the past and this Court 
had interfered with the same ought not to be of any consideration 
in a similar matter brought to the Court subsequently. As a matter 
of fa ct consistency is a cherished judicial virtue and no court 
should be expected to make exceptions other than those warranted 
by the law. Apart from that any length of service unlawfully utilized 
is not long enough to deter this Court from pronouncing upon t he 
legality of the same when the matter is properly brought before it 
for adjudication. Respondent No. 3 had been appointed to head the 
premier anti -corruption agency of the country and the importance 
of the office of the Chairman, National Accountability Bureau had 
been commented upon by this Court in the case of Bank of Punjab 
and another  v. Haris Steel Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. and others  (PLD Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 23 
2010 SC 1109) and also in the case of Shahid Orakazi and another  
v. Pakistan through Secretary Law, Ministry of Law , Islamabad and 
another  (PLD 2011 SC 365) and it had been observed in that 
regard in the latter case as under:  
 
29. In the case of The Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries (Pvt.) Ltd. 
and others (supra ) this Court had made some detailed comments in re spect of 
the reasons behind promulgation of the National Accountability Ordinance, 
1999, the qualifications for holding the office of Chairman, National 
Accountability Bureau, the consultees in the matter of his appointment and the 
important duties to be d ischarged and the prestigious functions to be performed 
by him. It had been observed by this Court in that case as follows:   
 
 
“37. The National Accountability Bureau Ordinance being 
Ordinance No. XVIII of 1999 was promulgated on 16th 
November, 1999, inte r alia, " to provide for effective measures 
for the detection, investigation, prosecution and speedy 
disposal of cases involving corruption, corrupt practices, 
misuse or abuse of power or authority, misappropriation of 
property, taking of kick -backs, commis sions and for matters 
connected and ancillary or incidental thereto." And for 
"recovery of outstanding amounts from those persons who 
have committed default in re -payment of amounts to banks, 
financial institutions, government agencies and other 
agencies ." The persons liable to be proceeded against, arrested 
and prosecuted under the said Ordinance, as per section 9 
thereof read with section 5(m), included persons of the level 
and status of the sitting Prime Minister, the sitting Chairman 
of the Senate, the sitting Speaker of the National Assembly, 
Federal Ministers, Attorney General, the sitting Chief 
Ministers, the sitting Speakers of the Provincial Assemblies, 
Provincial Ministers, Members of the Parliament and 
Members of the Provincial Assemblies. And the  person 
empowered to initiate and take such -like steps against such -
like accused persons and others, including ordering their 
arrest, their prosecution and even confiscation of their 
properties, was the Chairman of the said Bureau. The 
provisions of sectio n 6(b) of the said Ordinance then talked of 
the appointment and the terms and conditions of the office of 
the said Chairman, as originally enacted, was in the following 
terms: -- 
  
"6(b) Chairman National Accountability 
Bureau:  
  
(i) There shall be a Chairm an NAB to be 
appointed by the President for such period 
as the Chief Executive of Pakistan may 
determine and consider proper and 
necessary.  
  
(ii) The Chairman NAB shall be appointed 
on such terms and conditions and shall have 
the status and privileges as may be 
determined by the Chief Executive.  
  Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 24 
(iii) The Chairman NAB may resign his 
office by writing under his hand addressed 
to the Chief Executive."  
  
The matter of accountability under the said Ordinance and the 
status of the persons charged with the res ponsibilities 
envisaged by the said Ordinance came to be examined by this 
Court in Khan Asfand Yar Wali's case  (PLD 2001 SC 607). 
This Court was appalled to find that no qualifications stood 
prescribed for persons who could be appointed as officers with 
the above kind of high obligations nor did such like officers, 
who stood commanded to proceed even against the sitting 
Prime Minister, have any security of service or of any terms 
and conditions of their service. It was, therefore, found 
imperative by this C ourt that the office of the Chairman 
should be made secure and strong and be manned by persons 
of high qualities to be able to cope with the high degree of 
responsibilities cast on it. It had consequently been observed 
through para -288 of the above -mention ed judgment that the 
Chairman of the NAB should be appointed by the President in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan; that the tenure 
of his office be secured; that he should also be protected 
against removal from office and should not be remov able from 
the said office except on grounds on which a Judge of the 
Supreme Court could be removed and that the salary and 
allowances etc. to which such a Chairman was entitled should 
also be fixed and determined and should not be allowed to be 
varied duri ng the term of his office.  
  
38. It was in view of these recommendations and observations 
made by this Court through the above -mentioned judgment 
delivered in April, 2001 that amendments were made in the 
above -mentioned Ordinance through an Amending Ordina nce 
No. XXXVI of 2001 which was promulgated on August, 10, 
2001 and the substituted provisions of section 6(b) above -
quoted then read as under: -- 
  
"(b) Chairman National Accountability 
Bureau:  
  
(i) there shall be a Chairman NAB to be 
appointed by the Pre sident in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of Pakistan for a 
period of three years on such terms and 
conditions as may be determined by the 
President and shall not be removed except 
on the grounds of removal of Judge of 
Supreme Court of Pakistan."  
  
39.  It may, however, be mentioned that in the month of 
November, 2002, amongst others, a new subsection (ba) was 
added to the above -mentioned section 6 through the 
Amending Ordinance No. CXXXIII of 2002 whereby the 
qualifications for a person to be appointed  as the Chairman 
NAB were also prescribed which were as under:  
  
"6(ba) A person shall not be appointed as 
Chairman NAB unless he --- 
  
(i) is a retired Chief Justice or a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High 
Court; or  Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 25 
  
(ii) is a retired  officer of the Armed Forces 
of Pakistan equivalent to the rank of a 
Lieutenant General; or  
  
(iii) is a retired Federal Government Officer 
in BPS 22 or equivalent."  
  
But in the same breath, an amendment was also made in 
subsection (b) of the said section  6 whereby consultation with 
the Chief Justice of Pakistan in the matter of the said 
appointment was omitted. It may well have been just a 
coincidence but historically speaking the elimination of the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan from the said scene coincided with 
the General Elections in the country in the year 2002 after 
which elections serious allegations became public regarding 
the misuse of this NAB Ordinance for political purposes.  
  
40.  Be that as it may, what is still strikingly noticeable is 
that irre spective of the fact whether the said Chairman was 
appointable with or without the consultation of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan, the fact remains that the qualifications 
prescribed for the said office are a definite indicator of the 
high status of the sai d office which is obviously in consonance 
with the high obligations cast on the incumbent i.e. a 
Chairman being a person who had held the office of the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan or of the Judge of the Supreme Court or of 
the Chief Justice of a High Court o r was a retired officer of the 
Armed Forces of Pakistan of the rank of a Lieutenant General 
or who was a retired Federal Government Officer in BPS -22. 
  
41.  The reason for looking for a person of such an 
eminence and prestige for appointment as the Chairm an of 
NAB is not far to find. A bare perusal of the provisions of 
sections 5(m), 7, 8, 12, 16(a), 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26 
and 28 of the said NAB Ordinance would show the 
importance and the momentousness of the office of the 
Chairman under the said O rdinance. He is the person to be 
consulted by the President of Pakistan for the appointment of a 
Deputy Chairman of the NAB and for the appointment of the 
Prosecutor -General Accountability; he appoints all other 
officers of the NAB; he is the one to decide  whether to make 
or not to make a Reference with respect to corruption or 
corrupt practices and no Court could take cognizance of any 
such offence unless such a Reference was made by him or by 
an officer authorized by him; he is the one who could order 
initiation of proceedings under this Ordinance or order an 
inquiry or investigation in the matter; he is one who directs 
and authorizes arrests of accused persons under the said 
Ordinance; he is the one who has the power to freeze 
properties which are the sub ject matter of an offence under the 
said Ordinance and who could, in certain cases, even order 
sale of the said property and he has the authority to call for 
any record or information with respect to any matter covered 
by the NAB Ordinance. All Banks and F inancial Institutions 
stand commanded to report all unusual financial transactions 
to him. It is he who stands authorized to communicate with 
foreign Governments for their assistance; he is the authority to 
accept plea -bargains and he is the one who has th e power to 
tender pardon to any person accused of an offence under the 
said Ordinance. Needless to add that such like orders could be Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 26 
passed by him against any holder of any Public Office 
including a sitting Prime Minister of the country.”  
 
It may be true that respondent No. 3 has already served as the 
Chairman, National Accountability Bureau for about a year and 
three quarters by now out of a term of four years but at the same 
time it is equally true that the remaining term of office is about two 
years and  a quarter which is a considerably long period of time. A 
person cannot be allowed to continue holding such an important 
office if his appointment to that office has been found by this Court 
to have been brought about in a manner which is not lawful. It is  
true that the constitutional jurisdiction of this Court is 
discretionary in nature but we cannot countenance exercise of 
discretion of this Court in favour of continuance in office of such 
an unlawfully appointed person for more than a couple of years.  
 
11. The submissions made by the learned counsel for 
respondent No. 3 and the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan 
suggesting revisiting of some judgments already passed by this 
Court regarding proper interpretation of the word “consultation” 
have not been found by us to be worth any serious consideration 
as we find such judgments to be considered judgments serving the 
intents and purposes of the relevant constitutional and legal 
provisions well.      
 
12. The above are the detailed reasons for the short ord er 
announced by us on 28.05. 2013 which reads as follows:  
 
“For the reasons to be recorded later in the detailed 
judgment, we hold and declare that consultation in the 
appointment of Chairman NAB was not made in 
accordance with Section 6 of the National 
Accountability Bureau Ordinance, 1999 and the law 
declared by this Court. Consequently, this 
Constitution Petition is allowed, the impugned 
appointment of respondent No. 3 is declared to be 
without lawful authority and is set aside with 
immediate effect. The  Federal Government is directed Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2011  
 27 
to make fresh appointment without further loss of 
time.”  
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge         Judge  
 
Judge         Judge  
Islamabad  
30.05.2013  
Approved for reporting . 
 