IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT  
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, HCJ  
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
Suo Moto Case No. 16 of 2011 etc.  
(Implementation proceedings of judgment  
of this Court reported as PLD 2011 SC 997)  
 
 
For the petitioners:   Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, AOR  (In Crl. O. P. 96/12)  
   Barrister Zafarullah Khan , ASC (In Crl. MAs 66 -K to 68 -K/2013)  
     
For the applicants :  Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC (In CMA2664/13)  
    Raja Muhammad Irshad, Sr. ASC (In CMA589 -K/13)  
Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC (In CMA 1075/13)  
    Mr. Yasin Azad, ASC (In CMA 149 -K/13)  
Syed Jamil Ahmed, ASC (in CMA 4141/13)  
    Dr. M. Farough Naseem, ASC (In CMA  2033/13 etc)  
    Ms. Sofia Saeed Shah, ASC (In CMA 4017/13 etc)  
    Mr. Salman Akram Butt, ASC (In CMA 532/2013)  
    Mr. Mazhar Ali B. Chohan, AOR (In CMA 2263/13 etc)  
    Mrs. Sheraz Iqbal Chaudhry, AOR (In CMA 3820/13)  
    Mr. K. A. Wahab, AOR (In CMA 3 372/13 etc)  
    Mr. Shoaib Faridi, in person (in CMA 3282/13)  
    Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi, in person (in CMA2460/13 etc. ) 
    Mr. Saleh Muhammad, in person (In CMA 3576/13)  
    Mst. Hajani Zar Malik, in person (In CMA 464 -K/13)  
    Syed Adil Gilani, in p erson (In CMA 534 -K/13)  
    Mother & Sister of Juma Sher Pathan (In CMA 229 -K/13)  
 
 
On Court’s N otice :   
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Muneer A. Malik, AGP  
    Mr. Ashiq Raza, DAG assisted by  
    Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, Adv.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh:   Mr. Khalid Jave d Khan, AG  
    Mr. Shahadat Awan PG  
    Mr. M. Sarwar Khan, Addl. A.G.  
    Mr. Muhammad Ejaz Chaudhry, CS  
    Syed Mumtaz Shah, Home Secretary.  
    Mr. Nusrat Hussain, IG Prisons.  
    Mr. M. Shoaib Siddique, Commissioner.  
 
For Sindh Police:   Mr. Shahid Nad eem Baloch, IGP  
    Mr. Zakir Hussain, Addl. IGP Special Branch  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  2
    Mr. Shahid Hayat, Addl. IGP Karachi  
    Mr. Abdul Khalique Sheikh, DIG South  
    Mr. Javed Odho, DIG West  
    Mr. Muneer Shaikh, DIG East  
    Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG (Legal)  
    Mr. M. Saleem, ADIG Legal  
    Mr. Sultan Khawaja, DIG CIA  
 
For DG Rangers:   Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, ASC  
    Maj. General Rizwan Akhter, DG  
    Major Ashfaque Ahmed, DA JAG  
     
For Board of Revenue:  Mr. Yawer Farooqui, ASC  
    Syed Zulfiqar Ali Shah Member  
    Mr. Nazar Muhammad Laghari, Consultant  
 
For the KPT:    Mr. Shaiq Usmani, Sr. ASC  
 
For Frontier Constabulary : Nemo  
 
For Customs Deptt:   Raja Muhammad Iqbal, ASC  
    Mrs. Masooda Siraj, ASC  
    Mr. Muhammad Yahya, Chief Collector, Enforcement  
    Mr. Nasir Mas roor, Chief Collector of Customs  
    Mr. Khawar Fareed Manika, DG Afghan Transit.  
 
For Pakistan Meritime  Mr. Umar Hayat Sandhu, ASC  
Security Agency:   Rear Admiral Ather Mukhtar, DG PMSA  
    Lt. Cdr. Muhammad Afzaal, DI (L)  
 
For Pakistan Costal  
Guards:    Brig. Shehzad Akhtar, DG PCG  
    Maj Shehzad Saleem Khan, LO  
 
For the AGP:    Mr. Shoaib Zafar, AAO (In Const. P. 19/13)  
 
For the ECP:    Mr. Attaur Rehman, Regional Election Commissioner.  
 
Dates of hearing:   20.9.2013 . 
 
 
O R D E R  
 
 
  Iftikhar Muhammad Chaud hry, CJ .- For the last 
few years  a critical, serious and dismal condition of law and 
order is prevailing in the Karachi city. Unscrupulous persons 
have certainly made the life of the citizens difficult in all walks SMC 16 of 2011 etc  3
of life by indulging in nefarious crimina l activities i.e. target 
and sectarian killing, kidnapping for ransom , extortion ( bhatta ), 
drug  peddling land  grabbing , causing disturbance s thereby 
effecting citizens, who earn their livelihood on a daily basis . 
Thus,  day by day it has become very hard fo r the  citizens of 
Karachi to lead a peaceful life because of the reasons mentioned 
hereinbefore and for so many other factors.  
2.   The only satisfactory aspect of the case is that a 
Democratic set up through an elected government continued . 
Now after fre sh elections held on 11th May, 2013, a duly elected 
provincial government  has been installed . Of course, there 
would be election complaints and in terms of the Constitution 
the forums set up thereunder ha ve already taken cognizance on 
the requests of aggri eved persons but as far as law and order 
situation prevailing in the city is concerned, there is no second  
opinion except  as noted hereinabove . For the last few years the 
law and  order situation has deteriorated day by day. What 
could be more disappoint ing to the citizens than receiving the 
dead bodies of their nears and dears ones. A t times in the target 
killing the law abiding citizens are brutally murdered or 
subjected to other heinous crimes. As far back as in the month 
of August, 2011 this Court in the  case of Watan Party and SMC 16 of 2011 etc  4
another v. Federation of Pakistan  and others  (PLD 2011 SC 997) 
took cognizance of the situation prevailing even at that time . 
Arguments were heard and material produced on record 
examined and after a lengthy hearing of the case, in  which all 
the stakeholders from different walk s of life including the Law 
Officers of the Federation as well as of the Provincial 
Government appeared and put forward their viewpoints; a 
judgment was delivered in the above case, wherein inter alia  it 
was observed that violence in Karachi during the current year 
and in the past is not ethnic alone but it is also a turf war 
between different groups having competing economic, socio -
political interest s who wish  to strengthen their 
position/ control , based on th e phenomenon of “tit for tat ” with 
political, moral and financial support or endorsement of 
political parties which claim  representation on behalf of the 
public of Karachi , including components and non -components 
of the Provincial Government and in this co ntext further 
observations and directions were passed. As per one of the 
directions, the Chief Justice of the learned High Court of Sindh , 
was to monitor on a monthly basis as to whether the 
observations and the directions made by this Court in exercise 
of powers under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  of the Islamic SMC 16 of 2011 etc  5
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 , have been implemented or not? 
Despite of monitoring by the learned High Court no 
satisfactory result was achieved, as a consequence whereof 
again , from time to time , the case was fixed for hearing before 
this Court to ensure the protection of life of the citizens of this 
country, particularly, in view of the prevailing situation in 
Karachi, as in term s of Article 9 of the Constitution , it is the 
duty of the State to ensure the protection of life of all the 
citizens who are subject of the Constitution.  
3.   The Court has been trying to make both the Federal 
as well as the Provincial Government  of Sindh realize that they 
must discharge their obligations of protection to the life and 
property of the citizens. In the same context , a comprehensive 
order was passed, particularly, inquiring from the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan as well as the learned Advocate 
General about the steps which are being taken by both the  
governments in order to fulfill their obligations under the 
Constitution as well as to comply with the directions and the 
observations which have already been made in the Watan 
Party’s case  (ibid). There were other important observations, 
which we will be  dealing with hereinafter at the appropriate 
stage. However, in response to the observations which have SMC 16 of 2011 etc  6
been noted hereinbefore , the Sindh Government through the 
learned Advocate General has filed CMA 585 -K/2013, a perusal 
whereof suggests that in pursuanc e of meeting dated 04.09.2013 
of the Federal Cabinet meeting presided over by the Prime 
Minister , in coordination with the Provincial Government , 
major decisions were taken to improve the law and order 
situation in the city and to provide safe and secure e nvironment 
to its citizens. In this meeting , it was decided to initiate a 
targeted operation under the command of Pakistan Rangers, 
Sindh, assisted by the Sindh Police and supervised by the Chief 
Minister. Relevant paras of the said CMA are reproduced 
here in below:  
“2. Launch of targeted operation in Karachi as 
decided during Federal Cabinet Meeting dated 
04.09.2013  
 
i. The Federal Cabinet meeting was 
convened at Governor House Karachi 
under the chairmanship of Prime 
Minister of Pakistan 4th September 
2013,  in coordination with provincial 
government. Major decisions were 
taken to improve the law and order 
conditions in the city and to provide 
safe and secure environment for its 
citizens. It was decided to initiate a 
targeted operation under the command SMC 16 of 2011 etc  7
of Pa kistan Rangers (Sindh), which 
will be assisted by the Sindh Police and 
supervised by the Chief Minister, 
Sindh.  
 
ii. The operation started from 5th 
September, 2013 and so -far it has 
yielded positive resultes in curbing 
heinous crimes including target killi ng, 
extortion (bhatta), kidnapping for 
ransom and other terrorist activities. 
Large numbers of operations have been 
carried out, armes and ammunitions 
have been recovered, extortionists and 
target killers have been arrested.  
 
iii. During the meeting of Fed eral Cabinet 
on 4.9.2013, the matter of bringing 
existing and new Mobile Phone SIMs 
on CNICs was taken up by the 
provincial government. The Federal 
Government responded extremely 
positively and shown the resolve to 
complement the efforts of the provincial 
administration.  
 
iv. Chief Minister, Sindh held a series of 
meetings to review the progress of 
targeted operations regarding law & 
order situation in Karchi in which it 
was decided to amend various laws for 
expeditous punishments to the culprits, SMC 16 of 2011 etc  8
and enact  Witness Protection Act to 
improve prosecution.  
 
v. Pakistan Rangers, Sindh have been 
facilitated in five Police Stations of 
Karachi, one in each district of Karachi, 
to supervise the work of Registration 
and Investigation of specific cases.  
 
vi. A meeting  was held on 7.9.2013 with 
Dig (CIA), and Prosecutor General 
Sindh, under the chairmanship of 
Additional Chief Secretary, Home, 
Sindh to discuss in detail and propose 
amendments in law, authorizing the 
Senior Police Ofifcer/SHO to become 
complainant in cas es of Kidnapping for 
Ransom and Extortion.  
 
vii. Progress of Targeted Operation is being 
monitored personally by Chief Minister 
and Chief Secretary, Sindh on daily 
basis. Bottlenecks, if any, are being 
removed on priority basis to achieve 
optimum results.   
 
To improve coordination between different Law 
Enforcing Agencies and Intelligence Agencies a 
joint meeting was also held under the 
chairmanship of Chief Secretary Sindh on 2nd of 
September 2013.  
 SMC 16 of 2011 etc  9
3. Curbing the menace of Arms and 
Ammunition smuggling/p roliferation  
 
i. Chief Secretary, Sindh held a meeting 
with Chief Collector Enforcement, 
Karachi and the Collector Customs, 
MCC, Gwadar to ascertain the ways 
and means through which illegal arms 
and ammunition is smuggled into 
Karachi curb this menace. It  was 
emerged that due to lack of coordination 
among the provincial law enforcement 
agencies and customs authorities, non -
communication of credible intelligence 
information to Customs in advance, 
and resosurce constraints, the 
enforcement mechanism has not been 
very effective.  
 
ii. Therefore, Chief Secretary, Sindh made 
a reference to Federal Board of Revenue 
to take measures for effective 
enforcement to curb illegal trafficking 
of arms/ ammunition. Chief Secretary, 
Sindh also made a reference to Ministry 
of Interior for timely sharing of 
intelligence reports with Customs 
authorities to enable them to efficiently 
intercept the flow of arms/ammunition 
smuggled into the city. Ministry of 
Interior has also been requested to equip 
the enforcement machinery with 
modern technological methods to check SMC 16 of 2011 etc  10
the movement of arms/ammunition and 
smuggling of other goods.  
 
iii. Chief Secretary, Sindh made a reference 
to Ministry of Interior and Federal 
Investigation Agency (FIA) apprising 
them about the escape of criminal 
elements abroad or to other provinces 
after committing crime. It has been 
requested to facilitate the Government 
of Sindh by devising a mechanism to 
forestall the fleeing criminals abroad 
and into other provinces from Karachi.  
 
iv. In pursuance of request mad e by 
Secretary, Home and Tribal Affairs 
Balochistan, a joint meeting was 
convened by Additional Chief 
Secretary, Home Sindh regarding 
construction of police pickets and 
enhance police patrolling in the 
bordering areas of Sindh and 
Balochistan Provinces in order to 
check the movement of unscrupulous 
elements while crossing the border. 
They agreed on sharing of information 
between Law Enforcing Agencies of 
both provinces and fortnightly 
meeting of DC and DPO Lasbella 
with DC Karachi West and SSP 
West, Karachi . 
 SMC 16 of 2011 etc  11
v. Chief Secretary, Sindh has also made 
a reference to Ministry of Interior and 
Ministry of SAFRON, to formulate a 
conscrete policy and issue directives 
to National Aliens Registration 
Authority (NARA) to register all 
illegal/unregistered afghans, as 
NARA is presently not mandated to 
start the registration of Afghans. It 
has also been requested that new 
registration should also be linked with 
existing Afghan. National Databas 
maintained by NADRA and other 
databases as well.  
 
vi. On issue of registration  of illegal 
immigrants, Home Department, 
wrote letters to Ministry of Interior, 
Government of Pakistan to convene a 
meeting in Ministry of Interior 
Inviting all concerned i.e. FIA, 
Foreign Office, Ministry of Law, 
NARA, NADRA, Home Department 
and Sindh Pol ice to prepare a joint 
action plan/strategy for launching 
special drive against illegal aliens 
staying in Karachi.  
 
vii Home Department has entered into an 
agreement with NADRA regarding 
issuance of new computerzed arms 
licenses as well as revalidation of  old 
manual licenses in Home Department SMC 16 of 2011 etc  12
and eith districts of Sindh province. 
Implementation of revalidation of one 
million arm licenses in districts will 
be started in October, 2013.”   
 
4.   Learned Attorney General for Pakistan has also filed 
CMAs No.599 -K and 600 -K of 2013 in sealed envelope s 
claiming confidentiality of its contents in the public interest. 
However, learned Attorney General states that, after having 
gone through the same, if the Court is of the opinion that same 
has to be made public, he would have no objection. We have 
opened the sealed envelopes and have gone through the 
contents of the applications. At this stage, we are of the opinion 
that both the CMAs alongwith other documents, which are of 
important nature, are not required to be ma de public in the 
interest of implementation of the plan, which has been 
prepared by both the Federal and the Provincial Governments. 
We have noted with appreciation that to ensure the protection 
of life and property of the citizens, both the governments on  
having realized their commitments and duties under the 
Constitution had decided to effectively play their role as the 
Constitution calls for, particularly , the role of the Federation 
under Article 148(3) of the Constitution. And we may  also 
observe that the act ions taken  after the 4th September, 2013 , are SMC 16 of 2011 etc  13
only the beginning and to ensure that writ of the government 
prevails in the city of Karachi a lot of work is required to be 
done.  
5.   Learned Advocate General on behalf of the Police 
has submitted a co mparative report for the period commencing 
from 21.08.2013 to 04.09.2013 i.e. before commencement of 
targeted operation and from 05.09.2013 to 19.09.2013 after the 
commencement of the action to maintain the law and order. 
These figures are reproduced herei n below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.   A per usal of the above comparative table of 15 days 
makes it clear that there is some progress  as far as the  
Heads  15 days Comparative  
From 05th to 19th 
September  From 21st August to 
04th September  
Target Killing  10 17 
Dacoity/Robbery  02 03 
Personal 
Disputes  13 15 
Bomb Blast  - 04 
Motives Not 
Ascertained  35 135 
TOTAL  60 174 SMC 16 of 2011 etc  14
commission of the crime under the headings noted hereinabove 
are concerned. He has also placed on record a summary of the 
major achievements during the said period, which is also 
reproduced herein below:  
“MAJOR ACHIEVEMENTS DURING  
4TH SEP TO 18TH SEPT – 2013  
 On 13th Sep 2013, Kharadar Police after an 
encounter arrested accused namely Umair s/o 
Niaz along with Pistol. During interrogation 
accused disclose d to have committed target 
killing of 10 persons.  
 On 16th Sep 2013, AVCC / CIA arrested 05 
kidnappers and recovered kidnapee, namely, 
Umar Mehmood (FIR No.522/13 u/s 365 -
A/34 PPC of PS Boat Basin) arrested 
Kidnappers demanded 1.5 million as Ransom 
for rel ease of kidnapee.  
 SIU Police arrested 5 dacoits, namely, Zahid, 
Asif, Aijaz, Noor Muhammad and Imran and 
recovered 1.355 KG gold (Case FIR 
No.167/2013 u/s 395 PPC of PS Bahadurabad.  
 On 17th Sep 2013, Mochko Police District West 
on patrolling tried to sto p motorcycle riders 
who opened fire on police party, on retaliation 
police party responded resultantly both 
criminals, namely, (1) Syed Zeeshan Ali s/o 
Mukhtiar Ali and (2) Muhammad Ibrahim 
received bullet injuries and expired, 02 TT 
Pistols recovered from  their possession.  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  15
 On 18th Sep 2013, Bilal Colony Police, District 
Central arrested 02 Target Killer / Bhatta 
Collector, namely, (1) Muhammad Amir @ 
Khushka s/o Noor Muhammad and (2) Zahid 
@ Mahto s/o Muhammad Ishaq after an 
encounter and recovered 02 Pis tols and 01 
motorcycle. Accused wanted in Case FIR 
No.162/13 u/s 302/324/34 PPC, FIR 
No.28/13 u/s 302/34 and FIR No.145/13 u/s 
384/386/337 -B of PS Gulshan -e-Maymar.  
 On 18th Sep 2013, New Karachi Police District 
Central arrested 01 Bhatta Collector, namely , 
Muhammad Abid s/o Muhammad Yousuf 
after an encounter and recovered 01 Pistol. 
Accused wanted in case FIR No.529/12 u/s 
386/506/25 -D Telegraph Act of PS New 
Karachi. FIR No.344/13 u/s 384/385/34/25 -D 
Telegraph Act of PS New Karachi.  
 On 18th Sep 2013, in t he limits of Baghdadi 
Police District City during an encounter with 
criminal of Lyari Gangwar 03 criminals, 
namely, (1) Noman s/o Iqbal Patani, (2) Imran 
Chohan s/o Haji Bhai and (3) Abdul Ghafoor 
s/o Haroon were killed. Police recovered 03 
Pistols from th eir possession.  
 South Police with the help of Punjab Police 
conducted a raid in Lahore and arrested 
accused Ameen Buledi of Lyari Gang War. He 
is wanted in 28 cases of kidnapping for 
ransom and target killing. There are hundreds 
of complaints of extortion  against him and his SMC 16 of 2011 etc  16
gang. The civil society is being contacted to 
registered cases against him.  
 Accused Amir Billa, Nadeem Irfan, Imran, 
Owais besides 10 others wanted in 
innumerable cases of target killing and 
extortion have been arrested by south police  
from Murree with the help of intelligence 
agencies and Punjab Police.  
 Two accused were apprehended by East 
Police who were transporting weapons 
including an LMG.  
 
7.   Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, learned ASC has filed a 
confidential report (CMA No.609-K/201 3) contents whereof 
pertain s to the steps being taken by the Rangers and the Police 
in pursuance of meeting dated 04.09.2013. On having gone 
through the report , we consider it appropriate not to make its 
contents public at present in the public interest. T herefore, 
office is directed to keep the application confidential in a sealed 
envelope. Both the CMAs filed by learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan and the report submitted by Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, 
learned ASC shall only be allowed to be opened , if need  be, 
with the prior permission of the Court.  
8.  Mr. Shahadat Awan , learned Prosecutor General , 
Sindh , has also filed a statement , perusal whereof indicates a 
very alarming situation that there are 110549 abscond ers/  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  17
proclaimed offenders in the 27 D istric ts of Sindh, out of which 
33665 are from the five Districts of Karachi. To substantiate the 
information so disclosed, a chart has also been appended with 
the statement according to which such absconders etc. were 
declared so in different cases during the last five years 
commencing from 2008 to 2013. One could well imagine why  in 
a city like Karachi is in the grip of criminals who are free to 
commit crime whenever and wherever they  like and the 
documented/declared numbers of such persons is 33665. The 
said f igures are very difficult to reconcile with and what 
security and safety a citizen can expect from a police whose 
files/dockets are full of a large  number of accused persons  
involved in different cases. Ha s the police force taken upon 
itself a dedicated co mmitment to reduce the crime and arrest 
the large number of absconders? When we inquired this from 
the Inspector General of Police, he stated that twice campaign s 
were launched by him to cause the arrest of such persons. The 
statement so made by him is not  acceptable. Had the culprits 
been brought to book, it definitely would have reduce d the 
crime in the city which is being committed everywhere and not 
a single corner of the city is protected. It is not the duty of any 
one SHO rather collectively , the whol e police force is SMC 16 of 2011 etc  18
answerable because their basic obligation  is to provide 
protection to the citizens but here the situation is that despite 
clear directions on the subject neither any  serious effort has 
ever been made for causing the arrest nor there is a future plan , 
as nothing has been mentioned in the statement , which has 
been filed by the learned Prosecutor General. No only this, 
there is another fact which is required to be noted that 6822 
absconders/proclaimed offenders are involved in terrorism 
cases  in the Province of Sindh out of which 1486 are from 
Karachi , detail thereof has also been furnished. As far as the 
Districts of Karachi are concerned, it is true that the learned 
Prosecutor General has come out with the correct facts 
disclosing the number  of such persons who are involved in the 
terrorism cases . D uring the course of operation which 
commenced w.e.f. 04.09.2013 to onward such like accused 
persons who are terrorists or other criminals, are likely to 
confront the law enforcing agencies, therefo re, the police force 
has to further share the burden by accelerating their efforts to 
cause the arrest of absconders involved in the ordinary crimes 
as well as in the terrorism cases including by adopt ing a 
strategy under rules 23.22(2) and 23.23 of the Police Rules, 1934. SMC 16 of 2011 etc  19
For their convenience and apprising the senior police officers  
about their duties , the same are reproduced herein  below:  
           “23.22. Register of proclaimed offenders :  (1)… …  
(2) In January of each year a statement in English 
in Form 23.22(2) shall be submitted to the Deputy 
Inspector General, Criminal Investigation 
Department, showing the result of action taken 
against proclaimed offenders during the past year. 
An abstract of such a statement shall be prepared 
in the office of the  Deputy Inspector -General, 
Criminal Investigation Department, and published 
in the Police Gazette. The figures relating to the 
proclaimed offenders, who are registered members 
of the criminal tribes, shall be given separately.  
23.23. Revision of lists of p roclaimed 
offenders: (1) Every Superintendent shall 
carefully revise his list of proclaimed offenders 
periodically and omit from, therefrom, after 
consultation with the District Magistrate and the 
Superintendent of the district, in which such 
person was pr oclaimed, the names of persons 
accused of trivial offences or concerned in cases 
where, from lapse of time, no sufficient evidence is 
on record or is procurable.  
(2) Due intimation of such omission shall be sent 
to the officer -in-charge of the police stati on 
concerned; intimation shall also be sent to the 
Deputy Inspector General, Crime Branch, in those 
cases in which intimation of proclamation was 
given, or in which a notice issued in the Criminal 
Intelligence Gazette.  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  20
(3) A separate revised list shall be  submitted for 
proclaimed offenders who are registered members 
of criminal tribes .”   
  
9.  Similarly, the break up of the cases pending before 
the different Courts under the Arms Ordinance, 1965 etc. have 
been mentioned details whereof are noted herein bl ow:- 
“(a) The detail of 14157 cases for the offences under 
Pakistan Arms Ordinance, 1965 for the period for 
6-10-2011 to 31 -5-2013 is enclosed herewith as 
Annexure ‘C’.  
 
(b) The detail of 1827 cases for the offence under 
Sindh Arms Act, 2013 for the period from 1 -6-
2013 to 31 -8-2013 is enclosed herewith as 
Annexure ‘D’.  
 
(C) The detail of 459 cases for the offence under 
Explosive Substance Act, 1908 for the period from 
6-10-2011 to 31 -8-2013 is enclosed herewith as 
Annexure ‘E’.  
 
11.  The learned Prosecute General , Sindh , may place on 
record the accurate position of the cases , pertaining to the City 
of Karachi alongwith the names of the Courts where these cases 
are pending. On receipt of the same, the Registrar shall send 
this data to the concerned trial Cou rts with the direction that 
they are required to conclude the hearing of cases on 
preferential basis by proceeding on a day-to-day basis without SMC 16 of 2011 etc  21
granting unnecessary adjournments  unless they are 
unavo idable.  
12.  The learned Advocate General , Sindh , state d that 
after filing the report on 18. 09.2013, the Provincial Government 
had passed Sindh Witness Protection Act, 2013  (Act of 2013) , 
the copy of the Bill has been placed on record which is likely to 
be signed by the Governor Sindh.  
13.  It is to be noted that there was a necessity of having 
a law for providing protection to witnesses who dare to appear 
before the Courts in the criminal cases involving heinous 
crimes because on account of the terror of the accused persons, 
the witnesses do not  feel protecte d enough to come forward 
and depose against them as a result whereof they succeed are 
getting themselves acquitted from the Courts of law. However, 
we are of the view that by the enforcement of th e Act of 2013 in 
the Province of Sindh, there is a fair chan ce of producing 
evidence against the accused persons facing trials before the 
Special Courts under the A nti-Terrorism Act , 1997 (Act of 1997) 
and other heinous crimes. However, we may note here that 
under the Act of  1997, a provision already exists for pro viding 
protection to the witnesses. There are cases in which on account 
of non -providing of protection to the witnesses, despite the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  22
directions by the learned High Court, they have been killed , 
reference in this behalf , could be made to the case of Wali Kh an 
Babar. We have asked the learned Prosecutor General to 
produce before us the details of the said case i.e. Wali Khan 
Babar’s matter pointing out as to whether any proceedings have 
been initiated  against the culprits involved in his murder as 
well as the  proceedings against the accused who ha d killed the 
witnesses. All the responsible police officers are directed to 
ensure arrest of all the accused persons involved in all the said 
heinous offences. Similarly, the Courts seized of the matters 
may make all necessary efforts through the law enforcing 
agencies to cause their arrest or to proceed against  them in 
terms of Section s 87 and 88 of the Cr.P.C.  
14.  It has been informed by the learned Prosecutor 
General that proceedings in the case of murder of Wali Khan 
Babar have been concluded and now hearing is fixed for 
10.10.2013. Without causing prejudice to the case of the accused 
persons, the learned trial Court may keep in its mind that such 
cases are required to be concluded within 7 days under Section 
19 o f the A ct of 1997 . However, if a request is made for ante -
dating the hearing, the trial Court shall examine the plea and if 
allowed the case should be decided at the earliest without SMC 16 of 2011 etc  23
further loss of time. Similarly, the accused persons who have 
killed the witnesses shall also be dealt with strictly in 
accordance with law.  
15.  It may not be out of context to mention that with 
reference to providing protection to the Judges, Prosecutors  and 
witnesses etc. of the cases pending before the Anti Terrorism 
Courts  relating to the heinous crimes, following the dictat es of 
this Court a meeting was convened at Islamabad. The copy of 
the minutes of the aforesaid meeting has already been sent to 
the concerned quarters. It is a matter of satisfaction that the 
Provincial Government of Sindh had taken the lead in 
promulgating a law on the subject and we expect from the other 
Provincial Governments to attend to this issue as well at the 
earliest.  
16.  The learned Prosecutor General has produced the 
following details of the cases of murders of prosecution 
witness/informers in Wali Khan Baba r’s case,  which is 
reproduced as under:  
 
“STATEMENT ON BAHALF OF PROSECUTOR GENERAL, SINDH  
 
In Wali Khan Babar Case  
It is respectfully submitted that, as per Police reports, the details 
for murders of prosecution witness/informers in Wali Khan 
Babar Case are as under: - SMC 16 of 2011 etc  24
 
S. 
No FIR Under 
Section  Police Station  Name of 
deceased  Name of 
Accused  Remarks/  
Investigation  
01 358/2012  302/34 PPC  Soldier Bazar  Haider Ali 
S/O 
Muhammad 
Ali Untraced  FRT “A” Class 
dated 11.12.2012 
submitted but with 
the order of DIG 
East reopned on 
19.09.2013 and 
under investigation  
02. 77/2011  302 PPC  Gulshan -e-
Iqbal  Rajab 
Bangali S/O 
Abdul 
Razzaque  Untraced  FRT “A” Class 
dated 13.03.2012 
submitted but with 
the order o f DIG 
East reopned on 
19.09.2013 and 
under investigation  
03 269/2011  302/34 PPC  Gulshan -e-
Iqbal  Naveed 
Ahmed 
Tanoli S/o 
Rafique 
Muhammad 
Khan  Muhamm
ad Junaid 
Qureshi 
S/o 
Muhamm
ad Naeem 
Qureshi  Pending trial in the 
court of ADJ IVth 
South  
04 80/2011  302/3 4 PPC  Mobina Town  HC 
Muhammad 
Arshd Kundi 
S/o 
Muhammad 
Zaffar Khan  Untraced  FRT “A” Class 
dated 13.06.2012 
submitted but 
reopened and on 
30.08.2013 
entrusted to SIP 
Mairaj -ud-din 
Crime Branch and is 
under investigation  
05. 22/2011  302/34 PPC  Liaquatabad  PC 
Muhammad 
Asif S/O 
Muhammad 
Rafique  Untraced  FRT “A” Class 
submitted but 
reopened and on 
29.08.2013 
entrusted to SIP 
Mairaj -ud-din 
Crime Branch and is 
under investigation  
 
17.  It may be observed that as a result of the targeted 
operation after the de cision by the Federal and the Provincial 
Governments jointly on 4th September, 2013, the prosecution 
has to remain very vigilant and active to ensure that 
incriminating evidence according to law is collected against the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  25
culprits who are involved in the com mission of offences and are 
booked to face the trials. If the cases are fall within the schedule 
of Anti Terrorism Act, 1997 , and the cases are submitted before 
the Special Courts under the ATA, the Presiding Officers are 
directed to adhere to the provisio ns of section 19 strictly which 
require s decisions of such like cases within 7 days and in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act of  1997 and as 
mentioned in the case  of Sh. Liaqat Hussain  and others v. 
Federation of Pakistan through Ministry of Law, Ju stice and 
Parliamentary Affairs, Islamabad and others  (PLD 1999 SC 504) . 
The decisions of these cases shall also be communicated to the 
Incharge Judges of the learned High Court s and the Supreme 
Court appointed to ensure the expeditious disposal of the cas es 
in accordance with law as per the directions of this Court in the 
case of Sh. Liaqat Hussain  and others  (supra ).  
18.  It has been informed that from 4th September, 2013  to 
onward, a number of cases have been filed. Without prejudice 
to the cases of acc used persons, we would like to make 
observation for the expeditious disposal of these cases as it has 
been earlier noted hereinabove.  
19.  In the case of Watan Party and another  (supra ), we 
have sp ecifically observed as follows:  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  26
“Further observe that Karac hi is full of arms and 
ammunition of prohibited and non -prohibited bores 
including licensed and illicit, therefore, Karachi has 
to be cleansed from all kinds of weapons by adhering 
to the laws available on the subject, and if need be, 
by promulgating new l egislation. All licensed arms 
genuinely required for security concerns and 
personal safety may be retained but these must also 
be registered with NADRA. All other licenses, 
where such need cannot be shown or where multiple 
licenses have been issued to the same individual (as 
distinct from security firms) if not justified, or 
which are used for unnecessary display at 
ceremonies or elsewhere for aerial firing should be 
cancelled after summary and expeditious 
proceedings in accordance with law; ”  
 
20.  The lea rned Advocate General stated that so far no 
action in terms of the provision 6 of the Surrender of Illicit 
Arms Act, 1991  (Act of 1991),  has been initiated. The said 
provision reads as under:  
“Publicity for surrender of illicit arms.  (1) 
The Federal Govern ment and the Provincial 
Government shall give wide publicity to the 
provisions of this Act on the media, including 
television, radio, national and regional press, in 
Urdu, English and regional language or by any 
other mode as may be prescribed.  
 
(2) There shall be publicity displayed a count -
down of every expired day of the period allowed 
for surrender of illicit arms under this Act and 
the number of days left for such surrender”.    
 
21.  We have pointed out to him that after the 18th 
Constitutional Amendme nt, both the Federal and the Provincial 
Governments are competent to deal with the issues pertaining 
to control of the flow of illicit arms and ammunition in the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  27
country, therefore, the Provincial Government is required to 
issue a notification in terms of above provision allowing 15 
days time to the persons who possesses illicit fire a rms as have 
been defined under S ection 2 of the Act of 1991 to surrender the 
same and ensure that after making wide publicity as is 
contemplated under the law such illicit arm s are fully 
recovered as the Provincial Government have already 
constituted a Committee to implement the policy to initiate 
actions, if need be, on a large scale to effect the recovery of such 
arms.  
22  It may be pointed out that in the countries like 
Pakistan where such like situation s exist , the Executive 
Authorities have to take drastic steps with a view to control and 
maintain law and order situation in order to protect the life of 
citizens . In the judgment of Wattan Party  (ibid), the  matter was 
discus sed in the following terms :- 
“92. An identical situation was prevailing in 
Malaysia and that Government with full 
commitment and sincerity had also collected illicit 
arms from the criminals. Similarly, this task can be 
completed in our country as well; if there is honest 
commitment on the part of the law enforcing 
agencies but in the instant case without 
depoliticizing the police, positive result apparently 
seems to be an uphill task, however, to ensure peace SMC 16 of 2011 etc  28
in Karachi, certain steps will have to be taken.  The 
law enforcing agencies will have to be depoliticized 
as well as for recovery of illicit arms effective 
measures will have to be taken under a proper 
programme to be launched by the Government. As 
far as the question of presence of 2.5 million aliens 
in Karachi is concerned, it is more alarming 
compared to the activities of the criminals involved 
in heinous crimes, like target killing, etc. This aspect 
of the case would reveal that the presence of such 
persons is not only a factor for increase in crime,  but 
at the same time without proper registration, they 
are a burden on the national economy, inasmuch as 
their presence can give rise to so many other 
administrative problems, including obtaining of 
National Identity Cards by them. If they have 
succeeded in this venture and claim themselves to be 
citizens of Pakistan and have also succeeded in 
registering their names in the electoral list, it would 
be tantamount to depriving the actual electorate 
from choosing their representatives, inasmuch as 
due to thei r presence, areas have expanded 
considerably, which directly affects the delimitation 
of the constituencies meant for holding elections of 
the Provincial Assembly and the National 
Assembly, therefore, the Government should take 
immediate action against the m in accordance with 
law, namely the Foreigners Act. NADRA and the 
Police must undertake a careful cleansing process of 
such people and NADRA must have separate 
records and computer files based on proper and 
cogent evidence. NADRA and police should 
coopera te in Karachi through an intensive drive to SMC 16 of 2011 etc  29
identify foreigners, block their NIC cards after due 
process of law and special teams should be appointed 
and dedicated for this job by DG NADRA and IGP 
so that this can be completed in the course of next 
one yea r or so. Then the law must take its own 
course in each case. This must be given high 
priority .” 
 
23.  A perusal of the above para also indicates that 
reportedly 2.5 million alien s are living in Karachi, therefore, we 
observed the issue rating to their pres ence  be attended to . We 
expect from both the Federal as well as the Provincial 
Governments that though after the earlier decision no action 
has been taken but now they would  proceed to look into this 
aspect of the matter , as it is one of the important reasons on 
account of which the law and order situation is not being 
controlled.  
24.  As far as the smuggling of illicit arms and 
ammunition in Karachi City or the whole Province is 
concerned, it is essential for both the Federal and the Provincial 
Government to control the same by adopting extraordinary 
measures , if need be. An i dentical situation has been noticed in 
the other Provinces as well, therefore, while hearing the 
Constitution P etition No. 77 of 2010 at Quetta on 18. 09.2013, we 
have asked the Chairma n FBR to initiate action through the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  30
Customs and FC for ensuring that no smuggled  illicit arms or 
ammunition are brought to the Province of Balochistan. He had 
placed on record a policy which is also reproduced herein 
below:  
Matter relating to Customs Depa rtment:  In 
response to our directions, Mr. Tariq Bajwa, 
Chairman FBR appeared whereas reportedly 
Secretary M/o Defence, Secretary M/o Interior 
and Secretary Narcotics are out of country. 
However, The Chairman FBR stated that he 
himself is the Secretary of Revenue Division, 
Government of Pakistan. We have pointed out to 
him about the smuggling of arms and 
ammunition, non -custom paid vehicles, narcotics 
etc. without any control by the Customs 
Department or by the Agency upon whom the 
powers had been conferred  to act as the Custom 
Officers like FC etc. The flow of unauthorized 
arms and ammunition etc. is causing serious 
problem in law and order situation not only in 
the Province but in whole of the country 
including Karachi. At times it has been noticed 
that th e arms smuggled into Pakistan are highly 
sophisticated as compared to the arms which are 
being used by our law enforcing agencies like 
police etc. We have pointed out to him that on a 
large scale so many items like Iranian petrol are 
smuggled into the coun try but there is no check 
as a result whereof the consumers are forced to SMC 16 of 2011 etc  31
use these items as the same are sold to them on 
cheaper rates which is not in the interest of the 
economy of the country due to which the public 
exchequer suffers badly. The Chairman  FBR has 
placed on record his two stage devised strategy 
(CMA No. 284 -Q/2013) to fight the menace of 
smuggling generally and arms smuggling in 
particular. The relevant contents of the same are 
reproduced herein below: - 
  “… The two stages are: - 
  a) IMMEDI ATE ACTION : 
  The following five choke points have been 
identified:  
i) Sheela Bagh  
ii) Glangor  
iii) Gabd  
iv) Surab  
v) Bela 
Pakistan Customs will man these choke points to 
interdict smuggled goods before they enter the more 
settled areas of the Province. These choke points sh all be 
jointly manned by the enforcement staff of Quetta and 
Gwadar Collectorates and the staff of Directorate of 
Customs Intelligence Quetta. In addition, the Customs 
Posts at Lakpass, Kurkhera and Chidgee shall be 
strengthened. Performance at all other C ustoms stations 
and Customs posts shall also be closely monitored.  
b) SHORT TERM STRATEGY : 
FBR is already in contact with Chief Secretary and I.G 
Police Balochistan to work out a joint strategy to combat 
smuggling throughout the length and breadth of the 
province. In this context a meeting shall also be held 
with the I.G FC Balochistan, Secretary Interior and 
Secretary Anti Narcotics Division. This will be followed 
by a joint field visit by the Chairman FBR, Chief SMC 16 of 2011 etc  32
Secretary, I.G Police and I.G FC Balochista n in the 
border areas. The objective of these deliberations is to 
develop a holistic plan by pooling all available resources 
and creating inter -departmental synergy to make anti -
smuggling operations effective.  
FBR commits before this Honourable Court to br ing a 
distinct improvement in its anti -smuggling efforts ”. 
 
10. It is also to be notated that it is the duty of the 
Narcotics Division to control the narcotics in the 
Province because this is another source of collecting 
money without any extra labour whic h is ultimately 
used in criminal activities to disturb the law and 
order situation causing problems for the Provincial 
as well as the Federal governments. The Chairman 
FBR stated that efforts are being made. He has 
stated that he would look into the matter  and 
assured the Court that all necessary steps shall be 
taken to ensure that the Custom Department 
enforces the relevant laws of anti -smuggling strictly 
and the smuggling shall be controlled fully. He is 
directed to ask the two Directorates (Custom 
Collec torates at Quetta and Gwadar) to prepare 
comprehensive reports in respect of the activities of 
the Customs Department relating to unauthorized 
arms and ammunition, non -custom paid vehicles as 
well as narcotics and other contraband items 
alongwith the figur es of the cases which they have 
registered under the Customs Act and other relevant 
laws. The report shall be submitted to the Registrar 
of this Court for our perusal in Chambers within 
two weeks” .  
  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  33
25.  On the last date of hearing, on having noticed tha t 
arms and ammunition are allegedly being smuggled through 
the sea and at the time the same are allowed within Karachi and 
other parts of the Province , therefore, we appointed                
Mr. Ramzan Bhatti, former Member Customs as a one -Man 
Commission to probe and ascertain the following  four 
questions:  
“(a) As to whether arms and ammunition are 
brought or smuggled through the sea and what are 
the possible measures and ways to be adopted to stop 
it.  
 
(b) Who can be held responsible for the smuggling of  
the arms and ammunition in the country through 
ships, vessels as well as launches and what are the 
reasons for not preventing the smuggling of the 
same.  
 
(c) As to whether the Customs officials posted at the 
Ports of Bin Qasim and Karachi man age to recove r 
hundred percent custom duty and the revenues or 
there are certain mechanisms on the basis of which 
these duties are evaded, which cause loss to the 
public exchequer and ultimately such black money is 
used for illegal activities and promoting crimes in 
the country.  
 
(d) To enquire into the allegation that a shopload of 
arms and ammunition was brought to Karachi with 
the connivance of the then Minister for Shipping, as 
stated by the DG Rangers and to propose what 
action should be taken against the persons 
responsible” . 
 
26.  He has submitted the findings vide report dated 
10.09.2013. The said report has been made public and notices 
have been issued to  all concerned to file comments, if they so SMC 16 of 2011 etc  34
desired. At this stage , we would not like to discuss the contents  
of the report because we would like to give an opportunity to 
the Federal and the Provincial Government  to go through the 
contents of the report and on the next date of hearing, an 
appropriate order shall be passed accordingly. However, in this 
context CM As Nos. 537 -K, 562 -K and 567 -K of 2013 have also 
been filed on behalf of the Chief Collector, D .G., Pakistan 
Maritime Security as well as by the D .G., Costal Guards. Copies 
of the same have been handed over to the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan as w ell as to the learned Advocate 
General , Sindh,  so they may go through the same and after 
hearing them, appropriate orders shall be passed in this behalf 
as well.  
27.  Now , we also need to look at another aspect of the 
case namely, besides illicit arms and ammunition , a large  
number of licenses have been issued to different persons within 
and outside Karachi. The l earned Advocate General has 
referred to the following para of the Wattan Party’s case  
(supra) : 
“71. Dr. Babar Awan, learned counsel for the 
Federa tion and learned Advocate General Sindh 
were called upon to explain as to how many licenses 
of prohibited and non -prohibited weapons have been 
issued by the Federal and the Provincial SMC 16 of 2011 etc  35
Government of Sindh during the last five years. 
Both of them filed the r eports indicating that 180956 
licenses of non -prohibited bore were issued by the 
Home Department, Government of Sindh whereas 
46114 licenses of prohibited bore and 1,202,470 
licenses of non -prohibited bore were issued by the 
Ministry of Interior, Governmen t of Pakistan. It is 
to be noted that usually crimes are not committed 
with licensed weapons as the criminal perpetrators 
use un -licensed weapons for the same. ”   
 
28.  When we inquired from him , the present statistics of 
arms licenses issued for Karachi a nd the other parts of the 
Province, the Chief Secretary pointed out that roughly one 
million fire arms licenses have been issued. However, on 
inquiring from the Home Secretary, he could not furnish the 
number of arms licenses which have been issued by the five 
District Administrators/Deputy Commissioners of Karachi. We 
have painfully noted that the functionaries who are dealing 
with the current situation in Karachi ha ve absolutely no 
knowledge about the number of licenses which had been issued 
during the la st five years. It is to be observed that the 
availability of arms of all kinds is one of the reasons of increase 
in the crime including target killing  and bhatta , etc., therefore, it 
should have been basic consideration for functionaries of the 
Province to  know the exact statistics about number of licenses. SMC 16 of 2011 etc  36
However, they are directed to collect the exact figures from the 
concerned District Magistrates, DCOs and the other competent 
authorities within the Province as well as from the concerned 
Ministry of the Government of Pakistan who are responsible to 
issue licenses for the prohibited arms etc. to ascertain the 
quantity of the licensed arms available in Karachi. The 
Provincial Government ha s recently promulgated the Sindh 
Arms Act, 2013 , and under its Section 16 it has acquired the 
powers of suspension and revocation of the licenses , including 
to curtail the number of arms licenses which at a times a license 
holder can possess. It is an equally important to note that 
Section 26 of the Arms Ordinance, 1965 , also covers the subject 
which according to the learned Advocat e General has not been 
repealed. Therefore, besides the surrender illicit arms which 
cannot be permitted to be possessed by anyone, the Provincial 
Government has also to undertake an exercise to verify the 
arms licenses issued from time to time to the persons who are 
residents of Karachi by exercising jurisdiction under section 11 
of the Act  of 1991 read with section 26 of the Arms Ordinance, 
1965 , as well as section 16 of the Sindh Arms  Act, 2013 . Section 
11 of the Surrender of Illicit Arms Act  of 1991, being re levant, is 
reproduced as under:  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  37
“11. Scrutiny of licences, etc.  (1) Whenever the 
Federal Government or, if so required by it, the 
Provincial Government deems fit, it may, 
notwithstanding an ything contained in the Pakistan 
Arms Ordinance, 1965 (W.P. Ordinance XX of 
1956), the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (VI of 
1908), the Explosives Act, 1884 (IV of 1884), the 
Arms Act, 1878 (XI of 1878), or any other law, by 
notification in the official Ga zette, direct every 
person possessing or keeping in his control any arms 
ammunition or explosive under any licence issued  
by any authority appointed under any law for the 
time being in force, to present such licence to the 
authority specified in the notif ication by the Federal 
Government or, as the case may be, the Provincial 
Government, for scrutiny.  
 
(2) Where, on scrutiny of a licence, the authority 
referred to in sub -section (1) is satisfied that it was 
not in the public peace to allow retention of th e 
licence or any arms, ammunition or explosives, it 
may, after providing an opportunity for being heard, 
cancel the licence issued to a person to possess or 
keep any arms ammunition or explosive.  
 
(3) Where a licence is cancelled under sub -section  
 
(2), the person possessing or keeping any arms, 
ammunition or explosives shall deposit such arms, 
ammunition or explosives with the authority 
specified by the Federal Government. ” 
 
29.  The Provincial Government has  to initiate this 
process as early as could be  possible but not beyond the period SMC 16 of 2011 etc  38
which is envisaged for surrendering of illicit arms i.e. 15 days , 
so that the law enforcing agencies i.e. Rangers as well as the 
police may continue their activities to curb and to control the 
criminals involved in distu rbing the law and order situation in 
the City of Karachi. On this , the  learned Advocate General has 
assured that the Committee which has been constituted to 
discuss the issue relating to the joint target ed operation and the 
Provincial Government shall cons ider all aspects of the case and 
all efforts shall be made for the purpose of achieving the objects 
of ensuring peace in Karachi and the application of the rule of 
law as well as the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights of 
the citizens under Article 9 of the Constitution.  
30.  It is also important to note that in Wattan Party’s 
case (supra ) the Inspector General of Police was required to 
collect the record and facts about the officers/officials involved  
in the Karachi operation in the years 1992 and 1996 who 
disappeared or were eliminated and was directed to submit a 
report within the next one month also showing whether their 
families were compensated or not. It is informed that 
compensation s to widows/families of the police officers/  
officials who disappea red or were eliminated have been 
provided. A detailed report  is required to be filed by the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  39
Inspector General of Police before the next date of hearing. 
However, it has also been informed by the learned Advocate 
General that the cases of those officers/off icials who were 
killed or lost their lives during or after both the previous 
operations, have been ordered to be re -opened and the accused 
persons involved therein shall be arrested and proceeded 
against in accordance with law.  
31.  In the above referred Wattan Party’s case , it has also 
been observed that there is a need for fresh comprehensive law 
to eliminate and punish land grabbers and encroachers which is 
one of the Karachi’s greatest problem s. During the hearing of 
this case , an application (CMA 589 -K/2013 ) has been moved by 
Raja Muhammad Irshad , learned ASC on behalf of ISI and  
sought permission to allow the transfer of 10 acres of land in 
favour of ISI  by the Provincial Government . Notice of th is 
application was given to the learned Advocate General  who 
statedly for paucity of time could not submit a reply, therefore, 
he request s for  some time to do the needful. The same is the 
request from the learned counsel appearing for the BOR . Let 
both the learned counsel file their replies -objections before th e 
next date of hearing.  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  40
32.  Matter of Juma Sher Khan.  The mother and sister of 
Juma Sher Khan appeared and stated that no progress has been 
made so far in the case of Juma Sher Khan who was 
assassinated  brutally alongwith Arshad Papu and Yasir Arfat. 
It is informed by Mr. Shahid Hayat , Addl. I .G., Karachi that in 
their case six persons have been arrested and on completion of 
investigation they have been challaned so that they may answer 
the accusations. As far as Munawar brother of Shera Pathan is 
concerne d, statedly, according to his sister, he has also been 
involved in the murder case of Zakir Khan. O n this, the Addl. 
I.G., pointed out that initially he was arrested in the said case 
and now a second investigation Committee/team has been 
constituted  and the report  is likely to be received within 2/3 
days . Transparency must  be ensured in order to find out the 
real culprits of the murder of Zakir because his relative i.e. 
sister and mother are alleging that Munawar has been wrongly 
involved in the commission of the said murder of Zakir.  Let the 
investigating  agency complete the investigation. The report of 
the same shall be submitted to this Court within seven days for 
our perusal in Chambers, copy of the same shall also be handed 
over to the family of Shera K han for their perusal and enabling SMC 16 of 2011 etc  41
them to file any objection , if need be , before the competent 
forum.  
33.  It is an equally important to note that in pursuance 
of our order we had directed the Member IT , Board of Revenue , 
to conduct an imagery survey of Karachi  to ascertain as to 
whether there is any encroachment by the land grabbers on the 
state land or otherwise. The Member , Board of Revenue , has 
filed a report and stated that as far as the survey of Karachi City 
land is concerned , it has been complete d. It has been further 
stated that approximately 23,240 acres of land is in the 
possession of institution, the details whereof are provided in 
the table which is reproduced herein below:  
(d) Institutional Encroachment is summarized here as under:  
 
S.No.  INSTIT UTION  Deh Excess 
Area in 
Acres  
 
KARACHI WEST – AS PER REPORT OF DEPUTY COMMISSIONER  
 
1 LDA Scheme 42  Lal Bakhar -1 8,700.00  
2 LDA Scheme 42  Moach  3,700.00  
3 KANUPP  Lal-Bakhar -2 325.00  
 
KARACHI WEST –AS PER SATELLITE IMAGERY OF GIS SECTION  
  
1. Karach i Port Trust  - 1238.12  
 
2. MDA Scheme -45 Taiser Town  7401,879  
 
KARACHI MALIR -AS PER SATELLITE  IMAGERY OF GIS SECTION  
 
1 Malir Cantt Excessive Area  Thaddo  1,522.514  
2. Port Qasim  Bakran  101.66  
3. Port Qasim Area  Bakran  134.18  
KARACHI SOUTH - AS PER S ATELLITE IMAGERY OF GIS SECTION  
1. Defence Housing Authority 
Phase -VIII - 117.28  
Total  23,240.63  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  42
 
Similarly , he stated that approximately 30,988.70 acres of land is 
in possession of the other  encroach ers, the details whereof are 
reproduced here in below:  
12. Consolidated summary of encroached 
area identified on the basis of reports of 
Deputy Commissioner Karachi Malir and 
West against top ographic survey and GIS  
based maps as well as analysis of GIS  
Section is given here as under: - 
 
S.No.  District  Non -
Institutional 
Encroachment  Institution
al 
Encroach
ment as 
per repot 
of DC  Institutional 
Encroachme
nt as per 
report of 
GIS Section  Total  
AREA IN ACRES  
 
 Malir  702-82 - 1758 -35 2489 -25 
2 West  6967.17  12775.00  8,639.9  28,382 -17 
3 South  -- -- 117-28 117-28 
     30,988.70  
 
13. It is worthwhile to submit before Honourable 
Court the fact that the GIS Section has also been 
entrusted with the task of preparation of high 
resolution GIS Based Satellite analysis of change in 
land use on 164 amenity sites in Karach i in 
Constitution Petition No. 09 of 2010 filed by Mr. 
Naimatullah Khan Advocate Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan and others in pursuance of orders of the 
Honourable Supreme Court dated 28.03.2013. The 
GIS Section has successfully comp leted the 
assignment and a consolidated “Map Book” after 
completion of the assignment has been submitted on 
27.08.2013 in Supreme Court.  
 SMC 16 of 2011 etc  43
14. The above compliance report is submitted for 
kind perusal and further necessary orders of the 
Honourable supreme Court.”  
 
34.  The Revenue Department is directed to put up on 
record the ownership rights , if any , in respect of the persons  
who are in possession of the said land. Notices of the same be 
also issued to the institution, who are in possession of the land 
reproduced hereinabove to ap pear and file objections -replies, if 
any, and also to explain as to under what  authority or law they 
are in possession of the property and if they fail to substantiate 
their ownership and possession o f the property which belong s 
to the Province of Sindh, w hy they should not be directed to 
vacate and handover possession to the Government of Sindh as 
early as could be possible. It may be noted that as far as the 
Provincial Government is concerned, it represents the 
citizens/el ectors who are the real owners of  the assets of the 
Province , therefore , this property belonging to them and 
without any provision of law it cannot be handed over to the 
persons other than the owners.  
35.  The l earned counsel appearing on behalf of DHA has 
stated that he has also filed r eply in this regard. Notice of this 
reply be issued to the Government of Sindh through the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  44
Advocate General as well as the Board of Revenue (Land 
Utilization).  
36.  On 26.11.2012 and 28.11.2 012, it was observed as 
under:   
“(Relevant para of Order dated 26. 11.2012)  
5. About the admission of 35 accused/under trial 
prisoners on parole, as referred to in the earlier 
order, today, Mr. Shahadat Awan, learned 
Prosecutor General Sindh has submitted District -
wise break -up details up to 20.11.2012, which shows 
that o ut of 70 criminals cases, wherein these 35 
accused/under trial prisoners  were stated to be 
involved, acquittal has been recorded in 34 cases, 9 
cases have been withdrawn and record of 16 other 
cases has not yet been traced out. Learned 
Prosecutor General Sindh has also placed on record 
another statement on behalf of Home Department, 
Government of Sindh to show that not 35 but 70 
accused were admitted to parole, who were involved 
in 177 cases. He has also submitted another list of 
25 criminals, who, accordi ng to the Home 
Department, Government of Sindh, are on parole. 
To our further queries with reference to these 25 
criminal/convicts Mr. Shahadat Awan, learned 
Prosecutor General Sindh has requested for some 
more time to submit further details, furnishing 
justifications for their admission on parole. The 
report submitted by the Inspector General Prisons 
Sindh, containing the list of 70 accused involved in 
177 cases, who have been admitted to parole, is 
taken on record.  SMC 16 of 2011 etc  45
  (Relevant para of Order dated 28.11.20 12) 
12. When the matter regarding release of 
convicts/under trial prisoners on parole has been 
taken up, the Prosecutor General Sindh as well as 
MIT-II, High Court of Sindh have placed on record 
their respective reports, which, according to their 
own state ments are still incomplete. These reports 
are taken on record with directions that complete 
reports regarding release of such criminals and 
further steps, if any, taken in this regard may be 
submitted before the Court at the earliest. Mr. Abdul 
Fateh Malik , learned Advocate General Sindh has 
assured that all such criminals, who have been 
illegally released on parole will be arrested and put 
behind the bars by revocation of their probation for 
which necessary summary has already been 
submitted to the Chief M inister Sindh. For further 
proceedings, this case is adjourned with directions 
to the office that it may be placed before the 
Honourable Chief Justice of Pakistan for necessary 
orders about its fixation .”  
  
37.  It has been informed that there were 25 con victs who 
were  released on parole out of which 17 have been arrested but 
the list of the same has not been produced alongwith the jail 
record whereas remaining 8 are still absconding. The learned 
Prosecutor  General and the Inspector General of Prisons are 
directed to procure the list of those persons which shall be 
furnished to the I nspector General of Police and the other 
functionaries responsible to enforce the law and order with the SMC 16 of 2011 etc  46
request to cause the arrest in accordance with the law so that 
they may undergone the sentences already awarded to them. It 
is also informed that there were 70 under trial prisoners who 
were involved in 177 cases ( some  accused in more than one 
case)  who were par oled. It is informed that out of these cases , 
94 have been acquitt ed whereas in 9 cases the accused ha ve 
been convicted. The learned Prosecutor General is directed to 
collect the information as to whether out of these UTPs how 
many persons have been arrested and if not so whether they 
were convicted in absentia.  
38.  It has been observed that to maintain the law and 
order situation in Karachi all the “No Go” areas have been 
ordered to be made free for access of every citizen. The I nspector 
General of Police shall submit a report on the next date of hearing 
that the entir e city has been cleared and there is no “No Go ” area in 
Karachi. It has been informed by the I nspector General of Police that 
in Police Stations , Peer Abad, Mango  Peer and Sohrab Goth , there 
are some “No Go ” areas, however, they are  going to be cleared. Th e 
IGP and the D .G., Rangers are directed to comply with the 
directions of this Court noted hereinabove.  
39.  In respect of depoliticizing the police , the Inspector 
General of Police explained that an exercise has been 
commenced and with reference to the re cruitment, SMC 16 of 2011 etc  47
appointment and posting procedures , etc. portfolio s of each 
police officer/official are also being checked.  
CMA No. 484 -K/2013:  Mst. Hajani Zar Malik applicant, present 
in person, has filed this application for her impleadment in this 
case. Noti ce of this CMA to the learned Advocate General be 
issued for the next date of hearing.  
CMAs Nos.  200-K & 447 -K of 2013.  Syed Mehmood Akhtar 
Naqvi, applicant in person, moved these applications. Let 
notice be issued to the  Board of Revenue , Sindh , for the next 
date of hearing.    
40.  To come up after two weeks.    
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
    Judge  
 
 
    Judge  
 
 
    Judge  
 
 
   Judge  
Islamabad, the  
20th September, 2013.  
A. Rehman  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  