IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
C. M. A . NO.  2939  OF 201 7 IN CONSTITUTION PETITIO N NO. 29 OF 2016 ETC .  
 
Imran Ahmed Khan and others.              …Applicant(s)  
 
Versus  
 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif,  
Prime Minister of Pakistan.          …Respondent (s) 
 
 
In attendance : Mr. Ashtar Ausaf Ali, A. G. for Pakistan . 
 Mr. Riaz Riazuddin, Governor State Bank of 
Pakistan.  
 Mr. Zafar Hijazi, Chairman S ECP.  
  
Date of Hearing:   05.05.2017 
 
O R D E R   
 
On the last date of hearing we observed as under : -  
“Pursuant to our directions, names of the Officers have 
been sent by all the Departments/Institutions but since 
we have reservations about the names give n by the 
Governor State Bank of Pakistan and the Chairman 
Security & Exchange Commission of Pakistan, let both 
of them appear before us day after tomorrow i.e. 
05.05.2017  at 11:00  a.m. with the lists of all the scale 18 
and above Officers or equivalent so that we may 
consider them for approval as Members of JIT.   
 
2.  Today, the Governor State Bank of Pakistan and the 
Chairman SECP appeared with the lists they were directed to 
produce. We examined the lists and deliberated over our choice . 
We from the list  submitted by the Governor State Bank of Pakistan 
select and nominate Mr. Am er Aziz, an Officer of (BS -21) who is on 
deputation with NIBAF , as a Member JIT . We also examined the list 
submitted by the Chairman SECP  and deliberated over the names. 
We from th e said list select and nominate Mr. Bilal Rasool who is C.M.A. NO. 2939 OF 2 017 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 29 OF 2 016 ETC.  2  
Executive Director, SECP , presently working at the Commission’s 
Secretariat, Media and Corporate Communication and Translation 
Department  as a Member JIT . We have also examined the list s 
submitted by the Chairman NAB. We after due deliberation select 
and nominate Mr. Irfan Naeem Mangi, Director (BS -20) as a Member 
JIT. We also examined the list submitted by the Director General ISI. 
We after due thought and deliberation select  and nominate Brig. 
Muhamm ad Nauman Saeed as a Member JIT.  We have also 
examined the list submitted by the Military Intelligence (M.I.). We 
after due consideration select and nominate Brig. Kamran Khurshid 
as a Member JIT. We also examined the list submitted by the Director 
General , FIA . We having considered the background and 
antecedents of the Officers in the list decided to select and 
nominate Mr. Wajid Zia, Additional Director General (Immigration), 
FIA to head the JIT.   
3.  We further direct as follows : -  
 
i) The Secretariat of the JIT shall be housed in the 
Building of the Federal Judicial Academy, 
Islamabad where they shall be provided 
adequate office accommodation and related 
facilities.  The requisite approval has been 
obtained from Hon’ble The Chief Justice of 
Pakistan.   
ii) Since the JI T in connection with the investigation 
would need funds, the Federal Government is 
directed to provide them necessary funds. We 
direct the Federal Government to initially provide 
an amount to the tune of rupees twenty million C.M.A. NO. 2939 OF 2 017 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 29 OF 2 016 ETC.  3  
forthwith so th at the JIT may not feel 
handicapped in its movement in any direction. 
The funds shall be placed at the disposal of the 
Head of the JIT.  
iii) The Head and Members of the JIT shall arrange 
secretarial staff of their choice from the ir 
respective departments. The JIT would also be at 
liberty to utilize the expertise available in their 
departments and any other department of the 
Federal or Provincial Governments as and when 
required by it . 
iv) The boarding, lodging and transportation of the 
Members of JIT shall also  be provided by their 
respective Departments in accordance with the 
rules.   
v) The JIT shall have the power to engage and 
associate local and/ or foreign experts to 
facilitate the investigation and collection of 
evidence in  line with the letter and spirit of order 
dated 20.04.2017 of this Court.  
vi) The JIT shall have all the powers given by the law 
relating to investigation including those available 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1898,  
National Accountability Bureau Ordinance , 1999  
and the Federal Inv estigation Agency Act , 1975 .  
vii) As the JIT, in essence and substance, is acting on 
the direction of the Supreme Court  of Pakistan , C.M.A. NO. 2939 OF 2 017 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 29 OF 2 016 ETC.  4  
all the Executive Authorities throughout Pakistan 
shall act in aid  of the JIT .  
viii) If and when any person fails or refu ses to 
associate with or appear before the JIT or refuses 
to cooperate or provide oral or documentary 
information required by it, the same be 
immediately brought to the notice of the Court 
for taking appropriate action.  
ix) The Secretary Interior, Governm ent of Pakistan is 
directed to ensure necessary security 
arrangements for the Secretariat and the 
Members of the JIT.  
  
4.  The JIT is directed to commence and complete the 
investigation and submit its final report in terms of the order dated 
20.04.2017 . It shall also submit fortnightly progress reports as stipulated 
in the said o rder.  
5.  For further proceedings to come up on 22.05.2017.  
 
 
             JUDGE  
 
       JUDGE   JUDGE  
ISLAMABAD.  
05.05.2017 . 
M. Azhar Malik  
 
 