IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
MR. JUSTICE SYED MANSOOR ALI SHAH  
 
 
CONST.P.21/2022 AND C.M.A.5029/2022  
 
1. Const.P.21/2022  
(Under Article 184(3) for 
striking down the amendments 
made through the National 
Accountability  (Amendment) 
Act, 20 22 and the National 
Accountability  (Second 
Amendment) Act, 2022  for 
being ultra vires to the 
Constitution)  Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. 
Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary, L aw and 
Justice Division, Islamabad 
and another  
   
2. C.M.A.5029/2022  
IN Const.P.21/2022  
(Stay)  Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi v. 
Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary, Law and 
Justice Division, Islamabad 
and another  
       
For the Petitioner (s)/ 
Applicant(s)  : Khawaja Haris Ahmad, Sr. ASC  
Dr. Yasir Aman Khan, ASC  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Isaam Bin Haris, Advocate  
Ms. Zaynib Chaudhary, Advocate  
Mr. Muhammad Hashim Waqar, 
Advocate  
Barrister Faiza Asad, Advocate  
Mr. Muhammad Shoaib Ilyas, Advocate  
   
Federation/Respo ndent 
No.01  : Mr. Muhammad Makhdoom Ali Khan, 
Sr. ASC  
Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahzad, AOR  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Saad Muhammad Hashmi, 
Advocate  
Mr. Umair Muhammad Malik, Advocate  
Kh. Aizaz Ahsan, Advocate  
Mr. Yawar Mukhtar, Advocate  
Kh. Azeem Armaghan, Advocate  
Mr. W aqar Umar Farooq, Advocate  
   
  Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, Addl. AGP  
Raja Shafqat Abbasi, DAG  
   
NAB/Respondent No.02  : Mr. Mumtaz Yousf, Addl. Prosecutor 
General  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 2
Mr. Muhammad Sattar Awan, D eputy 
Prosecutor General  
Qazi Babar Irshad, Special Prosecutor 
General  
Barrister Syeda Jugnu Kazmi, Special 
Prosecutor General  
   
Date of Hearings  : 19.07.2022  15.11.2022  10.02.2023  
  29.07.2022  16.11.2022  14.02.2023  
  05.08.2022  17.11.2022  15.02.2023  
  19.08.2022  06.12.2022  16.02.2023  
  01.09.2022  07.12.2022  21.02.2023  
  04.10.2022  08.12.2022  22.02.2023  
  05.10.2022  12.12.2022  23.02.2023  
  06.10.2022  13.12.2022  14.03.2023  
  10.10.2022  14.12.2022  15.03.2023  
  11.10.2022  10.01.2023  16.03.2023  
  12.10.2022  11.01.2023  16.05.2023  
  18.10.2022  12.01.2023  18.08.2023  
  19.10.2022  17.01.2023  29.08.2023  
  24.10.2022  18.01.20 23 30.08.2023  
  08.11.2022  19.01.2023  31.08.2023  
  09.11.2022  07.02.2023  01.09.2023  
  10.11.2022  08.02.2023  and 
  14.11.2022  09.02.2023  05.09.2023  
   
J U D G M  E N T  
   UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ:   
Surah Al -Anfal, V erse 27:  
“O ye that believe! betray not the trust of Allah 
and the Messenger, nor misappropriate knowingly 
things entrusted to you. ” 
(Translation by Yusuf Ali ) 
Through  the present  Constitution Petition No.2 1 of 2022  the 
petitioner has challenged the amendments made  to the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1 999 (“NAB Ordinance ”) by th e 
National Accountability  (Amendment) Act, 20 22 (“First 
Amendment ”) and the National Accountability  (Second 
Amendment) Act, 20 22 (“Second Amendment ”) (collectively 
referred to as the “2022 Amendments ”).  
Origin s and Content of the  Unamended  NAB Ordinance  
2.   Before delving in to the facts giving rise to the present 
petition it would be appropriate to briefly set out the origins and Const.P.21/2022 etc . 3
history of the NAB Ordinance. The N AB Ordinance was a successor 
of the Ehtesab Act, 1997 and was promulgated by the then Chief 
Executive  of Pakistan, General Pervez Musharraf,  on 16.11.1999 
with retrospective effect from  01.01.01985 . The NAB Ordinance is 
a special la w enacted  to ‘eradicate corruption and corrupt practices 
and hold accountable all those persons accused of such practices .’ 
To achieve  its purposes the N AB Ordinance : 
i. Set up Special Courts for conducting trials of the offence of 
corruption a nd corrupt practices  [refer Section s 5(g) and 16 
of the NAB Ordinance  prior to the 202 2 Amendments ]; 
ii. Defined the categories of  holders of  public off ice who are  
subject to the NAB Ordinance. The two main categories are  
parliamentarians (“elected holders of public  office ”) and 
‘persons in the service of Pakistan ’ [refer Section 5( m) of the 
NAB Ordinance prior to the 2022 Amendments ]; 
iii. Expanded  the class of persons who cou ld be inves tigated 
and prosecuted for the offence of corruption and cor rupt 
practices  [refer Section 5(o) of the NAB Ordinance  prior to 
the 202 2 Amendments ];  
iv. Set up the NAB for the purposes  of conducting pre-trial 
inquir ies and investigation s in relation to the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices  and to prosecut e the same  
[refer Sectio n 6 of the NAB Ordinance  prior to the 202 2 
Amendments ]; 
v. Retained  certain categories of the offence of corruption and 
corrupt practices  from previous accountability laws  whils t 
also adding certain new categories such as ‘misuse of 
authority ’ and ‘wilful def ault’ [refer Section 9(a) (vi) and (viii)  
of the NAB Ordinance  prior to the 202 2 Amendments ]; 
vi. Declared the offence of corruption and corrupt practices 
non-bailable  [refer Sect ion 9(b) of the NAB Ordinance  prior to 
the 202 2 Amendments ];  
vii. Retained certain  evidentiary  presum ptions against accused 
persons whilst a lso adding a new category of presumption for Const.P.21/2022 etc . 4
persons  accused  of misu sing their  authority  [refer Section 14 
of the NAB Ordinance  prior to the 202 2 Amendments ]; 
viii. Permitted  the Chairman NAB or any authorise d officer of the 
Federal Government to seek mutual legal assistance from 
foreign States [ refer Section 21 of the NAB Ordinance  prior to 
the 202 2 Amendments ]; and  
ix. Introduced the concept of a plea bar gain [refer Section 25(b) 
of the NAB Ordinance  prior to th e 202 2 Amendments ]. 
3.   The vires of the NAB Ordinance  were challenged  soon 
after its promulgation but the  Court in Khan Asfandyar Wali Vs. 
Federation of Pak istan  (PLD 20 01 SC 607)  upheld its provisions 
albeit  with certain direct ions and observations. Since then despite 
three elected governments coming  into power the NAB Ordinance 
has not been repealed  and it remains  the premier accountability 
law in the country.  
Factual Background  
4.   With the above context we can now lay down t he facts  
relevant to  the present petition . On 22.06.2022 the First 
Amendment to the  NAB Ordinance became an Act of Parliament . 
Its essential  features are : 
i. Its provisions  have deemed effect from the  date of  
commencement of the  NAB Ordinance i.e., 01.01.1985  [refer 
Section 1(2)  of the First Amendment ]; 
ii. It excludes the decisions , advice, reports , opinion s tendered 
by and  works,  functions,  projects , schemes  executed by  
holders of public  office and public /governmental  bodies  from 
the ambit  of the NAB unless  there is  proof of the holders  of 
public office  or persons acting on their behalf  having 
receiv ed any monetary or material benefit from the decisions , 
advice, reports, opinion s, works,  functions,  projects  or 
schemes  [refer Section 2  of the First Amendment ];  
iii. It has defined  ‘public at l arge’ to mean at least 100  persons 
[refer Section 3  of the First Amendment ]; Const.P.21/2022 etc . 5
iv. It has altered the ingredients of the offences listed in Section 
9(a)(v), (vi)  and (ix) of the  NAB Ordinance [refer Section 8 of 
the First Amendment ]; 
v. It has given  Account ability Courts the power to grant bail to 
accused persons  [refer Sectio n 8 of the First Amendment ]; 
vi. It has omitted  Section 14 of the  NAB Ordinance  which 
allow ed the Accountability Court to draw  various  evidentiary  
presumptions  against the accused [refer Section 10  of the 
First Amendment ]; 
vii. It has omitted Section 21(g) of the NAB Ordinance which 
allowed evidentiary material  trans ferred b y a foreign 
Government  to be  receivable as evidence in legal proceedings  
notwithstanding the provisions of the Qanun -e-Shahadat 
Order, 1984  [refer Section  14 of the First Amendment ]; and  
viii. It has reduced the period of custo dy of the accused  for the 
purposes of  inquiry and  investigation  from 90 days to 14 
days [refer Section 16 of the First Amendment ]. 
5.   On 25.0 6.2022 the petitioner f iled the titled 
Constitution Petition with the prayer that the First Amendment be 
struck down ( albeit  with the exception of  a few beneficial changes ) 
for violating the Fundamental Rights  of the people of Pakistan  
enshrined in Article s 9 (security of person ), 14 (inviolability of 
dignity of man) , 19A  (right to information) , 24 (protection of 
property  rights ) and 25  (equality of citizens)  of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 ( “Constitution” ).  
6.   The first hearing in th e case took p lace on 19.07.2022 . 
During the course of the petitioner ’s arguments the Second 
Amendment also became an Act of Parliament on 12.0 8.2022. The 
significant  features of this amendment are:  
i. Its provisions  have deemed effect from the  date of  
commencement of the  NAB Ordinance i.e., 01.01.1985  [refer 
Section 1(2)  of the Second Amendment ]; Const.P.21/2022 etc . 6
ii. It has  enlarged the category of  holders of  public office and 
public/government al bodies excluded from the jurisdiction of  
the NAB [refer Section 2 of the Second Amendment ]; 
iii. It has  limited  the pecuniary jurisdiction of the NAB to cases 
involving loss of  Rs.500 million  or more  thereby rendering 
the NAB incompetent to  investigate and prosecute offences of 
corruption and corrupt practices which have caused a loss of 
less than Rs.500 mi llion [refer Section 3 of the Second 
Amendment ]; and 
iv. It has provided accused persons with the opportunity to 
renege from the plea bargains entered into by them  and 
approved by the Accountability Court  if they fa il to make the 
complete payment as approved b y the Accountability Court  
[refer Section 14 of the Second Amendment ]. 
The pet itioner filed an application on 31.08.2022 for amending his 
Constitution Petition to also challenge the Second Amendment  on 
the tou chstone of the Fu ndamental Rights already raise d in 
respect of  the First Amendment . This application was allowed by 
the Court on 01.09.2022 with the consent of the learned counsel 
for the respondent Federat ion. Thereafter, the proceedings 
continued for more than a year and comprised o f 53 hearin gs in 
total. During this period of one year two further amendments were 
passed  in relation to  the NAB Ordinance , namely : 
i. The National Accountability  (Amendment) Act,  2023  which 
became an Act of Parliament on 29.05.2023  (“2023 Act ”). 
This Act has primarily  amended  Section 4 of the NAB 
Ordinance to provide a transfer mechanism for pending 
inquiries, investigation s and references  to the relevant 
agency, authority, department, court , tribunal  or forum 
[refer Se ction 2 of the 2023 Act] ; and 
ii. The National Accountability  (Amendment) Ordinance , 2023  
which was pr omulgated on 03.07.2023  (“2023 Ordinance ”) 
by the President. The main feature of this Ordinance is that Const.P.21/2022 etc . 7
it has re -inserted the  evidentiary  presumptions against the 
accused for certain categories of the offence of cor ruption 
and corrupt  practices [ refer Section 2 of the 2023 
Ordinance ]. Although this Ordinance  has retrospective effect 
from the da te of commencement of the NAB Ordinance the 
restoration of the presumptions will have no effect on the 
references that have a lready been returned by the 
Accountability Courts  to the NAB  due to the  2022 
Amendments. The 2023 Ordinance has  therefore  brough t 
about only a cosmetic change in the NAB Ordinance and it 
does not rectify the deficiency  created by the omi ssion of the 
presum ptions by the First A mendment . 
Although learned counsel for the petitioner  filed his written 
submis sions on the amendments brought about  in the NAB 
Ordinance  by the 2023 Act , the primary focus of the proceedings 
remained the 2022 Amendments and th is judgme nt shall also only  
examine the vires of the 2022 Amendments  though mention may 
be made of the 2023 Act and the 2023 Ordinance  in passing .  
7.   It is also pertinent to mention  here that as a result of 
the 2022 Amendments  a large number of  references  filed by the 
NAB in the Accountability Courts were affected . The data , as 
provided by the Addl. Prosecutor General , NAB, is set out below:  
i. 386 references were returned  by the Accountability Courts  to 
NAB in 2022 whereas  212 references were returned in 2023 . 
Therefore, a total of 598 references have been returned so 
far. Of these 35 references pertain to elected holders of 
public office ; 
ii. The public money involved  in the returned references is more 
than Rs.15 0 billion ; 
iii. 327 of the 386 references were returned  in 202 2 due to the 
minimum pecuniary jurisdiction  of the NAB  being increased 
to Rs.500 m illion  under  the Second Amendment ;  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 8
iv. Out of  the 598 ret urned referen ces o nly 54 have yet been 
trans ferred to other  courts for further action  of which 17 
have been transferred to the Custom Court and 4 to the 
Banking Court . As a result, 544 references are with the NAB 
in storage ; and  
v. 127 references remain  with the Accountability Courts  after 
the 2022 Amendments . 
Comparative Table of the 2022 Amendments  
8.   Before we examine  the contentions of the learned 
counsel for the parties , a comparative table detailing the pivotal  
changes brought about in the content of the NAB Ordinance by the 
2022 Amendments  is produced below : 
NAB Ordinance Prior to the 2022 
Amendments  2022 Amendments  
4. Application : It extends to the whole of 
Pakistan and shall apply to all persons in 
Pakistan, all citizens of Pakistan  and persons 
who are or have been in the service of Pakistan 
wherever they may be, including areas which are 
part of Federally and Provi ncially Administered 
Tribal Areas . 
 4. Application : (1) This Ordinance extends to the 
whole of Pakistan and shall apply to all persons, 
including those persons who are or have been in the 
service of Pakistan, except persons and transactions 
specified in su b-section (2). 
 
(2) The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be 
applicable to the following persons or transactions, 
namely: -  
(a) all matters pertaining to Federal, Provincial or 
Local taxation, other levies or imposts, including 
refunds, or loss of exc hequer pertaining to taxation , 
transactions or amounts duly covered by amnesty 
schemes of Government of Pakistan ;  
 
(b) decisions of Federal or Provincial Cabinet, their 
Committees or Sub -Committees , Council of Common 
Interests (CCI), National Economic Cou ncil (NEC), 
National Finance Commission (NFC), Executive 
Committee of the National Economic Council 
(ECNEC), Central Development Working Party 
(CDWP), Provincial Development Working Party 
(PDWP), Departmental Development Working Party 
(DDWP),  Board of Dire ctors of State Owned 
Enterprises (SOEs), Board  of Tr ustees/Direct ors of 
all Statutory Bodies , the State Bank of Pakistan and 
such other bodies except where the holder of the Const.P.21/2022 etc . 9
public office has received a monetary gain as a 
result of such decision;  
 
(c) any person or entity who, or transaction in 
relation thereto, which are not directly or indirectly 
connected with the holder of a public office except 
offences falling under clauses (ix), (x) and (xi) of sub -
section (a) of section 9;  
 
(d) procedural lapses i n performance of any public or 
governmental work or function, project or scheme, 
unless there is evidence to prove that a holder of 
public office or any other person acting on his behalf 
has been conferred or has received any monetary or 
other material ben efit from that particular public or 
governmental work or function, whether directly or 
indirectly on account of such procedural lapses, 
which the said recipient was otherwise not entitled 
to receive;  
 
(e) a decision taken, an advice, report or opinion 
rendered or given by a public office holder or any 
other person in the course of his duty, unless there 
is sufficient evidence to show that the holder of 
public office or any other person acting on his behalf 
received or gained any monetary or other material 
benefit, from that decision, advice, report or opinion, 
whether directly or indirectly, which the said 
recipient was otherwise not entitled to receive;  
 
(f) all matters, which have been decided by, or fall 
within the jurisdiction of a regulatory body 
established under a Federal or Provincial law ; and  
 
(g) all matters where the funds , property or interest 
not involving or belonging to the appr opriate 
government, except for the offences under  clauses 
(ix), (x) or (x i) of sub -section (a) of section 9. 
5. Definitions: … 
(n) “Offence ” means the offences of corru ption 
and corrupt practices and other offences as 
defined in this O rdinance and includes t he 
offences specified in the Schedule to this 
Ordinance . 5. Definitions: … 
(o) “Offence ” means the offences of co rruption and 
corrupt practices and other offences as defined in 
this O rdinance  of value n ot less than five hundred 
million rupees  and includes t he offences specified in 
the Schedule to this Ordinance ; 
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices : (a) A 
holder of a  public office, or any other person, is 
said to commit or to have committed the offence 9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices : (a) A holder 
of a public office, or any other person, is said to 
commit or to have committed the offence of Const.P.21/2022 etc . 10
of corruption and corrupt practices — 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or benamidar s 
owns, possesses, or has acquired  right or title in 
any assets or holds irrevocab le power of attorney 
in respect of any assets  or pecuniary resources 
disproportionate to his known sources of 
income, which he cannot reasonably  account for 
or maintains a standard of living beyond that 
which is commensurate with his sources of 
income ; corruption and corrupt practices — 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or other 
benamidars, through corrupt and di shonest means , 
owns, possesses or acquires rights or title in assets 
substantially disproportionate to his known sources 
of income which he can not reasonably account for.  
      Explanation I .– The valuation of immovable 
property shall be reckoned on the d ate of purchase 
either according to the actual price shown in the 
relevant title documents or the applicable rates 
prescribed by District Collector or the Federal Board 
of Revenue whichever is higher. No evidence 
contrary to the later shall be admissible.  
      Explanation II .– For the purpose of calculation 
of movable assets, the sum total of credit entries of 
bank account shall not be treated as an asset. Bank 
balance of an account on the date of initiation of 
inquiry may be treated as a movable asset. A  
banking transaction shall not be treated as an asset 
unless there is evidence of creation of corresponding 
asset through that transaction.  
14. Presumption against accused accepting 
illegal gratification:  
a. Where in any tr ial of an offence under clauses  
(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) of subsection (a) of section 9  it 
is proved that an accused person has accepted 
or obtained, or has agreed to accept or attempted 
to obtain, for himself or for any other person any 
gratification, other than legal remuneration, or  
any valuable thing, or any pecuniary advantage 
from a person or any agent of a person, for any 
favour shown or promised to be shown by the 
accused, it shall be presumed, unless the 
contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained, 
or agreed to accept or a ttempted to obtain, that 
gratification or that valuable t hing or pecuniary 
advantage for  himself or some other person, as 
the case may be, as a motive or a reward such as 
is specified in section 161 to 163 of the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860 , (Act XLV of 1860 ), or, as the 
case may be, without consideration, or for a 
consideration which he  believed to be 
inadequate.  
 
b. Wherein any trial of an offence punishable 
under  section 165A of the Pakistan Penal Code, Section 14 om itted.  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 11
1860 (Act XLV of 1860) it is proved that any 
gratifi cation, other than legal remuneration or 
any valuable thing has been given, or offered to 
be given, or attempted to be given, by any 
accused person, it shall be presumed, unless the 
contrary is proved, that he gave or offered to 
give, or attempted  to give,  that gratification, or 
that valuable thing, as the case may be, as a 
motive or a reward such as is specified in section 
161 to 163 of the said Code , or, as the case may  
be without consideration or for a consideration 
which he believed to be inadequate.  
c. In any trial , of an offence punishable under 
clause (v) of sub -section (a) of section 9 of  this 
Ordinance, the fact that the accused person or 
any other person on his behalf, is in possession, 
for which the accused person cannot 
satisfactorily account, of  assets  or pecuniary 
resources disproportionate to his known source 
of income, or that such person has, at or about 
the time of the commission of the, offence with 
which he is charged, obtained an accretion to his 
pecuniary resources or property for which he 
cannot satisfactorily account , the Court shall 
presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the 
accused person is guilty of the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices and his 
conviction therefor  shall not be invalid by reason 
only that it is based solely on such a 
presumption.  
 
d. In any trial  of an offence under  clause  (vi) and 
(vii) of section 9  the burden of proof that he used 
his authority, or issued any directive, or 
authori zed the issuance of any policy or 
statutory rule or , order (SRO), or m ade any grant 
or allowed any concession, in the public interest, 
fairly, justly, and for the advancement of the 
purpose of the enactment under which the 
authority was used, directive or policy or rule or 
order was issued or grant was made or 
concession was  allowed shall lie on  the accused , 
and in the absence of such proof the accused 
shall be guilty of the offence, and his conviction 
shall not be invalid by the reason that it is based 
solely on such presumption:  
      Provided that the prosecution shall fir st Const.P.21/2022 etc . 12
make out a reasonable case against the accused 
charged under clause (vi) or clause (vii) of sub -
section (a) of section 9 . 
21. International Cooperation Request for 
mutual legal assistance : The Chairman NAB or 
any officer authorized by the Federal 
Government may request a Foreign State to do 
any or all of  the following acts in accordance 
with the law of such State: — 
… 
(g) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Qanun -e-Shahadat Order 1984 (P.O. 10 of 1984) 
or any other law for the t ime being in force all 
evidence, documents or any other material 
transferred to Pakistan by a Foreign Government 
shall be receivable as evidence in legal 
proceedings under this Ordinance ; Section 21(g) omitted.  
25. Voluntary return and plea bargain : … 
(b) Where at any time after the authorization of 
investigation, before or after the commencement 
of the trial or during the pendency of an appeal, 
the accused offers to return to the NAB the 
assets or gains acquired or made by him in the 
course, or as a conse quence, of any offence 
under this Ordinance , the Chairman, NAB, may, 
in his discretion, after taking into consideration 
the facts and circumstances of the case, accept 
the offer on such terms and conditions as he 
may consider necessary, and if the accused 
agrees to return to the NAB the amount 
determined by the Chairman, NAB, the 
Chairman, NAB, shall refer the case for the 
approval of the Court, or as the case may be, the 
Appellate Court and for the release of the 
accused . 25. Voluntary return and plea bargain: … 
(b) Where at any time after the authorization of 
investigation, before or after the commencement of 
the trial or during the pendency of an appeal, the 
accused offers to return to the NAB the assets or 
gains acquired or made by him in the course, or as a 
consequence, of any offence under this Ordinance , 
the Chairman, NAB, may, in his discretion, after 
taking into consideration the facts and 
circumstances of the case, accept the offer on such 
terms and conditions as he may consider necessary, 
and if th e accused agrees to return to the NAB the 
amount determined by the Chairman, NAB, the 
Chairman, NAB, shall refer the case for the approval 
of the Court, or as the case may be, the Appellate 
Court and for the release of the accused : 
      Provided that stat ement of an accused ent ering 
into plea bargain or voluntary return shall not 
prejudice case of any other accused:  
      Provided f urther that in case of failure of 
accused to make paymen t in accordance with the 
plea bargain agreement approved by the Court,  the 
agreement of plea bargain shall become inoperative 
to the rights of the parties immediately . 
 
9.   It may be not iced from the provisions produced above 
that the 2022 Amendments have indeed brought about  a 
significant change  in the legal position unde r the NAB Ordinance. Const.P.21/2022 etc . 13
Whereas prior to the 2022 Amendments the NAB Ordinance 
applied to all persons in Pakistan after the  2022  Amendments the 
scope of NAB Ordinance  has been  significantly  restricted with 
nearly all holders of public office exempted from its  application 
unless  there is proof of any mo netary or material benefit being 
received by the m or a person actin g on their behalf. However, even 
if the NAB manages to overcome  the exceptions listed in  the 
amended  Section 4  of the NAB Ordinance  the jurisdict ional hurdle 
of an accused having caused a  minimum  loss of  Rs.500 million  or 
more  would  still need to be crossed . If that is not done the accused 
will be ousted from the jurisdiction of the NAB.  Therefore, i t is only 
when the requirements of Section  4 and Section 5(o)  of the NAB 
Ordinance (as altered  by the 2022 Amendments)  are satisfied can 
the accused p erson be inquired /investigated  into by th e NAB  and 
be tried in the Accountability  Court.  
10.   However, by  the addition  of the new conditions  in and 
expla nations  to Section  9(a)(v)  coupled with the omission  of Section 
21(g) that permitted the admission of foreign evidentiary material 
in legal proceedings  under the mutual legal assistance regime set 
up by the United Nation s Convention against Corruption , the 
burden cast o n the prosecut ion to establish t hat a holder of public 
office has accumulated  unaccounted  domestic  (or foreign ) assets 
beyon d his means  has been made formidable . Along with  that the 
presumption  noted in Section 14(c)  has also been deleted.  The 
result of th ese amendments  relating to proof of the offence of  
accumulated assets beyond means  will be that  in the  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 14
 future  few persons will be prosecuted for such a n offence by  the 
NAB with still les ser convictions under Section 9(a)(v) . The above 
result is in addition to the  effect  that the 2022 Amendments  
envisage the return of pending inquiries, investigations  and 
references  but do not provide any mechanism for  then trans ferring 
them  to the relevant agency, authority, department, court , tribunal  
or for um. That proce dure was provided for the firs t time by the 
2023 Act . Howe ver, the 2023 Act  is applicable to onl y those 
inquiries, investigations and references of which either the NAB or 
the Accountability Court  is se ized. As noted above , there are 
hundreds  of re ferences that have been returned by the 
Accountability Courts  to the NAB  pursuant to  the 2022 
Amendments  and prior to the 2023 A ct. The se references  returned 
in the interregnum between the two amendments  have gone into 
limbo , a fact affirmed  by the record supplied by the Additiona l 
Prosecutor General , NAB . 
11.   At this stage it  would also be  appropriate to note that 
the offence of corruption and corrupt practice is an umbre lla term 
used to describe different categories of offences  noted in Section 
9(a) of the NAB Ordinance . The 2022 Amendments have change d 
three such categories, namely:  
i. Assets beyond means [refer Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance];  
ii. Misuse of authority [refer Section 9 (a)(vi) of the NAB 
Ordinance]; and  
iii. Cheating  [refer Section 9(a)( ix) of the NAB Ordinance] . 
Additionally , Section 9(a)(vii)  which criminalised the issuance of 
any directive, policy, SRO or any other  order  which granted undue Const.P.21/2022 etc . 15
concession or benefit to the holder of public office , his relative, 
associate, benamidar or any other person has been omit ted by the 
First Amendment. This judgment, however, shall only deal with 
Section 9(a)(v) as that is the  category of  the offence of  corruption 
and corrupt practices  which prima facie appears to have the widest 
implications of an ad verse nature  on the Fundamental Rights of 
the people.  
Arguments  of Counsel  
12.   Both the learned counsel for the petitioner and the 
learned counsel for the respondent Federation made extensive 
submissions on  the maintainability and merits  of the petition . 
Their main contentions were: 
A. Submissions by the Petitioner  
i. The titled petition is maintainable under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution as the 2022 Amendments directly 
and adversely affect the Fundamental  Rights of the 
people of Pakistan  i.e., Articles 9 , 14, 19A, 24 and 25  
and violate a salient feature of the Constitution, 
namely, Parliamentary form of Governmen t blended 
with Islamic provisions;  
ii. The provisions of the 2022 Amendments  have 
effectively decriminalised the offence of ‘corruption and 
corrupt p ractices ’ thereby allowing  the holders of  
public  office to retain their ill -gotten wealth whilst 
being exemp ted from prosecution under the  NAB 
Ordinance . The specific sections of the 2022 
Amendment s that decriminalise the offen ce of 
‘corruption  and corrupt  practices ’ and exclude  holders 
of public office from the province of the NAB  will be 
discussed later in the judgment ; and  
iii. The Court is empowered under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution to either strike down the 2022 Const.P.21/2022 etc . 16
Amendments or to direct the Federa tion to bring the 
2022 Amendments in line with the requirements of the 
Constitution and Fundamental Rights.  
B. Subm issions by the Respondent Federation  
i. The insta nt Constitution  Petition  is not maintainable 
because it does not satisfy the twin criteria laid down  
in Article 184(3) of the Constitution , the petitioner 
lacks bona fide and locus standi to challenge the 2022 
Amendments and the petition at the present stage is 
premature and based on speculations and conjectures ;  
ii. No cogent reason has been given  by the p etitioner  for 
not challenging the  2022 Amendments before the High 
Courts;  
iii. The 2022 Amendments have been enacted after taking 
into consideration the criticisms level led against the 
NAB Ordinance, including by the Superior Judiciary in 
its judgments/orders;  and  
iv. An incorrect  perception is being c reated that the 2022 
Amendments have decriminalised the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices  because there exist 
other accountability  foras in the country which can 
investigate, prosecute  and try accused perso ns for the  
offences  which no longer fall within the ambit of the 
NAB.  
13.   Apart from  the above submissions , information was 
also sought from the Additiona l Prosecutor General , NAB  
(produced above in para 7 ) regarding the particulars of the 
references th at have been r eturned to the NAB pursuant to the 
2022 Amendments and the ir fate since. Written submissions  were 
also provided  by the lear ned Attorney General for Pakistan  who 
predominantly  attacked the maintainability of the present petition  
and endorsed  the submissions of  the learned  counsel for the 
respondent Federation  in toto .  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 17
14.   Having heard the learned counsel for all the parties 
and having  examin ed the available  record the Court reserved its 
judgment on 05.09.2023. Our decision  on the present pet ition and 
the reasons  for the same are set ou t herein below . 
Mainta inability  
15.   The learned counsel for the res pondent Federation 
strongly ob jected to the maintainability of  the titled petition for 
failing to satisfy the jurisdictional requirements of Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution . It was his case that the petitioner had fai led to 
identify the precise Fundamen tal Right that had been violated by 
the 2022 Amend ments . Additionally, h e submitted that the 
petitioner  lacked locus standi and bona fides to challenge the 20 22 
Amendments because  firstly, when he was Prime Minister his 
government  introduced many of the amend ments that have been 
consolidated  by the 2022 Amendments  and secondly, he  had 
committed a dereliction of duty  by refus ing to sit in the Nati onal 
Assembly and raise concerns regarding  the 2022 Amend ments 
therein.  Learned counsel also stated that the dispute raised by the 
petition in respect of the 2022 Amendments is hyp othetical as 
there are no facts before the Court as a result  of which  the Co urt 
will be considering  and decid ing the question of vires  of the 2022 
Amend ments  in the abstract.  
16.   In response, learned counsel for the petitioner 
consistently maintained his stance that the cumulative effect of the 
2022 Amendments is that the offen ce of corruption and corrupt 
practices  committed by  the holders of  public office has been Const.P.21/2022 etc . 18
decriminalised thereby  violating the following  Fundamental Rights 
of the people of Pakistan :  
“9. Security of person.  No person shall be 
deprived of life  or liberty save in accordance with 
law. 
 
14. Inviolability o f dignity of man, etc . (1) The 
dignity of man and, subject to law, the privacy of 
home, shall be inviolable.  
 
24. Protection of property rights.  (1) No person 
shall be compulsorily deprived of his property 
save in accordance with law.  
 
25. Equality of citizens. (1) All citizens are equal 
before law and are entitled to equal protection of 
law.” 
Learned counsel for the petitioner f urther submitted t hat since the 
2022 Amendments directly and adversely affect  the Fundamental 
Rights of the public  not only are the conditions of Article 184(3) 
satisfied but also the objections of learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation regarding bona fides and locus standi  of the 
petitioner  lose force.  
17.   As the learned coun sel for the respondent Federation 
has primarily attacked  the maintai nability of the  instant 
Constitution Petition , we shall examine th at question first. The 
Court has been  conferred original jurisdiction by Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution which reads:  
“184. Original jurisdiction of Supreme Court.  
… 
 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 
199, the Supreme Court shall, if it considers that 
a question of public importance with reference to 
the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights conferr ed by Chapter I of Part II is 
involved, have the power to make an order of the 
nature mentioned in the said Article.”  
By vi rtue of the afore -noted provision the Court can  pass 
appropriate order s in cases where  the enforcement of a Const.P.21/2022 etc . 19
Fundamental Right(s)  affecting the public at large  is involved. It is 
by now  well-established in our jurisprudence that  acts of  
corruption  and corrupt practices  do infringe the Fundamental 
Rights of the public and thus meet the test of Article 184(3).  
Reliance  in this regard  is placed on the decisions of the Court in 
Suo Motu Case No.19 of 2016  (2017 SCMR 683); Corruption in 
Hajj Arran gements in 2010  (PLD 2011 SC 963); Bank of Punjab 
Vs. Haris Steel Industries  (Pvt.) Ltd.  (PLD 2010 SC 1109). For 
reference  relevant passage s from the  cases of Corruption in Hajj 
Arrangements  (supra ) and Bank of Punjab  are produced below:  
“Corruption in Hajj Arra ngements  
28. …However, when the cases of massive 
corruption, not only one, but so many came for 
hearing, therefore, this Court in the exercise of its 
constitutional jurisdiction had enforced 
fundamental rights of the citizens under Articles 
4, 9, 14 and 25 of the Constitution … 
Undoubtedly, whenever the Court will notice that 
there is corruption or corrupt practices , it would 
be very difficult to compromise or digest  it 
because the public money of the country cannot 
be allowed to be looted by any one whatsoever 
status he may have . 
 
Bank of Punjab  
25. A perusal of the above quoted provision [Art 
184(3)] would demonstrate that this Court was 
possesse d of powers to make any order of the 
nature mentioned in Article -199 of the 
Constitution, if, in the opinion of this Court, a 
question of public importance relating to the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights 
was involved in the matter [.] As has be en 
mentioned in the preceding parts of this order, 
what was at stake was not only a colossal amount 
of money/property belonging to at least one 
million depositors i.e. a large section of the public  
but what was reportedly at stake was also the 
very existen ce of the Bank of Punjab  which could 
have sunk on account of the mega fraud in 
question and with which would have drowned not 
only the said one million depositors but even 
others dealing with the said Bank . And what had 
been sought from this Court was the protection 
and defence of the said public property . It was 
thus not only the right of this Court but in fact its  
onerous obligation to intervene to defend the said Const.P.21/2022 etc . 20
assault on the said fundamental right to life and 
to property of the said public .” 
(emphasis  supplied ) 
18.   Although  learned counsel for the respondent 
Federation had no cavil with the proposition that the Court can 
undertake proceed ings in the origi nal j urisdiction to chec k 
corruption and corrupt practices  committed by  the holders of  
public off ice, he stressed that  unlike the cases previously decided 
by the Court the instant matter pinpoints  no specific act of 
corruption and/or corrupt practice. In fact, the entire controversy 
raised by the petitioner is conjectur al and academic . However, we 
are not persuaded with this argument of  learned counsel  because 
as noted above in paras 7 and 9-10, the 202 2 Amendments have  
limited the NAB ’s jurisdiction  thus excluding  hundreds of pending 
references  from trial before any forum and have also made the 
proof of the offence of corruption and corrupt practices 
significantly harder  for references that satisfy the  jurisdictional  
requirements of Section 4 and Section 5(o)  of the NAB Ordinance . 
We think it would be  a legal  absur dity to hold that whi lst the Court 
can take cognizance of individual a cts of corrupt ion and corrupt 
practices under Article 184(3) it cannot do so when amendments 
have been introduced in the accountability law i.e., the  NAB 
Ordinance which  exclude  the jurisdiction of  the NAB to  investigate 
and prosecut e holders of  public office  in two significant respects  
thereby ex-facie violat ing Articles 9, 14, 23  and 24  of the 
Constitution  by exonerat ing the holders of public office  from their 
alleged  acts of  corruption and corrupt practices  by failing to 
provide a  forum for their trial . The 2022 Amendments  have 
therefore render ed the NAB toothless in accomplishing  its objective Const.P.21/2022 etc . 21
of ‘eradicat [ing] corruption and corrupt practices and hold [ing] 
accountable all those persons accused of such practices ’ and have 
left public property belonging to the people of Pakistan vulnerable 
to waste and malfeasance by  the holders of public office.  Such 
interference  in the NAB’s jurisdiction and powers  most certainly 
affect s the F undamental Rights  of the people  at large  as not ed by 
the Court  in Progress Report of NAB in OGRA Case  (2015 SCMR 
1813 ): 
“3. …We may emphasize that NAB has been 
created as a principal watchdog against 
corruption  in Pakistan. Corruption is  itself 
rightly perceived as eating into the very 
foundation and v itals of society . A corruption 
watchdog  which, therefore, does not function 
efficiently adversely affects  inter alia , the 
fundamental rights in Articles 14 , 18, 19A, 23 
and 24 of the Constitution .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
Although the above observation was  made by the Court in the 
context of the  NAB’s poor handling of  the Oil and Gas Regulatory 
Authority  Scam,  we see no reason why the same ration ale cannot 
apply to the present  matter where the legislature through the 2022 
Amendments has  left the NAB ineffective  in pursuing cases of 
corruption and corrupt practices  exposing the public property of 
the people to  misappropriation . We accordingly  hold that the 
present Constitution Petition fulfils  the requirements of Art icle 
184(3)  of the Constitution  and so is maint ainable.  
19.   Be that as it may , the learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation  raised other  preliminary  objections to the 
petition as well . One of them being that the petition er does not 
possess either locus standi or bona fides to challen ge the 2022  
Amendments  because he never questioned the 2022 Amendments  
in Parliament . However, i t is s ettled law that when the Court Const.P.21/2022 etc . 22
exercis es jurisdiction under Article 184(3)  of the Constitution it  is 
not concerned with the antecedents or standing of the person  who 
has filed the petition  because that person  is merely  acting as an 
informant . Instead, t he Court favours a subst antive approach 
focusing  more  on the con tent of the petition and whether the same 
crosses the threshold set out in Article 184(3). In this respe ct, we 
are fortified by the dicta of the Court in Muhammad Yasin  Vs. 
Federation of Pakista n (PLD 2012 SC 132 ): 
“24. Before concluding our discussion on the 
issue of maintainability of this petition we need to 
address the respondent's submission that the 
petition has been filed mala fide . We have found 
no lawful basis for this submission … we have 
already held in the case titled  Moulvi Iqbal Haider 
versus Capital Development Authority and 
others  (2006 SC 394 at 413) that the contents of a 
petition under Artic le 184 (3) ibid will override 
concerns arising on account of the conduct or 
antecedents of a petitioner …”  
(emphasis supplied ) 
Likewise, the Court in Muhammad As hraf Tiwana Vs. Pakistan  
(2013 SCMR 1159) observed that: 
“16. …The questions  which the contents  of this 
petition have brought to light are, without doubt, 
matters of public importance and, as discussed 
above relate directly to the enforcement of 
fundamental rights . Therefore, concerns about 
the conduct or antecedents of the petitioner, if 
any, would  stand overridden by the contents of 
the petition . We may also emphasize that exercise 
of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) ibid is not 
dependent on the existence of a petitioner …” 
(emphasi s suppl ied) 
20.   We have already noted above that the instant peti tion 
satisfies the conditions of Article 184(3) , therefore, any 
apprehensions about the locus standi and bona fides of the 
petitioner stand overridden . Insofar as the  prior amendments 
passed  during  the petitioner ’s term as Prime Minister  are 
concerned, the  same were promulgated through  different  
Ordinances  all of which have lapsed and are no longer in the fi eld. Const.P.21/2022 etc . 23
On the other hand, t he 2022 Amendments have come into being 
through Acts of Parliamen t and will remain on the statute book 
unless these are repeale d by Parliamen t in the  future . Further, the 
amendments brought  about  in the petitioner ’s tenure  did not 
contain analogous  retrospectivity clauses , as exist in the 2022 
Amendments , as a result of which  the impact  of the Ordinances  on 
pending references and past and closed transactions was limited.  
21.   The learned counsel for the respon dent Federation  also 
submitted  that the petitioner  could have voiced his grievances  
against the 2022 Amendments  in the National Assembly  as a 
member of the Opposition . Indee d, in the Co urt’s recent judgment 
reported as Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians  Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2022 SC 574) the necessity  of a 
robust  Opposition for a healthy democracy  was emphasised . 
However, the choice to remain in or walk out of  Parliament is a 
political decision made  consciously  by parliamentarians and their 
political parties. The decision being political in nature t he Court 
cannot  and does not  sit in judgm ent over such matters . In any 
event, we have already held abo ve that  locus  standi is not an 
impediment when the Court is exercising original jurisdiction. 
Therefore, to dismiss the instant petition solely on the ground that 
the petitioner did not object to the 2022 Amendments in the 
National Assembly would  result in  the Court  deciding the question 
of maintainability on the basis of  an irrelevant  consideration. More 
so when we have already held above that the 2022 Amendments do 
raise questions of public imp ortance having a bearing on the 
Fundamental Rights of the people of Pakista n.  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 24
22.   Learned counsel for the respondent Federation lastly 
took exception with the Court exercising its original jurisdiction in 
this matter instead of first letting the High Court s decide the vires 
of the 2022 Amendments. He relied on Manzoor Elahi Vs . 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 197 5 SC 66) and Benazir Bhutto 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416) to reiterate that 
the Court ’s original ju risdiction is to be exercised sparingly and in 
deference to the High Court s jurisdiction under  Article 199 of  the 
Constitution. We are of the view that t he Court ’s judgment in Suo 
Motu No.1 of 2023  dated 01.03.2023 has already  dealt with this 
point. For reference, the relevant passage  is produced below:  
“45. …Secondly, it appears that the petition 
under Article 1 84(3)  [Manzoor Elahi Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan ] was the first of its kind 
before the Court under the present Constitution … 
The jurisprudence as regards Article 184(3) was 
thus quite literally in its infancy . In the half -
century that has since passed, thin gs have of 
course changed enormously. The jurisprudence 
has matured, developed and deepened and the 
Court has developed an altogether more muscular 
approach in its understanding and application of 
Article 184(3) . There has been a sea change in 
how the Cour t views this constitutional power. 
Thus, e.g., the observation of the learned Chief 
Justice, that “[t]his is an extraordinary power 
which should be used with circumspection”  (pg. 
79) is, with respect, hardly reflective of present 
times . Time does not stand  still and nor does the 
jurisprudence of the Court. In the common law 
tradition, the law is connected to the past but not 
shackled by it. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
We find ourselves in agr eement with t he dicta cited above  and 
endorse it . Indeed,  on an  examinati on of the jurisprudence of the 
Court that has developed under Article 184(3)  of the Constitution  it 
becomes  clear that since  the decisions in  Manzoor Elahi  (supra ) 
and Benazir Bhutto  (supra ) there have been numerous instances 
where  the Court has considered  and decided the  vires of legislation  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 25
in its original jurisdiction . Some of these cases are Mehram Ali Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 1445)  which decided the 
vires  of the  Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997 ; Liaquat Hussain Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 19 99 SC 504)  which decided the 
vires  of the Pakistan Arm ed Forces (Acting in Aid of the Civil Power) 
Ordinance, 1998 ; Asfandyar Wali  (supra ) which decided the vires  
of the NAB Ordinance ; Mobashir Hassan Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265)  which deci ded the vires  of the 
National Reconc iliation Or dinance, 2007 ; Baz Muhammad Kakar 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 923)  which decided the 
vires of the Contem pt of Court Act, 2012 ; Zulfiqar Ahm ed Bhutta 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2018 SC 370)  which decided the 
vires of Sections 203 and 232 of the Elections Act, 2017 .  
23.   In light of the above discussion, we find the re to be no 
merit in the  objections  raised by  the learned counsel for the 
respondent  Federation  in respect of  the maintai nability o f the  
present Constitution Petition . As a result, his objections  are 
rejected  and t he titled petition is declar ed to be  maintainable  
under Article 184(3 ) of the Constitution . 
Impugned  Provisions of the 2022 Amendments  
24.   In his Constitution Petition  the petitioner has sought 
the nullification of virtually the entire  2022 Amendments. However,  
on a careful  examination  of the se we are not convinced that the 
Fundamental Rights of the people of Pakistan are violated by each 
and every section  of the 2022 Amend ments . Our considered view  
at the outset about  the provisions  of the 2022 Amendments is that 
prima facie judicial  scrutiny  of only Sections  2, 8, 10 and 1 4 of the Const.P.21/2022 etc . 26
First Amendment and Sections 2, 3 and 14 of the Second 
Amendment  is required . These provision s have brought abou t the 
following modifications  in the NAB Ordinance:  
i. Section 3 of th e Second Amen dment has changed the 
definition of ‘offence ’ in Section 5(o) of  the NAB Ordinance by 
inserting a minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of Rs.500 million  
below whic h value  the NAB cannot take cognizance of the 
offence of corruption and corrupt practices;  
ii. Sectio n 2 of  the First Amendment by inserting sub -sections 
(a)-(f) into Section 4 of the NAB Ordinance and Section 2 of  
the Second Amendment  by adding sub -section ( g) in Section 
4 of the NAB Ordinance has excluded certain  holders of 
public office  from application of the NAB Ordinance and 
thereby limited its effect ; 
iii. Section 8 of the First Amendment has inserted new 
ingredients  in the offence under  Section 9(a)( v) of t he NAB 
Ordinance  and added explanations thereto . Section 9(a)(v) 
criminalizes the  act of holding  assets beyo nd mea ns; 
iv. Section 10 of the F irst Amendment has deleted Section 14 of 
the NAB Ordinance which provides evidentiary  presumptions  
that may be drawn  against the accused;  
v. Section 14  of the Firs t Amendment has deleted Section 21(g)  
of the NAB Ordinance which permitted foreign evidence to be 
admissible in legal proceedings  under  the mutual legal 
assistance  regime ; and 
vi. Section 14 of the Second Amendment has added a second 
proviso to Section 25 (b) of th e NAB Ordinance whereby an 
accused who enters into a plea bargain duly approved by the 
Accountability Court under Section 25(b) can renege from 
the same if he has not paid the full amount of the bargain 
settleme nt as approved by the Accountabili ty Court.  
The remaining provisions of the 2022 Amendments  may be 
considered later  in an appropriate case.  
Section 3 of th e Second Amendment  
25.   As already  noted above in para 6, Section 3 of the 
Second Amendment has  amen ded Section 5 (o) of the NAB 
Ordinance  to set the  minimum  pecuniary jurisdiction of the NAB at Const.P.21/2022 etc . 27
Rs.500 million  for inquiring  into and investigating  cases involving 
the commission of the offence of corruption and corrup t practices . 
As a result, offences that cause  loss valued at less than Rs.500 
million no longer come within the ambit of  the NAB.  The apparent 
rationale  for enhancing  the pecuniary  jurisdiction  is noted in the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons attached to the Second 
Amendment. It reads:  
“…Through  the insertion of proposed 
amendments, the pecuniary jurisdiction of the 
NAB has been fixed to take only action against 
mega scanda ls…” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
The necessity to streamline the jurisdiction  of the NAB and focus 
its efforts  on mega scandals  i.e., those involving an amount of 
Rs.500 million or more was explained by learned counsel for the 
respondent Federation by reference to  the jurisprudence of the  
Superior  Court s. Reliance  was placed on  State Vs. Hanif Hyder  
(2016 SCMR 2031) wherein the Court observed:  
“2. During the hearing of these proceedings, we 
have noticed that the NAB in exercise of powers 
under section 9 of the NAB Ordinance has started 
taking cognizance of the petty matters  and 
therefore, notice was issued to the D.G. NAB to 
submit repor t in regard to the enquiries and or 
investigations, which the NAB has undertaken in 
respect of the amounts involv [ing] less than 100 
Million and References, if any, filed which 
involved amount less than 100 million . A list has 
been provided. It is evident from this list that 
prima facie the enquiries and investigations 
undertaken by the NAB are not of mega scandals 
and apparently petty matters have been enquired 
into on the complaints. This is not the wisdom 
behind legislation of NAB Ordinance. The NAB 
Ordinance was primarily legislated to counter 
mega scandals and book the persons who are 
involved in mega scandals of corruption and 
corrupt practices .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
A decision by the Division Bench of the Sindh High Court  reported 
as Amjad Hussain Vs. National Accountability Bureau  (2017 
YLR 1)  was also referred:  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 28
“11. Learned PGA NAB on instructions from the 
Chairman NAB made written as well as oral 
submissions in order to assist the Court. He 
submitted that NAB was aware of this issue of 
pecuniary jur isdiction and in this respect had 
passed an SOP in respect of the monetary value 
of cases which NAB would pursue  which is set 
out below for ease of reference.  
“Priority for Cognizance of Cases:   
… 
iii. Cases of former/sitting legislators of 
National Assemb ly, Senate and Provincial 
Assemblies (including ministers/advisers 
etc.) and elected representatives of local 
bodies, where amount involved is more 
than Rs.100 million . 
iv. Cases involving interest of members of 
public at large where the numbers of 
defraud ed person are more than 50 
persons and amount involved is not less 
than Rs.100 million . 
v. Cases against public servants, whether 
serving or retired, Bankers, Businessmen 
and Contractors where amount involved is 
more than Rs.100 million . 
… 
40. …taking into  account the above discussion on 
the pecuniary jurisdiction of NAB including NAB 
making the best use of its human resources, 
equipment, office space etc., and budget 
limitations we hereby endorse by way of judicial 
order the NAB's SOP for dealing with pecu niary 
jurisdiction which is set out at para 11 of this 
order … as we consider the figure of Rs.100 M to 
be significantly large to justify the intervention of 
the NAB  being the premier anti corruption body 
in the Country …” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
The above  dictum of the Sindh High Court was endorsed by the 
Islamabad High Court in Iftikhar Ali Haideri Vs. National 
Accountability Bu reau (2019 YLR 255).   
26.   It becomes clear fr om the pronouncements of the 
Superior Courts quoted above  that the principal focus of the NAB 
is to mainly prosecute mega  scandals. But w hilst the judgments of 
the Superior Courts indic ate that the minimum pecuniary  
thresh old of NAB  should be Rs.100 million  (except in limited 
circumstances where offences less than Rs.100 million cannot be 
prosecuted by any other accountability agency) , Section 3  of the Const.P.21/2022 etc . 29
Second Amendment has increased th is minimum threshold  to 
Rs.500 million . No cogent argument was put forward by learned 
counsel for the respondent Federation as to why Parliament has 
fixed a higher amount  of Rs.500 million  for the NAB to entertain 
complaints and  file corresponding  references in the Acc ountability 
Courts when the Superior Courts  have termed  acts of corruption 
and corrupt practices  causing loss  to the tune of Rs.100 million as  
mega scandals.   
27.   It is accepted that Parliament is empowered  to legislate 
freely within its legislative competence  laid down by the 
Constitution . However,  it is also a settled principle of our 
constitutional dispe nsation that  the three organs of the State i.e., 
the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary perform distinct  
functions  and that  one or gan of t he State cannot enc roach into the 
jurisdiction of another organ. Reliance is placed on the case  of 
Mobashir Hassan  (supra ): 
“34. … It is also to be bor ne in mind that 
Constitution envisages the trichotomy of powers  
amongst three organs of the State, namely the 
legislature, executive and the judiciary. The 
legislature is assigned the task of law making , the 
executive to execute such law and the judiciary to 
interpret the laws . None of the organs  of the State 
can encroach upon the field of the others …” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
Nonetheless , by enacting Section 3 of the Second Amendment  we 
are afraid  that Parliament has  in fact assumed the powers of the 
Judiciary  because by excluding from the ambit of the NAB 
Ordinance the holders of public office who have allegedly 
committed the offence of corruption and corrupt practices involving 
an amount of less than Rs.500 million Parliament has effectively 
absolved  them from  any liability  for their acts . This is a function 
which under the Constitution  only the Judiciary can perform ( with 
the exception of the President  who has been conferred the power to Const.P.21/2022 etc . 30
grant a pardon  under Article 45 o f the Constitution). A similar view 
was also taken by the Court in  Mobashir Hassan  (supra ) when it 
was examining  the vires of Section 7 of  the National Reconciliation  
Ordinance, 2007  under which  pending  investigations and 
proceedings  initiated by  the NAB against  holders of  public office 
were wit hdrawn and terminated  with immediate effect :  
“119. So far as  withdrawal from the cases  inside 
or outside the country, as per Section 33 [A] of the 
NAO, 1999, inserted through Section 7 of the 
NRO, 2007, is concerned, it would mean that the 
‘holders of publ ic office ’ have been absolved from 
the charge of corruption and corrupt practices , 
therefore, by adopting such procedure, the 
legislative authority had transgressed its 
jurisdiction, because such powers are only 
available to the judiciary and the Constitut ion 
provides guarantee to secure the independence of 
the judiciary ...” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
28.   Learned counsel for the respondent Federation 
attempted to justify th is encroachment into the jurisdiction of the 
Judiciary  by submitting that merely because t he minimum  
pecuniary  threshold of  the NAB has been increased does not mean 
that holders of  public office stand  absolved . That other 
accountability fora  exist in the country where the trials of the 
accused holders of public office who have been removed from  the 
jurisdiction of the NAB  can be held . The Court having regard to the 
fact, as no ted abo ve in para 2 , that holders of public office  under 
the NAB Ordinance  fall into two categories i .e., elected holders of 
public office  and persons in the service of Pak istan , posed  the 
following  query to learned counsel  for th e respon dent Federation ‘if 
the Accountability  Court were to send/trans fer a Reference agains t 
a parliamentarian  [elected holders of public office]  for lack of its 
jurisdiction, then which would be the competent transferee court to 
adjudicate the Reference and under wh ich law ?’ In his written Const.P.21/2022 etc . 31
response, the learned counsel referred to the provisions of  
Prevention of Corrup tion Act, 1947  (“1947 Act ”); Pakistan Penal 
Code, 1860  (“PPC”); Income T ax Ordi nance, 2001; and  Anti-Money 
Launderin g Act, 2010. For present purposes the two relevant laws 
are the 1947 Act and the PPC. However, o n a careful examination 
of these legislations  it becomes clear that the  two are applicable 
only to pu blic servants. Public s ervant is defined in the PPC in 
Section 21 as follows:  
“21. “Public servant ”.- The words “public 
servant ” denote  a person falling under any of the 
descriptions herein after following, namely: —  
 
Second .- Every Commissioned Officer in the 
Military, Naval or Air Forces of Pakistan while 
serving under the Federal Government or any 
Provincial Government;  
 
Third .- Every Judge;  
 
Fourth .- Every officer of a Court of Justice whose 
duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report 
on any matter of law or fact, or  to make, 
authenticate, or keep any document, or to take 
charge or dispose of any property, or to execute 
any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or 
to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court; and 
every person specially authorized by a Court of 
Justice to perform any of such duties;  
 
Fifth.- Every juryman, assessor, or member of a 
panchayat assisting a Court of Justice or public 
servant;  
 
Sixth .- Every arbitrator or other person to whom 
any cause or matter has been referred for 
decision or rep ort by any Court of Justice, or by 
any other competent public authority;  
 
Seventh .- Every person who holds any office by 
virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep 
any person in confinement;  
 
Eighth .- Every officer of the Government whose 
duty it is,  as such officer, to prevent offences, to 
give information of offences, to bring offenders to 
justice, or to protect the public health, safety or 
convenience;  
 
Ninth .- Every officer whose duty it is, as such 
officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property on behalf of the Government, or to make Const.P.21/2022 etc . 32
any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of 
the Government, or to execute any revenue -
process, or to investigate, or to report, o n any 
matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the 
Government, or to make , authenticate or keep 
any document relating to the pecuniary interests 
of the Government, or to prevent the infraction of 
any law for the protection of the pecuniary 
interests of the Government, and every officer in 
the service or pay of the Government or  
remunerated by fees or commission for the 
performance of any public duty ; 
Tenth .- Every officer whose duty it is, as such 
officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any 
property, to make any survey or assessment or to 
levy any rate or tax for any secular c ommon 
purpose of any village, town or district, or to 
make, authenticate or keep any document for the 
ascertaining of the rights of the people of any 
village, town or district;  
Eleventh .- Every person who holds any office in 
virtue of which he is empowered  to prepare, 
publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to 
conduct an election or part of an election .” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
Section 2 of the  1947 Act also relies on Section 21 of the PPC to 
define public servant. Therefore, in both laws the term ‘public 
servant ’ has an identical meaning.    
29.   One example of public servants  is given  in Article 260 
of the Constitution : 
“260. Definitions. (1) In the Constitution, unless 
the context otherwise requires, the following 
expressions have the meaning hereby respectively 
assigned to them, that is to say, - 
… 
“service of Pakistan ” means any service, post or 
office in connection with the affairs of the 
Federation or of a Province , and includes an All -
Pakistan Service, service in the Armed Forces and 
any other ser vice declared to be a service of 
Pakistan by or under Act of  [Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) ] or of a Provincial Assembly, but does 
not include service as … member of a House or a 
Provincial Assembly ;” 
(emphasis s uppli ed) 
It may be noticed that under the Cons titution persons in the 
service of Pakistan are those who are holding posts in connection 
with the affairs of the Federation  or Province . As a result, suc h Const.P.21/2022 etc . 33
persons  are either  dealing with the property  of the 
Federal /Provincial Government  or with the pecuni ary int erests of 
the Federal /Provincial Government . They, therefore, come within 
the definition of public servant set out in the PPC  and adopted by 
the 1947 Act  and so can be prosecuted  under these laws for the 
offence of corruption and corrupt practices . However, elected 
holders of public office  do not qualify as  public servant s under the 
guise of being in the service of Pakistan because Artic le 260 of the 
Constitution specifically e xcludes them from such service.  Further, 
although no authoritative pronoun cement  has been delivered  in 
this r espect  by the S uperior Courts of Pakistan , the  Indian 
Supreme Court in R.S. Nayak Vs. A.R. Antulay  (AIR 1984 SC 684)  
has categorically  held that members of  the Legislative Assembly 
(equiva lent to our elected holders of pu blic office ) are not public 
serva nts within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (which is similar to Section 21 of the PPC).1 Further 
the Bangladesh S upreme Court in  Zakir Hossain Sarkar V s. State  
[70 DLR (2018 ) 203] has noted that a Member of Parliament  
(equiva lent to our elected holders of public office ) is not a public 
servant because he  is neither  appoi nted by the Government  nor 
paid by it and  he does not discharge  his constitutional duties of 
law-making in accordance  with the rules  and regulations made by 
the Executive  (para 23 of that judgment).  The result is that 
contrary to what learned counsel for the respondent Federation 
has submitted elected holders of public office  are not triable  either  
under the 1947 Act or the PPC for the  offence of corruption and 
corrupt practices.   
30.   This legal situation also explain s why the Ho lders of  
Representative  Office s (Prevention of Misconduct) Act, 1976  (“1976 
                                                
1 Later case -law from the Indian jurisdiction has included Members of the Legislative Assembly in 
the defini tion of public servant but the  said case -law does not  pertain  Section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 186 0 as the law in In dia changed in 1988.   Const.P.21/2022 etc . 34
Act”) was enacted  and Holders of  Representative  Office s 
(Punishment  for Misconduct ) Order,  1977 (“1977 Order ”) was 
promulgated. Both these laws applied only to  holders of  
representative  office i.e., elected holders of public office and  
subjected t hem to prosecution for offences similar t o those 
prescri bed in the NAB Ordinance. If th e submission of learn ed 
counsel for the respondent Federation is correct that elected 
holders of public office  can be tried under the 1947 A ct and the 
PPC then there would have been no need to pass the 1976 Act or 
the 1977 Order since both the 1947 Act and th e PPC precede these 
laws. Ultimately, the 1976 Act was repea led by the Parliament and 
Provincial Assemblies (Disqualification for Membership) 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1990 where as the 1977 Order was 
repealed by the Ehtesab Act, 1997. As n oted abo ve in para 2 , the 
Ehtesa b Act, 1997 was the predecessor of the NAB Ordinance and 
the latter repealed the former. This chain of legislative events 
show s that in 1976 Parl iament became aware of the vacuum in the 
law whereby persons in the service of Pakistan could be he ld to 
account for their corruption and corrupt practices but elected 
holders of public office  could not. Therefore, Par liament passed the 
1976 Act. Th e said Act was then succeeded  by multiple legislations 
which had the same object  i.e., accountability of elected holders of 
public office  with the NAB Ordinance being  the latest and the most 
compre hensive effort so far to accomplish this object ive.  
31.   By amending Section 5(o) of the NAB Ordinance to 
raise the minimum pecuniary threshold of the NAB to Rs.50 0 
million , Section 3 of the Second Amendment has undone the 
legislative efforts  beginning  in 1976  to bring elected holders of 
public office  within the ambit of accountability laws  because b y 
virtue of Section 3 elected holders of public office  have been 
granted  both retrospective  and pros pective  exemption from Const.P.21/2022 etc . 35
accountability  laws. Once excluded from the jurisdiction  of the 
NAB n o other accountability fora can take cognizance of their 
alleged acts of corruption and corrupt practices  as noted above . 
Such  blanket immunity  offends Articles 9 , 14, 23 and 24 of the 
Constitution  because it  permit s and encourag es the squandering of 
public assets and wealth  by elected holders of public office  as there 
is no forum for  their accountability.  This in turn affects the 
economic well -being of the State and ul timately the quality and 
dignity of the peoples lives  because as more res ources are diverted 
towards illegal activities  less resource s remain  for the provision of 
essential services  to the people  such as health facilitie s, education  
institutes  and basic infrastructure  etc. The immunity also negates  
Article 62(1)(f) of the Constitut ion which mandates that only 
‘sagacious, righteous , non-profligate, honest and ameen ’ persons 
enter Parliament. It also offends the equal treat ment command of 
Articl e 25 of the Constitution  as different ial treatment is being 
meted out to persons in the service of Pakistan than to elected 
holders of public office . This is because p ersons in the service of 
Pakistan can still be prosecuted for the o ffence of corruption and 
corrupt pract ices under the 1947 Act  as they fall within the 
definition  of public servant s (refer para 29 abo ve). The 1947 Act 
shares some of the  essential features of the NAB Ordinance, 
namely, it provides  for the prosecution of p ublic servants who have 
accumulated assets be yond means [refer Section 5(1) (e) of the 1947 
Act] and it permits the drawing of an evident iary presumptio n 
against  public servant s who cannot account for their 
disproportionate  pecuniary  resources or property [refer Section 5(3) Const.P.21/2022 etc . 36
of the 1947 Act].  Consequently, if Section 3 of the Second 
Amendment is allowed to remain on the statute book there will b e 
an anomalous  situation in that elected holders of public office  will 
be exempt ed from accountability under the am ended and much 
relaxed  requirements of the NAB Ordinance  even though they  
‘while acting as trustees and the chosen representatives of the 
people , take decisions which are often of grave consequence for the 
protection of  the economic, political and over -all national interests of 
the people of Pak istan. In other words, theirs is a fiduciar y duty of 
the highest order ’ [ref: Mehmoo d Akhtar Naqvi  Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 1089) at para 6 of Justice Jawwad S . 
Khawaja ’s concurring note ] whilst the pe rsons in the service of 
Pakistan  will have to  undergo  the rigours of accounta bility  laws 
without exception.  Such a situation cannot be  countenanced by 
either the Constitution or the law .  
32.   In this regard , we must a lso note that the learned 
coun sel for  the respondent Federation filed his concise statement 
on 12.09 .2023 wherein he has attached the decision /guideline  of 
the Chairman NAB  dated 08.08.2023  in respect of returned 
references. The decision /guideline  reads:  
“Therefore , a policy/decision has been  made by 
the competent autho rity that all References wh ich 
have been returned to  NAB shall now be placed 
before the Accountability Courts  by filing an 
application pleading this amendment as per case 
law laid down in the judgment Adam Amin 
Chaudh ry Vs NAB i n W.P. No.3787/2022 and 
requesti ng that the Reference be revived and re -
examined , the view point of the NAB be solicited 
and thereafter it be forwarded in terms of section 
4(4)(d) of the National Accountability 
(Amendment) Act, 202 3 to the appropriate 
forum .” 
(emphasis s upplied ) Const.P.21/2022 etc . 37
We have already noted above in para 6  that the 2023 Act h as 
provided a mechanism for trans ferring pending inquiries, 
investigations and references to th e relevant agency, authority, 
department, court , tribunal  or forum  if the NAB or Accountability 
Courts are seized  of these matters . But returned references can by 
no stretch of the imagination be considered as pending before  the 
Accountability Courts. Therefore, the above decision/guideline  
issued by Chairman  NAB a year after the First  Amendment  to seek 
the revival of  the 544 references  returned to the NAB  that are  lying 
in storage  to have the m forwarded  to the appropriate forum  cannot 
vest jurisdiction in the Accountability Courts to reopen cases of 
which it is no t seized. In any event , the decision/guideline  still 
does not resolve the pivotal issue i .e., that there is neither an  
accountability law other than the NAB Ordinance  and an 
investigating authority  other than the NAB nor any accountability 
forum other than the Accountability Co urt where the acts of 
corruption and corrupt practices committed by elected holders of 
public office  can be investigated and prosecuted.  The 
decision/guid eline may therefore pr ove effective only in cases of 
corruption and corrupt practices where the accuse d are persons in 
the service of Pak istan. Consequently, the decision/guideline 
issued by Chairman NAB  has no bearing on  the vires of Section 3 
of the Second Amendment  which  is unconstitutional on account of 
absolving persons accused of the offence of corru ption and corrupt 
practices without a judicial verdict  which amounts to legislative 
judgment [refer Province of Punjab Vs. National Industrial 
Cooperative Credit Corporation  (2000 SCMR 567) at para 8 ]. 
Declaration on Sect ion 3 of the Second Amendment  
A. Elect ed Holders of Public Office  
i. On account of our analysis  noted  above  in pa ras 27-
32, Section 3 of the Second Amendment  is declared to 
be ultra vires the Constitution and of no legal effect 
from the date of commencement of the Second 
Amendment.  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 38
B. Persons in t he Service of Pakistan  
ii. The cases of persons in the service of Pakistan can be 
categori sed under two headings , namely, offences 
which are common  to both the 1947 Act and the NAB 
Ordinance  and offences which are unique to the NAB 
Ordinance.   
iii. The offences whi ch are common to the 194 7 Act and 
the NAB Ordinance are  those listed in Section 9(a)(i) -(v) 
of the NAB Ordinance  whereas the offences in 9(a)(vi) -
(xii) are dist inct to t he NA B Ordinance . 
iv. Since persons in the service of Pakistan can be tried 
for offences  contained in Section 9(a)(i) -(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance under the 1947 Act the bar of Rs.500 
million shall continue for such offences. To this extent 
Section 3 of the Second Amendment is declared to be 
intra vires the Constitution . 
v. However, on account of the f act that  persons in the 
service  of Pakistan cannot be t ried for the  offences 
noted in Section 9(a)(vi )-(xii) under the 1947 Act or any 
other accountability law the bar of Rs.500 million will 
not apply to them for such offen ces. Section 3 of the 
Second Amen dment is therefore  declared to be  void 
and without legal effect  for these offences  for 
discharg ing the accused without trial  which is 
tantamount to legislative judgment and is held to be so 
from the date of commencement of the Second 
Amendment .  
Section 2 of the 2022 Amend ments  
33.   Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments has altered Section  
4 of the NAB Ordinance . For reference Section 4, as amended  by 
the 2022 Amendments, is  produced below:  
“4. Application : (1) This Ordinance extends to 
the whole of Pakistan an d shall apply to all 
persons, including those persons who are or have 
been in the service of Pakistan, except persons 
and transactions specified in sub -section (2). 
 
(2) The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be 
applicable to the following persons or 
transactions, namely: -  
 Const.P.21/2022 etc . 39
(a) all matters pertaining to Federal, Provincial or 
Local taxation, other levies or imposts, including 
refunds, or loss of exchequer pertaining to 
taxation , transactions or amounts duly covered 
by amnesty schemes of Government of P akistan ;  
 
(b) decisions of Federal or Provincial Cabinet, 
their Committees or Sub -Committees , Council of 
Common Interests (CCI), National Economic 
Council (NEC), National Finance Commission 
(NFC), Executive Committee of the National 
Economic Council (ECNE C), Central Development 
Working Party (CDWP), Provincial Development 
Working Party (PDWP), Departmental 
Development Working Party (DDWP),  Board of 
Direct ors of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), 
Board  of Tr ustees/Direct ors of all Statutory 
Bodies , the State B ank of Pakistan and such 
other bodies except where the holder of the public 
office has received a monetary gain as a result of 
such decision;  
 
(c) any person or entity who, or transaction in 
relation thereto, which are not directly or 
indirectly connected  with the holder of a public 
office except offences falling under clauses (ix), (x) 
and (xi) of sub -section (a) of section 9;  
 
(d) procedural lapses in performance of any 
public or governmental work or function, project 
or scheme, unless there is evidence  to prove that 
a holder of public office or any other person 
acting on his behalf has been conferred or has 
received any monetary or other material benefit 
from that particular public or governmental work 
or function, whether directly or indirectly on 
account of such procedural lapses, which the 
said recipient was otherwise not entitled to 
receive;  
 
(e) a decision taken, an advice, report or opinion 
rendered or given by a public office holder or any 
other person in the course of his duty, unless 
there is s ufficient evidence to show that the 
holder of public office or any other person acting 
on his behalf received or gained any monetary or 
other material benefit, from that decision, advice, 
report or opinion, whether directly or indirectly, 
which the said re cipient was otherwise not 
entitled to receive;  
 
(f) all matters, which have been decided by, or fall 
within the jurisdiction of a regulatory body 
established under a Federal or Provincial law ; and  
 
(g) all matters where the funds , property or 
interest not  involving or belonging to the 
appropriate government, except for the offences 
under  clauses (ix), ( x) or (x i) of sub -section (a) of 
section 9.” Const.P.21/2022 etc . 40
Prior to the 2022 Amendments Section 4  of the NAB Ordinance 
read: 
“4. Application : It extends to the whole of 
Pakistan and shall apply to all persons in 
Pakistan, all citizens of Pakistan  and persons who 
are or have been in the service of Pakistan 
wherever they may be, including areas which are 
part of Federally and Provincially Administered 
Tribal Areas .” 
34.   From the  comparison  of the unamended and amended  
versions of  Section 4  it becomes plain  that exceptions have been 
created for the  decisions , advice, reports , opinion s of and works,  
functions,  projects , schemes  undertaken  by holders of public office 
and publi c/governmental  bodies  unless there is evidence of the  
holder of  public officer or a person acting on his behalf having 
received monetary or other material benefit. Such exceptions are 
novel not only to the NAB Ordinance but also other accountability  
laws s uch as the 1947 Act . The rationale  behind  introducin g these 
exceptions  in the NAB Ordinance  is explained in the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons attached to the First Amendment:  
“Currently National Accountabilit y Bureau (NAB) 
is dealing with a large number  of inquiries and 
investigation in addition to ha ndling mega  
corruption  cases.  Under the existing regim e a 
number of inquiries have been initiated against 
the hol ders of Public Office and government 
servants on account of procedural lap ses where 
no actual corruption is involved. This has 
enhanced N AB’s burden and had an adverse 
impact on the working s of the Federal 
Government . Additionally, NAB has also assumed 
parallel ju risdiction and i s inquiring into matters 
pertaining to taxation , imposition of levies etc., 
and therefore interfering in the domain of tax 
regulatory bodies.  As such, a number of 
amendments have been proposed to redefine the 
operational domain of N AB.” 
The Court appreciate s the efforts of Parliament to address  and 
rectify  what has lo ng been  regarded  unguided discretion  of the Const.P.21/2022 etc . 41
NAB authorities . The Court as far back in Asfandya r Wali  (supra ) 
observed  in relation to the NAB Ordinance  that: 
“228. …To protect decision making level officers  
and the officers conducting inquiry/investigation 
from an y threats, appropriate measures must be 
taken to relieve them of the anxiety from the 
likelihood of harassment for taking honest 
decisions . 
 
229. Viewed in the above context, although 
shifting of burden of proof on an accused in terms 
of Section 9(a)(vi)(v ii) read with Section 14(d) may 
not be bad in law in its present form, but would 
certainly be counter productive in relation to the 
principle of good governance . If decision making 
level officials responsible for issuing orders, SROs 
etc. are not protected  for performing their official 
acts in good faith , the public servants and all 
such officers at the level of decision making 
would be reluctant to take decisions and/or avoid 
or prolong the same on one pretext or another 
which would ultimately lead to para lysis of State -
machinery . Such a course cannot be 
countenanced by this Court. ” 
(emphasis suppl ied) 
35.   Clearly then Section 2 of the 2022 Amendments is an 
attempt  by Parliamen t to rein in the unguided  powers of the NAB 
and to  protect the bureaucracy  from unnecessary  harassment . 
However, the exceptions  granted by Section 2 operate  as an en-
masse exemption  for holders of  public office  from facing  
accountability . The  freshly inserted  condition that  the NAB  shall 
provid e evidence of monetary or other material  benefit received b y 
the holder of  public office or a person acting on his behalf to 
overcome  the ex ception s listed in Section 2  of the 2022 
Amendments cannot be satisfied in the references  already  pending 
before the Accountability Courts . Therefor e, where  such condition 
will n ot be  met by the NAB t he result w ill be (and  in fact has been) 
that references will be returned .  In this regard, our analysis set Const.P.21/2022 etc . 42
out above  in paras 2 7-32 being  highly relevant  is adopted  because  
Section 2 of the 2022 Am endments  affects the same Fundamental 
Rights i.e., Ar ticles 9, 14,  23 24 and raises the same problems in 
terms of the accountability of elected holders of p ublic office  as 
Section 3 of the Second Amendme nt, namely, that  whilst persons 
in the service of Pakistan may sti ll be investigated and prosecuted 
under the 1947 Act  for the offences listed in Section 9(a)(i) -(v) of 
the NAB Ordinance , elected holders of public office  will not be 
amenable to the jurisdiction of any other accountability fora  for the 
offence of corrupti on and corrupt practices.  
Declaration on Sect ion 2 of the 2022 Amendments  
A. Elected Holders of Public Office  
i. For suffering from the same defects as noted above  in 
paras 27-32, Section 2 of the 2022  Amendment s is 
also declared to be  void from the date of 
commencement of the 2022  Amendment s.  
B. Persons in the Service of Pakistan  
ii. Section 2  of the 2022 Amendments  insofar as these 
pertain to the offences  set out in Section 9(a)(i) -(v) of 
the NAB Ordinance  are declared  to be intra vires the 
Constitution  because  persons in the service of 
Pakistan can be prosecuted for these offences under 
the 1947 Act.  
iii. However, Section 2  is ultra vires  the Constitution  from 
the date of commencement of the 2022  Amendment s 
for the offences listed  in Section 9(a)(vi )-(xii) because 
persons in the service of Pakistan cannot be tried for 
such offences under the 1947 Act or any  other  
accountability law.  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 43
Sections 8 and 10 of the First Amendment  
36.   Section 8 of the First Amendment has significantly 
altered Section 9 of the NAB Ordinan ce which lays down  various 
categories  of the offence of corruption and corrupt practices . For 
present purposes, the changes brought about in Section 9(a)(v) of 
the NAB Ordinance are relevant. The Sec tion as it existed prior to 
and after the First Ame ndment  is produced belo w: 
“Prior to the First Amendment  
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices : (a) A 
holder of a public office, or any other person, is 
said to commit or to have committed the offence 
of corruption and corrupt practices — 
… 
(v) if he or any of his d ependents or benamidar s 
owns, possesses, or has acquired  right or title in 
any assets or holds irrevocable power of attorney 
in respect of any assets  or pecuniary resources 
disproportionate to his known sources of income, 
which he cannot reasonably  account  for or 
maintains a standard of living beyond that which 
is commensurate with his sources of income ; 
 
After the First Amendment  
9. Corruption and Corrupt Practices : (a) A 
holder of a public office, or any other person, is 
said to commit or to have committe d the offence 
of corruption and corrupt practices — 
… 
(v) if he or any of his dependents or other 
benamidars, through corrupt and dishonest 
means , owns, possesses or acquires rights or title 
in assets substantially disproportionate to his 
known sources of i ncome which he can not 
reasonably account for.  
      Explanation I .– The valuation of immovable 
property shall be reckoned on the date of 
purchase either according to the actual price 
shown in the relevant title documents or the 
applicable rates prescribed  by District Collector 
or the Federal Board of Revenue whichever is 
higher. No evidence contrary to the later shall be 
admissible.  
      Explanation II .– For the purpose of 
calculation of movable assets, the sum total of 
credit entries of bank account sha ll not be treated 
as an asset . Bank balance of an account on the 
date of initiation of inquiry may be treated as a 
movable asset. A banking transaction shall not be 
treated as an asset unless there is evidence of 
creation of corresponding asset through tha t 
transaction .” 
(emphasis supplied ) Const.P.21/2022 etc . 44
37.   It may be noticed from the above that apart from  
reducing  the circumstances in which the offence of assets beyon d 
means can be made out  against the holder of a public office , the 
First Amendment  has mad e another  material change  in Section 
9(a)(v), namely, the obligation on the NAB to pr ove that an accused 
has accumulated substantially  disproportionate assets ‘through 
corrupt and dis honest means. ’ This element was  previously  not a 
part of Section 9(a)(v). This is evi dent from t he ingredients  of 
Section 9(a)(v) which  were well-established in the jurisprudence of 
the Court and required that the NAB prove t hat: 
i. The a ccused  is a holder of  public office ; 
ii. The nat ure and extent of the pecuniary  resources of the 
property foun d in the accused ’s possession;  
iii. The known sources of income of the accused; and  
iv. The resources  or property found in the  possession of the 
accused are objectively disproportionate to his known 
sources  of income  [ref: Muhammad Hashim Babar Vs. State  
(2010 SCMR  1697) at para 4].  
Once the NAB had established the above -mentioned four elements 
the accused was presumed to be guilty of th e offence of corruption 
and corrupt practices  unless he could account for the reso urces or 
property so rec overed from him. The NAB was not  required to  
demonstrate  that the accused had  obtained the re sources or 
property ‘through  corrupt and d ishonest means ’ because th e mere 
presence of dispropo rtionate assets  led to the presumption that the 
accused had engaged  in corrupt and d ishonest  conduct.  Such a 
presumption is provid ed in Section 14 (c) of the NAB Ordinance.  
The fact of the matter is that the proo f of acquisition of assets 
‘through corrupt and di shonest means ’ itself constitutes a 
complete offence . Therefore, b y changing Section 9( a)(v) the First Const.P.21/2022 etc . 45
Amendment has amalgamated two separate offences into one . As a 
result, t he ori ginal offence con tained in Section 9(a)( v) has  now 
been rendered redundant. To further ensure the futility of the said 
offence  all of the evidentiary  presumption s contained in Section 14  
of the NAB Ordinance  sustaining the erstwhile  offence under 
Section 9(a)(v)  and the remaining offences in the NAB Ordinance 
have been omitted  by Section 1 0 of the Fi rst Amendment . The 
presumption relevant to Section 9(a)(v)  of the Ordinance  existed in 
Section 14(c). This latter provision read:   
“14. Pres umption against accused accepting 
illegal gratification : … 
c. In any trial , of an offence punishable under 
clause (v) of sub -section (a) of section 9 of  this 
Ordinance, the fact that  the accused person or 
any other person on his behalf, is in possession, 
for which the accused person cannot 
satisfactorily account, of assets  or pecuniary 
resources disproportionate to his known source of 
income, or that such person has, at or about the 
time of the commission of the, offence with which 
he is charged, obtained an accretion to his 
pecuniary resources or property for which he 
cannot satisfactorily account , the Court shall 
presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the 
accused person is guil ty of the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices  and his 
conviction therefor  shall not be invalid by reason 
only that it is based solely on such a 
presumption. ” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
38.   Further , by th e insertion of Explanation II  to Section 
9(a)(v) entries in  bank  statements  have been removed from the 
scope of assets  whereas banking  transactions  can only be regarded 
as assets if there is evidence of the creation of a corresponding 
asset through  specific transactions.  The sour ce, object and 
quantum of credits/receipts in the bank accounts can now no 
longer be shown for proving the creation of assets. Nor can debit 
transfers from one account to another be used to show 
accumulation of mone y for the creation of an asset.  It goes without 
saying that bank  records  are usually the most pivotal evidence in Const.P.21/2022 etc . 46
financial crimes . However, by virtue of Explanation II limited resort 
can be made to them. On a first reading, the changes to Section 
9(a)(v) , the addition of Explanation II  and the omission of Section 
14(c) might appear innocuous  in nature  but their effect both 
individually and collectively has actually rendered the offence of 
corruption and corrupt practices  in the c ategory of assets beyond  
means  pointless . If accused  persons  cannot be held to account for 
owning or p ossessing as sets beyond  their means, the natural 
corollary  will be that public assets and we alth will become 
irrecoverable which would encourage further corruption . This will 
have a di rect adverse  effect on the peoples ’ right to life and  to 
public property  because  the economic well -being of the S tate w ill 
be prejudiced .  
39.   Additionally, when  other accountability laws  are 
examined in this context  such as the 1947 Act , it become obvious 
that no similar  or correspo nding changes have been made in th at 
Act in relation to the offence of assets beyon d means.  The relevant 
provisions from the 1947 Act are prod uced below for reference:  
“5. Criminal Misconduct . – (1) A public servant 
is said to commit the offence of criminal 
misconduct : 
… 
(e) If he, or any of his depend ents, is in 
possession, for which the public servant cannot 
reasonably account of pecuniary resources or of 
property disproportionate to his known sources of 
income.  
… 
(3) In any trial of an offence punishable under 
sub-section (2) the fact th at the accused person 
or any other person on his behalf is in 
possession, for which the accused person cannot 
satisfactorily account, of pecuniary resources or 
property disproportionate to his known sources of 
income may be proved, and on such proof the 
Court shall presume  unless the contrary is 
proved, that the accused person is guilty of 
criminal misconduct  and his conviction there fore 
shall not be invalid by reason only that it is based 
solely on such presumption. ” 
(emphasis sup plied) Const.P.21/2022 etc . 47
We have already hel d above in paras  29 and 31  that persons  who 
are in the service of Pakistan  can still be tried under  the 1947 Act  
for the offence of corruption and corrupt practices  even if they 
stand excluded from the jurisdiction of the NAB pursuant to the 
amendments mad e in Section 4 of the NA B Ordinance . However, 
the same cannot be said of elected holders of public office  because 
they only fall within the purview of  the NAB Ordinance. The 
amend ed Section 9(a)(v) and the omission  of Section 14(c)  would  
treat similarly pl aced persons differently  because while elected 
holders of public office  are relieved from prosecution  for the offence 
under Section 9(a)(v) , persons in the service of Pakistan will still  
have to  go through the rigors of  trial under  the 1947 Act  for the 
same offence . This would offend the equal tre atment command of 
Articl e 25 of the Constitut ion. Insofar as the  other  presumptions 
contained  in Section  14 of the NAB Ordinance  for the other 
categories  listed in Section 9( a) ibid are concerned, the same too 
stand revived as their omission will  prevent  the recovery  of public 
assets and wealth  from the holders of public office  there by 
defeating  the peoples Fundamental Rights of accessing justice and 
protecting their public property . Moreso, when  presumpt ions 
compar able to those  in Section 14(a ) [presumption as to motive]  
and (d)  [presumption as to guilt]  for the categories of ‘illegal 
gratification, ’ ‘obtaining a valuable thing without consideration, ’ 
‘fraudulent misappropriation ,’ ‘obtaining property/valuab le 
thing /pecuniary advantage through illegal means ’ and ‘misuse of 
authority ’ do not  exist in any other accountability  law, including 
the 1947 Act.   Const.P.21/2022 etc . 48
Declaration on Sect ions 8 and 10  of the First Amendment  
A. Elected Holders of Public Office  
i. For the foregoing reasons  the phrase ‘through corrupt 
and dishonest means ’ used in Section 9 (a)(v) along 
with its Explanation II  is struck down  from the NAB 
Ordinance from  the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment  for being unworkable . Additionally, 
Section 14 in its ent irety is restored  to the NAB  
Ordinance  from the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment . Sections 8 and 10 of the First 
Amendment are declared invalid to th is extent.  
B. Persons in the Service of Pakistan  
ii. The amend ment s made in Section 9(a)(v) of the NAB 
Ordinance by Section 8 of the First Amendment are 
upheld in their entirety as persons in the service of 
Pakistan can be tried for the same of fence under the 
1947 Act.  
iii. However, Section 1 0 of the First Amen dment is struck 
down from the date of commencement of t he First 
Amendment  and Sectio n 14(a), (b) and (d)  stand 
restored  to the NAB Ordinance  because suc h 
presumptions do not exist in any other accountability 
law.  
Section 14 of the First Amendment  
40.   Section 14 of the First Amendment has omitted 
Section 21(g) of the NAB Ordinance . This provision provided  that: 
“21. International Cooperation Request for 
mutual legal assistance : The Chairman NAB or 
any officer authorized by the Federal Government 
may request a Foreign State to do any or all of  the 
following a cts in accordance with the law of such 
State: — 
… 
(g) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Qanun -e-Shahadat Order 1984 (P.O. 10 of 1984) 
or any other law for the time being in force all 
evidence, documents or any other material 
transferred to Pakistan by a Foreign Government 
shall be receivable as evidence in legal 
proceedings under this Ordinance ;” 
The primary objective of Section 21(g) in particular and Section 21 
in general was explained by the Court in Mobashir Hassan  (supra ):  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 49
“99. …A perusal of ab ove Section  [21] indicates 
that on account of international cooperation, 
request for mutual legal assistance means, the 
NAB or any officer, authorized by the Federal 
Government, has been empowered to make a 
request to a Foreign State to do any or all thing s 
mentioned therein … for achieving the object to 
save the assets outside the country, allegedly 
belonging to the nation, a mechanism has been 
provided on the basis of international 
cooperation.  
… 
104. The Government of Pakistan is also 
signatory to the abo ve UN Convention  [against 
Corruption ] as it has been ratified by Pakistan on 
31st August, 2007, regarding international  
cooperation in criminal matters in accordance 
with Articles 44 to 50 of the above noted UN 
Convention, according to which, where 
appropr iate and consistent with their domestic 
legal system, the State Parties shall consider 
assisting each other in investigation or 
proceedings in civil and administrative matters, 
relating to corruption . 
… 
129. Section 21 of  the NAO,  1999  is a 
comprehensive p rovision of law , which spells out 
the nature of the  request to a Foreign State for 
mutual legal  assistance ... We believe that to curb 
the culture of corruption and corrupt practices 
globally it has become necessary to enact such 
law on the basis of which t he objects noted 
hereinabove could be achieved . 
 
130. …A perusal of UN Convention Against 
Corruption indicates that … State parties shall 
consider assisting each other in investigations of 
and proceedings in civil and administrative 
matters relating to corr uption; as well as 
affording to one another the widest measure of 
mutual legal assistance in investigations, 
prosecutions, and judicial proceedings in relation 
to the offences covered by the Convention; 
prevention and detection of transfers of proceeds 
of crime . On the other hand, the promulgation of 
the NRO, 2007, instead of preventing corruption 
and corrupt practices, has encouraged the 
same. ..” 
(emphasis supplied ) 
41.   It is a common fact that many accused persons being 
tried under the NAB Ordinance hav e stashed their wealth and 
assets abroad  in tax havens under fiduciary instruments . However , 
after the omission  of the said provision  the admissibility of foreign Const.P.21/2022 etc . 50
public documents shall be governed by  Article 89(5) of the Qanun -
e-Shahadat  Order, 1984  (“1984 Order ”) which reads:  
“89. Proof of other public documents . The 
following public documents may be proved as 
follows:  
… 
(5) Public documents of any other class in a 
foreign country,  by the original, or by a copy 
certified by the legal keeper thereof  with a 
certificate under the seal of a notary public, or of 
a Pakistan Consul or diplomatic agent, that the 
copy is duly certified by the officer having the 
legal custody of the original, and upon proof of 
the character of the document according to the 
law of f oreign country. ” 
It may be observed that the process of admitting foreign  public 
documents  under the 1984 Order is protracted and cu mbersome  
becaus e it requires either the production of the original document 
or a copy which is certified not only b y the leg al keeper of the 
document but also by the Embassy of Pakis tan. Further, the 
chara cter of the document needs to be established in accordance 
with the law of the foreign  country.  Additionally, foreign private 
documents would need to be established through th e proce dure set 
out in Articles 17 and 79 of the 1984 Order which would req uire 
that two attesting witnesses from the foreign country enter 
perso nal appearance for proving the execution of the foreign 
private document.  Such a p rocess naturally entails time  as the 
foreign evidence needs to pass through red tape.  It therefore  
defeats the purpose for which Section 21(g) was inserted into the 
NAB Ordinance  i.e., that after State cooperation led to the receipt 
of relevant  foreign  evidence the same would be direc tly admissible  
in legal pr oceedings initiated under the NAB Ordinance  without 
fulfilling the onerous conditions of A rticle 89(5) of the 1984 Ord er. 
By deleting Section 21(g)  from the NAB Ordinance  Section 14 of the 
First Amendment has made it near impossib le for relevant and  
necessary  foreign  evidence to be used in the trials of accused 
persons. It therefore offends the  Fundamental Right s of the peop le Const.P.21/2022 etc . 51
to access justice and protect  public property  from waste and 
malfeasance . 
Declaration on Sect ion 14 of the  First Amendment  
42.   Section 21(g) is he reby restored  in the NAB Ordinance 
for both elected holders of public office  and persons  in the service 
of Pakistan with effect from the date of commencement of the First 
Amendment  for facilitating  peoples right to  access justice  and for 
protect ing their public property from squander . Accordingly, 
Section 14 of the First Amendment is struck down  for being illegal . 
Section 14 of the Second Amendment  
43.   Section 14 of the Second Amendment  has insert ed two 
new provi sos to Section 25 (b) of the NAB Ordinance. The said 
provision pertains to plea bargains entered into by accused 
persons : 
“25. Voluntary return and plea bargain : … 
(b) Where at any time after the authorization of 
investigation, before or after the commencem ent 
of the trial or during the pendency of an appeal, 
the accused offers to return to the NAB the assets 
or gains acquired or made by him in the course, 
or as a consequence, of any offence under this 
Ordinance , the Chairman, NAB, may, in his 
discretion, af ter taking into consideration the 
facts and circumstances of the case, accept the 
offer on such terms and conditions as he may 
consider necessary, and if the accused agrees to 
return to the NAB the amount determined by the 
Chairman, NAB, the Chairman, NAB,  shall refer 
the case for the approval of the Court, or as the 
case may be, the Appellate Court and for the 
release of the accused : 
Provided that statement of an accused 
entering into plea bargain or voluntary return 
shall not prejudice case of any other a ccused:  
Provided f urther that in case of failure of 
accused to make paymen t in accordance with the 
plea bargain agreement approved by the Court, 
the ag reement of plea bargain shall become 
inoperative to the rights of the parties 
immediately .” 
(emphasis sup plied)  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 52
44.   For present purposes we are concerned only with the 
second provi so to Section 25(b) of the NAB Ordinance which  
renders a plea bargain  entered into by  an accused person 
inoperative if the accused fails to make the complete payment as 
approved by the Accountability Court. Read o n its own this proviso 
appears to protect  the interests of the State by ensuring pr ompt 
recovery of looted public  money and this intention is also re flected 
in the Statement of Objects and Reasons attached to the Second 
Amendment:  
“ …Section 25 is related to protect the interest of 
the Government that in case persons entering 
into plea bargain fail to make payment pursuant 
to the payment approved by the court, the plea 
bargain agreement will become infructuous. ” 
45.   However, despite the benign purposes behind 
introducing the  second  proviso to Section 25(b) , the actual effect of 
it is that it nullifies Section 25(b ) itself which was inserted in the 
NAB Ordinance  ‘to facilitate early recovery of the ill -gotten wealth 
throu gh settlement where practicable ’ [ref: Asfandya r Wali  case 
(supra ) at para 2 67] because it places no restrictions on the 
accused f rom revoking  the plea bargain entered into by h im. It is 
established law that whilst a proviso  can qualify or create an 
exception to the main section it cannot null ify the same [ ref: 
Muhammad Anwar Kurd Vs. S tate (2011 SCMR 1560) at para 
22]. Further, t he second proviso gives the accused an uninhibited  
right to withd raw from a plea bargain without obtaining the 
approval of the Ac countability Court  which in the first place 
approved  the plea bargain . The Court in the case of Asfandya r 
Wali (supra ) recognised that plea bargain  is in the nature of 
compounding  an offence and therefore  it should be subject to the 
sanction of the Account ability Court. We see no reason  and non e Const.P.21/2022 etc . 53
was advanced  by learned counsel for the respondent Federation  as 
to why the Accountability Court  should be excluded from the 
revocation  of an agreement which compounded the offence 
committed by the accused . The exclusion  of the Accountability 
Court  by the second proviso to Section 25(b) of th e NAB Ordinance 
therefore  undermine s the independence of the Judiciary  and is 
violative of Article 175( 3) of the Constitution.  
46.   Moreover, i t is an admitted fact that under t he proviso 
to Section 15 (a) of the NAB Ordinance  (disqualification to contest 
elections or to hold public office)  an accused person  who enters 
into a plea bargain suffers the same consequences as a n accused  
person who is convicted of the offence of corrupt ion and corrupt 
practices under Sectio n 9(a). Such consequence s are  that the 
accused person  either forthwith ceases to hold public office , if any, 
held by him or further stands disqualified f or a period of ten years 
for seeking or from being elected , chose n, appointe d or nominated 
as a member or representative of any public body  etc. Therefore,  
allowing  an accused person to renege from his plea bargain would  
be tantamount to  confer ring an unlawful be nefit on  him i.e., he 
would  escape the consequences stipu lated in Section 15(a)  of the 
NAB Ordinance.  
Declaration on Section 14 of the Second Amendment  
47.   The second proviso  to Section 25(b) is struck down  
from the NAB Ordinance from the date of commencement of the 
Second Amendment  for exceeding  its purpose by nullifying Section 
25(b) , for violating the independen ce of the Judiciary and for 
enabling accused persons to avoid the consequences of Section 
15(a) . As a result, Section 14 of the Second Amendment  is declared 
to be void and of no legal effect  to this extent.  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 54
Conclusion  
48.   On the basis of the above discussion the Court holds : 
i. The titled Constitution Petition is main tainable  on account of 
violating Article s 9 (security of person ), 14 (inviolability of 
dignity of man) , 24 (protection of property  rights) and 25  
(equality of citizens)  of the Constitution and for affecting the 
public at large because  unlawful  diversion of State resources  
from public  development proj ects to private use  leads to 
poverty, declining quality of life and injustice.  
ii. Section 3 of the Second Amendment  pertainin g to Section  
5(o) of the NAB Ordinance  that sets the minimum pecuniary 
threshold of the NAB at Rs .500 million  and Section 2 of the 
2022 Amendments  pertaining to Section  4 of the NAB 
Ordinance  which limits the application of  the NAB Ordinance 
by creating exceptions  for holders of public office  are 
declared  void ab initio  insofar as these  concern  the 
references filed against  elected holders of public office  and 
references filed against persons in the service of P akistan for 
the offences noted in Section 9(a)(vi) -(xii) of the NAB 
Ordinance;  
iii. Section 3 of the  Second Amendment  and Section 2 of the 
2022 Amendments  pertainin g to Sections 5(o) and 4 of the 
NAB Ordinance  are declared to be  valid for references filed 
against persons in the Service of Pakistan for the offences  
listed in Section 9(a)(i) -(v) of the NAB Ordinance ; 
iv. The phrase ‘through corrupt and dishonest means ’ inserted  
in Section 9 (a)(v) of the NAB Ordinance  along with  its 
Explanation II  is str uck down  from the date of 
commencement of the First Amendment  for references filed 
against elected holders of publ ic office . To this extent Section 
8 of the Fi rst Amendment is declared void; 
v. Section 9(a)(v)  of the NAB Ordinance , as amended by Section 
8 of the First Amendment , shall be retained for references 
filed against persons in the service of Pakistan ;  
vi. Section 14  and Section 21(g) of the  
  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 55
NAB Ordinance are restored  from the date of commencement 
of the First Amendment . Consequently , Sections 1 0 and 14 
of the First Amendment are d eclared void ; and 
vii. The second  proviso to Section 25(b)  of the NAB Ordinance is 
decla red to be invalid  from the date of commencement of the 
Second Amendment.  Therefore, Section 14 of the Second 
Amendment is void to this extent.  
49.   On account of our above  findings , all orders passed by 
the NAB and/or the A ccountability Courts placing relia nce o n the 
above Sections  are declared null and void and of no legal effect. 
Therefore , all inquiries, investigations  and references which have 
been disposed of on the basis of the struck down Section s are 
restored to their positions prior to the enactment of the 2022 
Amendments and shall be deemed to be pending before the 
relevant fora. The NAB and all Accountability Courts are directed 
to proceed with the restored procee dings in accordance with law.  
The NAB and/or all other  fora shall forthwith return the record of 
all such matters to the relevant fora and in any event not later 
than seven days from toda y which shall be proceeded with in 
accordance with law from the same stage these were at when the 
same  were disposed of/cl osed/returned . 
50.   The titled Constitution Petition is allowed  in the se 
terms . 
 
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice   
 
 
 
 Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
I dissent and have attached 
my separate note.  
Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
 Const.P.21/2022 etc . 56
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J. - I have read the judgment 
authored by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan to which my  
learned brother Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan has concurred (“ majority 
judgment ”) provided to me last night. With great respect, I could 
not make myself agree to it. Due to the paucity of time, I cannot 
fully record  reasons for my dissent and leave it for my detailed 
opinion to be recorded later. However, in view of the respect that I 
have for my learned colleagu es and for their opinion, I want to 
explain , though briefly , why I am unable to agree with them.  
2.   In my humble opinion , the primary question in this 
case is not about the alleged lopsided amendments introduced in 
the NAB law by the Parliament  but about  the paramountcy  of the 
Parliament, a house of the chosen representatives of about 240 
million people  of Pakistan. I t is about the constitutional 
importance of parliamentary democracy  and separation of powers  
between three organs of the State . It is about the limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Court comprising unelected judges , second 
judging the purpose and  policy  of an enactment p assed  by the 
Parliament , without any clear violation  beyond reasonable doubt,  
of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed under the 
Constitution  or of any other constitutional provision .  
3.  The majority judgment  has fallen short , in my humble 
opinion,  to recognize  the constitutional command that 'the State 
shall exercise its power and authority through the chosen 
representatives of the people'  and to recognize the principle of 
trichotomy of powers, which is the foundation of parliamentary 
democracy . The majority ha s fallen prey to  the unconstitutional 
objective of a parliamentarian, of transferring a political debate on 
the purpose and policy of an enactment from the Houses of the 
Parliament to the courthouse of the Supreme Court. Without 
setting out a clear and obj ective test for determining how the 
claimed right to have accountability of the parliamentarians is an 
integral part of any of the fundamental rights guaranteed under 
the Constitution, the majority judgment through a long winding 
conjectural path of far-fetched “in turn” effects has tried hard to  
“ultimately” reach an apprehended violation of the fundamental 
rights. The majority judgment  has also fallen short  to appreciate Const.P.21/2022 etc . 57
that what Parliament has done, Parliament can undo; the 
legislative power of the Parliament is never exhausted. If the 
Parliament can enact the NAB law, it can also repeal the entire law 
or amend the same.  
4.    For these and  further reason s to be recorded in my 
detailed opinion later, with great respect, I disagree with my 
learned brothers and dismiss this petition.  
 
         Sd/- 
     Judge  
 
Islamabad,  
15th September, 2023.  
Approved for reporting.  
 
  Const.P.21/2022 etc . 58
Order of the Bench  
By majority of 2:1  (Justice Syed Mansoor Ali S hah dissenting) 
Constitution Petition No.21 of 2022 is allowed . 
 
            Sd/- 
    Chief Justice  
 
            Sd/-  
Judge  
 
 
            Sd/-  
Judge  
Islamabad  
Announced on  15.09.2023.  
 
 
   Sd/-  
                      Chief Justice  
  
      
              APPROVED FOR REPORTING . 