IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
  C.M.A. NO.64 OF 2013 IN CONST.P.87 OF 2011  
AND  
C.R.P. NO.191 OF 2012 IN CONST. P.NO.87 O F 2011  
 
 
Workers Party Pakistan, etc.  … Petitioner (s)  
    
VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  … Respondent (s)  
 
 
For the Applicant/ 
Petitioner  : Mr. Bilal Hassan Minto, ASC  
   
For the Federation  : Mr. Irfan Qadir,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Di l Muhammad Alizai, DAG  
   
For the ECP  
 : Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Abdul Rehman,  
Additional Director General (Elections)  
   
Date of Hearing  : 30.04.2013  
 
ORDER  
 
  Learned counsel for the Election Commission of 
Pakistan (ECP)  stated that the ECP has already incorporated 
directions, observations and suggestions of the Court in the Code 
of  Conduct  or  the Rules framed under the Representation of the  
 
 CMA.64/13 in Const.P.87/11, etc.        - 2 - 
 
People Act, 1976 (ROPA). However, we have noticed that the 
Executives who are bound to assist the ECP for holding honest, 
free and fair general election s are required to ensure protection to 
the life and property of the citizens, voters and candidates 
throughout the country because a peaceful and congenial 
atmosphere persuades the voters, citizens and the candidates to 
show their full participation in the process of general election s 
throughout the country . There are certain areas where the life and 
property of the citizens, voters and the candidat es, prima facie,  
seem to be not protected , as has been reported in the media about 
the incidents of bomb explosions, suicides and murders, etc. 
Therefore, we direct to the Chief Secretaries of the Provinces and 
the Chief Commissioner, ICT to ensure complet e control of law 
and order situation throughout the country so the process of the 
general elections is  completed peacefully.  
2.  The learned counsel stated that the ECP is already 
focusing on this subject and on its behalf it is being ensured that all 
possible efforts/steps shall be taken  to provide peaceful and 
congenial atmosphere to the voters, citizens and the candidates so 
they  may  run  their  campaign  for  the  forthcoming  General  
 
 
 CMA.64/13 in Const.P.87/11, etc.        - 3 - 
 
Elections and also ensure their attendance at the Polling Stations 
on the day of polling for exercising the Right of Adult Franchise.  
3.  Adjourned to a date in Office after two (02) weeks.  
 
 
 
 
 CJ. 
  
 
 
 
Islamabad  J.  
30th April, 2013.  
Mahtab/*  J.  
  
 