IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
   PRESENT  
    
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaud hry, CJ   
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja   
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain   
 
 
CMA No. 19002/2012   
  in  
CONSTITUTION  PETITION No. 77 OF 2010 . 
 
President  Balochistan High Court Bar Association  … PETITIONER  
 
VERSUS   
Federation of Pakistan, etc.      …  RESPONDENTS  
 
For the petitioner(s)  Malik Zahoor Shahwani, Advocate/President 
Balochistan High Court Bar.  
Mr. Sajid Tareen, Advocate/Vice Presi dent 
Sardar Akhtar Jan Mengal  
 
For the applicants:  Mr. Nasarullah Baloch (CMA 178 -Q/2012)  
Mr. Mahmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
Ms. Tehniat Zahra, Adv./Member PIHRO (CMA 
3966/2012)  
 
For SCBAP:     
 
For Fed. of Pakistan:  Mr. Irfan Qadir, Attorney General for Pakista n 
 
For M/o Defence:   Commander Hussain Shahbaz, Dir(L)  
 
For M/o Interior:   Mr. Munir Pirach a, ASC  
    Mr. Masoodur Rehman Tanoli, Dir. NCMC  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Amanulah Kanrani, A.G.  
    Mr. Azam Khatak, A.A.G.  
    Mr. Babar Yaqoo b Fateh Muham mad,  
Chief Secy.  
 
For IG FC:    Raja Muhammad Irshad, Sr. ASC   
 
For FBR:    Rana M. Shamim, ASC  
     
Date of hearing  : 27.09.2012  Cont Pet 77 -2010  2 
 
 
            O R D E R   
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY , CJ.  Sardar Akhtar 
Jan Mengal, former Chief Minister and Head of Ba lochistan National 
party, in pursuance of direction of this Court dated 20.09.2012  
appeared to assist the Court to resolve the issue of missing persons 
and target killings of the citizens in the Province of Balochistan . He 
briefed the Court by making oral submissions and also placed on 
record extract from the book titled Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto – Afwah aur 
Haqiqat  composed by Altaf Ahmad Qureshi. He has suggested different 
ways and means to resolve the issues, which are being faced by the 
residents of the Provi nce. He has also placed on record a statement in 
writing under his signature, one of the Paras along with suggestions 
thereof reads as under: -  
 
“Before initiating a meaningful process of conflict 
resolution it is imperative that the Government of Pakista n 
should take and practically implement some measures 
which are must to build a conducive atmosphere for Baloch 
reconciliation process : -   
(1) All covert and overt military operations against the 
Baloch should immediately be suspended.  
(2) All missing persons sh ould be procured before a 
court of law.  
(3) All proxy death squads operating under the 
supervision of Inter Services Intelligence (ISI) and 
Military Intelligence (MI) should be disbanded.  
(4) Baloch political parties should be allowed to function 
and resume thei r political activities without any 
interference from intelligence agencies.  Cont Pet 77 -2010  3 
(5) Persons responsible for inhuman torture, killing and 
dumping of dead bodies of the Baloch political 
leaders and activists should be brought to justice.  
(6) Measures should be taken f or the rehabilitation of 
thousands of displaced Baloch living in appalling 
condition.   
 
After taking the above mentioned confidence building 
measures, a meaningful negotiation between the 
recognized and genuine representatives of the Baloch and 
military e stablishment could take place to decide the future 
relationship of Balochistan.”  
 
2.   On 19.09.2012,  we had asked the Chief Secretary , 
Government of Balochistan to bring the issues highlighted therein into 
notice of the Prime Minister (Chief Executive), Governor , Chief Minister 
of Balochistan  as well as the heads of the agencies . Although he had 
meetings with the  said functionaries , but it seems that so far no 
fruitful results have come out. Be that as it may, as the matter is 
pending , and is now likely t o be concluded, therefore, we direct him 
that he should bring the above suggestions of Sardar Akhtar Jan 
Mengal into the notice of the concerned authorities, including , Prime 
Minister , Heads of ISI, MI, IB, etc. As the Chief Secretary along with 
Inspector General of Police has traveled all the way from Quetta and 
realizing the importance of the issues and the hearing of the case 
before this Court, he may discuss the issue as already directed  by this 
Court  vide order referred to above, and the suggestions wh ich Sardar 
Akhtar Jan Mengal has made today in Court keeping in view the 
previous general situation in the Province of Balochistan , and give us 
the reaction in black and white of all th ose functionaries on 
28.09.2012.  Cont Pet 77 -2010  4 
3.   We place on record our thanks an d appreciation for Sardar 
Akhtar Jan Mengal who has come forward to provide assistance to this 
Court for the purpose of resolving the issues raised in the petition 
moved by the High Court Bar Association.  
 
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE   
Islamabad, 27th September, 2012  
 
  
 
   
  