 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
 (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY  
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
 
 
CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 170 OF 2013  
 
 
 
Haseeba Taimor Afridi  
…. Petitioner  
 
Versus  
 
The State & another  
…. Respondent s 
 
 
 
For the  Petitioner   Malik Waheed Anjum, ASC  
     Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
 
For the State    Mr. Asjad Javed Ghurral,  Addl. P.G.  
     a/w Mr. Imtiaz Ahmed Butt, SHO  
     Asghar Ali, S.I.  
 
For the Complainant   Mr. Z ulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta, ASC  
 
Date of hearing    05.6.2013  
 
 
ORDER  
 
  Heard learned counsel for the parties.  Learned 
Additional Prosecutor General candidly conceded that so far 
prosecution has not collected incriminating evidence against the 
petitioner to ju stify her involvement/detention.  
 
2.  We fail to understand that when there was no 
incriminating evidence  as to  why the police caused the arrest of Crl.P. 170/2013  2 
the petitioner who is stated to be of 15 years of age and 
subsequent thereto despite of subjecting her to i nvestigation no 
evidence was brought on record then why she was sent to 
judicial lockup.  In this behalf the Supervisory Officer, 
responsible to monitor the investigation of the subordinate 
officers, is equally responsible.  Not only this, the Magistrate 
Raja Faisal Rasheed who had been granting remand, should 
have also looked into the file instead of remanding the petitioner 
to police custody without any justification.  Under section 167 
Cr.P.C. it is the duty of the Magistrate to satisfy himself that 
there are grounds for believing that the accusation or 
information is well founded  for justifying custody of an accused 
with the police.   
 
3.  In the circumstances we allow ad -interim bail to the 
petitioner Haseeba Taimoor Afridi d/o Taimoor Afridi subject to  
her furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs.5,000/ - (Rupees 
five thousand) only to the satisfaction of the Ilaqua Magistrate.  
 
4.  Explanation be called for from the SSP In -charge of 
Investigation, the SHO as well as the Investigating 
Officer/Officers, named above, to state the reason for causing 
arrest and detention of the petitioner .   
 
5.  The Magistrate shall also send his explanation 
through the Sessions Judge, Rawalpindi, to explain as to why 
without adhering to the relevant provisions of law, note d Crl.P. 170/2013  3 
hereinabove, in a mechanical manner police remand was 
granted permission of judicial remand was granted followed by 
judicial remand as presently she is in custody in Adiala Jail .  
Put up on 7th June, 2013.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
05th June , 2013  
(Zulfiqar)  