IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Original Jurisdiction) 
 
 
PRESENT: 
 Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ 
 Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan 
 Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel 
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar 
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail 
 
SUO MOTO CASE NO.1 OF 2022 
(Re: ruling by the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly under Article 5 
of the Constitution qua voting on No-confidence Motion against the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan) 
 
Constitution Petition No.3 to 7 of 2022 
(Re: ruling passed on 03.04.2022 by the Deputy Speaker of the National 
Assembly on No-confidence Motion)  
 
 
 
 
 
Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians 
(PPPP) through its Secretary General  
Mr. Farhatullah Babar and others  
(in Const. P.3/2022) 
 
Supreme Court Bar Association of 
Pakistan through its President, 
Islamabad 
(in Const. P.4/2022) 
 
Pakistan Muslim League-N through its 
representative Malik Ahmed Khan 
(in Const. P.5/2022) 
 
Sindh High Court Bar Association 
through its Hon. Secretary, Karachi 
(in Const. P.6/2022) 
 
Sindh Bar Council through its Secretary, 
High Court Building, Karachi  
(in Const. P.7/2022)   …Petitioner(s)  
  
Versus 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary 
M/o Law and Justice Islamabad and 
others  
(in Const. P. 3/2022) 
 
President of Pakistan through Secretary 
to the President, Islamabad and others 
(in Const. P. 4/2022)  
 
Deputy Speaker of the Provincial 
Assembly of the Punjab and others 
(in Const. P. 5/2022) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 2
Federation of Pakistan through the 
Secretary, Islamabad and others 
(in Const.P.6/2022) 
 
Federation of Pakistan through the 
Secretary, Islamabad and others  
(in Const. P. 7/2022)   
  
 
 
 
 
…Respondent(s)  
 
 
For Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood, Addl. AGP  
Assisted by: 
Mr. M. Usman Piracha, Adv, 
Ms. Mayam Rasheed, Adv.   
Ms.Faryal Shah Afridi, Adv.   
   
For the President  : S. Ali Zafar, ASC 
S. M. Ali Bokhari, ASC 
Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. AOR 
   
For Prime Minister  : Mr. Imtiaz Rasheed Siddiqui, ASC 
Mr. Faisal Fareed, ASC 
S. Hasnain Ibrahim Kazmi, ASC 
Assisted by Ch. Atif Khan, Advocate   
   
For ECP : Mr. Sikandar Sultan Raja, CEC 
Mr. Omer Hameed Khan, Secretary   
Mr. Zafar Iqbal, Spl. Secretary  
Mr. Muhammad Arshad, DG (L) 
Mr. Khurram Shahzad, ADG(L) 
   
For SCBA : (SMC 1 & Const.P.4/22) 
Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, ASC 
Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, ASC (President) 
Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik, ASC 
(Secretary)  
Mr. Khawar Ikram Bhatti, ASC  
S. Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR 
Assisted by: Mr. Umair Ahmed, Adv.  
Asfand Yar Khan, Adv. 
   
For PPPP : (SMC 1 & Const.P.3/22) 
Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC 
Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari 
Mian Raza Rabbani, ASC 
Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC 
Mr. Azam Nazir Tarar, ASC 
Raja Shafqat Abbasi, ASC 
Sardar M. Latif Khan Khosa, Sr. ASC 
Sardar Shahbaz Ali Khan Khosa, ASC  
S. Rifaqat Hussain Shah, ASC SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 3
Assisted by:  
Barrister Shiraz Shaukat Rajpar 
   
For BNP (M) : Mr. Mustafa Ramday, ASC 
Mr. Rashid Hafeez, ASC 
assisted by:  
Mr. Ahmed Javaid, Advocate  
Mr. Akbar Khan, Advocate 
Ms. Zoe Khan, Adv.  
   
For ANP : Mr. Babar Yousafzai, ASC 
Mr. M. Sharif Janjua, AOR 
   
For PML(N) : (SMC 1/2022) 
 
Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC 
Mian Shahbaz Sharif  
(Opposition Leader)   
Assisted by:  
Mr. Saad M. Hashmi, Adv.  
Mr. Sarmad Hani, Adv.  
Mr. Yawar Mukhtar, Adv. 
Mr. Ammar Cheema, Adv. 
 
(Const. P. 5/2022) 
Ch. Sultan Mehmood, ASC 
Mr. Khalid Ishaq, ASC 
Mr. Azam Nazir Tarar, ASC 
S. Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR 
   
For PML : Mr. Imtiaz Rasheed Siddiqui, ASC 
S. Hasnain Ibrahim Kazmi, ASC 
Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. AOR 
   
For PTI  : Dr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC 
Mr. Azhar Siddiqui, ASC 
Mr. Ahmed Nawaz Ch. AOR 
For JUP : Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC 
Qari Abdul Rasheed, ASC 
   
For Dy. Speaker, NA  : Mr. Naeem Bokhari, ASC 
Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR 
 :  
For Sindh : Mr. Salman Talibuddin, AG  
(V.L. Karachi) 
Mr. Sibtain Mehmood, Addl. AG  
(V.L. Karachi) 
Mr. Fawzi Zafar, Addl. AG 
(V.L. Karachi)  
   
For Punjab  : Mr. Ahmed Awais, AG Punjab 
   
For Balochistan  : Mr. Asif Reki, AG  
Mr. M. Ayaz Sawati, Addl. AG SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 4
   
For KP : Mr. Shumial Butt, AG 
Mian Shafaqat Jan, Addl. AG 
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Addl. AG 
   
For ICT : Mr. Niazullah Khan Niazi, AG 
   
For M/o Interior  : Mr. M. Ayub, Addl. Secretary   
Mr. M. Naeem Saleem, Dy. Secretary  
   
For NA : Mr. Abdul Latif Yousafzai, ASC 
Mr. M. Mushtaq, Addl. Secretary   
Mr. Haq Nawaz, SO 
   
For SHCBA & SBC  : Const.P. 6 & 7/2022 
Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC 
Mr. Haider Imam Rizvi, ASC 
Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahzad, AOR 
   
Date of Hearing : 07.04.2022 
 
O R D E R 
 
   For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject 
to what is set out therein by way of amplification or otherwise, 
these matters are disposed of in the following terms: 
1.   The ruling of the Deputy Speaker of the National 
Assembly (“Assembly”) given on the floor of the House on 
03.04.2022 (“Ruling”) in relation to the resolution for a vote of 
no-confidence against the Prime Minister under Article 95 of the 
Constitution (“Resolution”) (for which notice had been given by 
the requisite number of members of the Assembly on 
08.03.2022, and in relation to which leave was granted to move 
the Resolution on 28.03.2022), and the detailed reasons for the 
Ruling (released subsequently and concurred with by the 
Speaker) are declared to be contrary to the Constitution and the 
law and of no legal effect, and the same are hereby set aside. SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 5
2.   In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the Resolution was pending and subsisting at all times and 
continues to so remain pending and subsisting. 
3.  In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
at all material times the Prime Minister was under the bar 
imposed by the Explanation to clause (1) of Article 58 of the 
Constitution and continues to remain so restricted. He could not 
therefore have at any time advised the President to dissolve the 
Assembly as contemplated by clause (1) of Article 58. 
4.   In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the advice tendered by the Prime Minister on or about 
03.04.2022 to the President to dissolve the Assembly was 
contrary to the Constitution and of no legal effect. 
5.   In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the Order of the President issued on or about 03.04.2022 
dissolving the Assembly was contrary to the Constitution and of 
no legal effect, and it is hereby set aside. It is further declared 
that the Assembly was in existence at all times, and continues to 
remain and be so. 
6.   In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
all actions, acts or proceedings initiated, done or taken by 
reason of, or to give effect to, the aforementioned Order of the 
President and/or for purposes of holding a General Election to 
elect a new Assembly, including but not limited to the 
appointment of a care-taker Prime Minister and Cabinet are of 
no legal effect and are hereby quashed. SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 6
 
7.   In consequence of the foregoing, it is declared that 
the Prime Minister and Federal Ministers, Ministers of State, 
Advisers, etc stand restored to their respective offices as on 
03.04.2022. 
8.   It is declared that the Assembly was at all times, 
and continues to remain, in session as summoned by the 
Speaker on 20.03.2022 for 25.03.2022 (“Session”), on the 
requisition moved by the requisite number of members of the 
Assembly on 08.03.2022 in terms of clause (3) of Article 54 of 
the Constitution. Any prorogation of the Assembly by the 
Speaker prior to its dissolution in terms as stated above is 
declared to be of no legal effect and is set aside. 
9.   The Speaker is under a duty to summon and hold a 
sitting of the Assembly in the present Session, and shall do so 
immediately and in any case not later than 10:30 a.m. on 
Saturday 09.04.2022, to conduct the business of the House as 
per the Orders of the Day that had been issued for 03.04.2022 
and in terms as stated in, and required by, Article 95 of the 
Constitution read with Rule 37 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in the National Assembly Rules, 2007 
(“Rules”). 
 
10.   The Speaker shall not, in exercise of his powers 
under clause (3) Article 54 of the Constitution, prorogue the 
Assembly and bring the Session to an end, except as follows: SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 7
a. If the Resolution is not passed by the requisite 
majority (i.e., the no-confidence resolution is 
defeated), then at any time thereafter; 
b. If the Resolution is passed by the requisite majority 
(i.e., the no-confidence resolution is successful), 
then at any time once a Prime Minister is elected in 
terms of Article 91 of the Constitution read with 
Rule 32 of the Rules and enters upon his office. 
 
11. If the Resolution is passed by the requisite majority (i.e., 
the no-confidence resolution is successful) then the Assembly 
shall forthwith, and in its present Session, proceed to elect a 
Prime Minister in terms of Article 91 of the Constitution read 
with Rule 32 of the Rules and all other enabling provisions and 
powers in this behalf and the Speaker and all other persons, 
including the Federal Government, are under a duty to ensure 
that the orders and directions hereby given are speedily 
complied with and given effect to. 
12.   The assurance given by the learned Attorney 
General on behalf of the Federal Government in C.P. 2/2022 on 
21.03.2022 and incorporated in the order made in that matter 
on the said date shall apply as the order of the Court: the 
Federal Government shall not in any manner hinder or obstruct, 
or interfere with, any members of the National Assembly who 
wish to attend the session summoned as above, and to 
participate in, and cast their votes, on the no confidence 
resolution. It is further directed that this order of the Court shall 
apply both in relation to the voting on the Resolution and (if 
such be the case) in relation to the election of a Prime Minister SMC No.1 of 2022 etc. 
 8
thereafter. It is however clarified that nothing in this Short 
Order shall affect the operation of Article 63A of the Constitution 
and consequences thereof in relation to any member of the 
Assembly if he votes on the Resolution or (if such be the case) 
the election of a Prime Minister thereafter in such manner as is 
tantamount to his defection from the political party to which he 
belongs within the meaning of the said Article. 
13.   The order of the Court made in SMC 1/2022 on 
03.04.2022 to the following effect, i.e., “Any order by the Prime 
Minister and the President shall be subject to the order of this 
Court” shall continue to be operative and remain in the field, 
subject to this amplification that it shall apply also to the 
Speaker till the aforesaid actions are completed. 
 
 
    
 CHIEF JUSTICE 
 
 
 
 JUDGE 
 
 
  
 JUDGE 
 
 
  
 JUDGE 
 
 
  
  
 
Islamabad 
07.04.2022 JUDGE 
 
 
   APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  