IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, HCJ 
Mr. Justice Faisal Arab  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
    
Suo Moto Case No.1 of  2020  
[SUO MOTO ACT ION REGARDING COMBATING THE PANDEMIC OF CORONA VIRUS (COVID -19)] 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood, DAG  
Mr. Farrukh Shahzad,  Assistant AGP  
Mr. Adrees Mehsood, Member, NDMA  
Dr. Atta-ur-Rehman, Additional Secretary,  
M/o NHSR&C  
Dr. Falak Naz, D.G., Plant Protection  
For ICT  : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi,  
Advocate  General , Islamabad . 
Mr. Hamza Shafqat, DC ICT  
Mr. Waseem Ahmed ,  
Addl. Dy. Commissioner  
Mr. Amer Naveed , Asst. Dir (Lit)   
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, Acting A dvocate  General  
Barrister Hassan Khalid Ranjha, AAG  
Mr. Ahmed Javed Qazi, Secretary LG  
Mr. Muhammad U sman, Secretary,  
Primary & Secondary  Health  Department  
Mr. Wasif Khurshid, Secretary Agriculture  
Mr. M. Nabeel Ahmed Awan , Secretary,   
Specialized Health Care & Medical Education  
Raja Khurram Shahzad Umar, D.G., PDMA  
 (all via video link from Lahore Branch)  
Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl. A.G. Punjab  
   
For Govt. of Sindh  
 : Mr. Salman Talibudin, Advocate General 
Mr. M. Usman Chachar,  
Addl. Chief Secretary  Home  
Mr. Kazim Hussain Jatoi, Secretary Health  
Qazi Shahid Pervaiz, Sr. M.B.R.  
Mr. Iftikhar Shalwani,  
Commissioner Karachi  
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi,  
Focal Person to Chief Secretary Sindh  
Mr. Mazhar Hussain  Alvi, AIGP (L)  
Mr. Mushtaq Ahmad, AIGP (L -1) 
Mr. Amanullah Zardari, Focal Person  
Syed Muhammad Shayyan Shah,  
Deputy Director, PDMA  
 (all via video link from Karachi Branch)  Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 2
   
For Govt. of KPK  
 : Mr. Shumail Butt, A dvocate  General,   
Syed Imtaiz Ali Shah , Secretary Health  
Mr. Kamran Khan, Secretary Labour  
Mr. M. Idrees  Khan , Secretary  Zakat  
Mr. Motasim Billah Shah ,  
Special Secy . (Local Govt .) 
Mr. M. Israr, Secy. Agriculture  
Mr. Adil Iqbal,  Special Secretary Health  
Mr. Mubbashir Raza,  D.S., Ushr & Zakat  
Mr. Naveed Khan,  Director Plants  
Syed Wilayat Shah, Dir . Operations  
(all via video link from Peshawar Branch)  
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Addl. A.G.  
   
For Govt. of 
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir,  
Advocate  General  
( via video link from Quetta Branch)  
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl.  A.G. 
   
For Govt. of GB  : Nemo  
 
For P MA  
:  
Syed Iqbal Hashmi, ASC  
 
For Pakistan  
Bait-ul-Mal : Syed Mansoor Hussain Gardezi,  
Deputy Legal Advisor  
   
Voluntarily 
Appeared  : Mr. Farhat Nawaz Lodhi, ASC  
   
In C.M.A. 
No.3099/20 20 : Mr. Samuel Payara,  
Chairman, Implementation of Minority  
Rights Forum  
(via video link from Lahore Branch)  
   
Date of Hearing  : 25.06.2020  
 
ORDER  
 
 Gulzar Ahmed, CJ. - We have heard the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan, Acting Advocate General, P unjab, Advocate 
General, Sindh, Advocate General KPK and Advocate General 
Balochistan .  
2.  Reports have been filed by the National Disaster 
Management Authority ( NDMA ), the Plant Protection Department , 
ICT, Government s of the Punjab, Sindh and of KPK so also by 
Government of Gilgit B ultistan . All these Reports have been examined 
by us  and are taken on record .  
3.  The Report submitted by NDMA lacks  some particular s, in 
that, it does not provide details of the import of machinery  Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 3
undertaken by M/s Al -Hafeez  Crystoplast (Pvt.) Ltd . for the 
manufacture of N-95 Masks in Pakistan . Copy of LC and other import 
documents have not been filed . The Airway Bill show s that the value 
of the machinery  has not been declared. It is not clear whether the 
machinery  was import ed by this Company and if it was  so, whether it 
paid any taxes and duties on the machinery , and for whom these N-
95 Masks  were supplied . If NDMA was the purchaser  of N-95 Masks 
produced by th is company than NDMA could not have been the 
facilit ator o f this Company for the import of machinery . The 
documents indicate that NDMA itself charte red an aircraft for airlifting 
the machinery , as noted from the letter dated 26.04.2020 of NDMA 
filed a s Annexure -II. Flight clearance was sought from the Chinese 
Government  through the Pakistan Embassy , and w hether the facilitation 
provided to this Company was also made available to other business 
entities in Pakistan by publication in newspapers, etc. No  publication 
of this nature has been filed by NDMA. It appears that thi s Company 
has been favour ed by NDMA for import of machinery  for making of N -
95 Mask and then supplying the same to the NDMA. NDMA is 
directed to provide details of purchases of N -95 Masks from this 
company or any third party and money paid to this Company or its 
agent s. Further , documents rel ating to payment of dues and taxes by 
this Company may also be filed. NDMA should also explain why this 
Comp any was given special favour by it for import of the machinery . 
The source from which the money was paid for th e purchase of 
machinery  should also be disclosed.  
4.  We also note that NDMA has sought approval from the 
Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan for import of un-registered 
drugs, i.e. 7000 Vials of Remdesivir Injection for use of p atients . The Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 4
Drug Regula tory Authority of Pakist an through its letter dated 
09.06 .2020  has given NOC o n the following conditions:  
“Conditions: - 
   
* Keeping in view the current situation of COIVID -19 
pandamic DRAP is issuing this NOC. However, this 
NOC shall be subject to conditi ons that NDMA shall 
submit the details of patients including their CNIC 
& prescriptions.  
 
* The Drug Regulatory Authority of Pakistan shall not 
be responsible for the quality, safety and efficacy of 
the above mentioned drug as the drug is not 
registered wi th the Drug Regulatory Authority of 
Pakistan.  
 
* This approval is issued under rule 13 of Drugs 
Import & Export Rules, 1976, which is a prior 
approval and shall not be applicable  on Drug(s) 
already imported. ” 
 
No material has been submitted before this Cou rt to show that these 
conditions were m et by NDMA.  
5.  As far as the question of Locust is concerned, the report shows 
that NDMA is procuring aircraft s, equipment vehicles and 
chemicals/pesticides from abroad , and making all efforts to       
subdue to effect of locus t in Pakistan and ensure that the cr ops are 
saved from damage. We note that four Beaver aircrafts which  belong to 
the Plant Protection Department , are still not operation al for the 
reason that pilots to fly them are not available. This was also stated on 
the last date of hearing. Now, in the Report , it is mentioned that 
Ministry of Food Security has recruited Pilots who are under training 
and will start operating the aircraft soon. Out of four Beaver Planes,  
three are meant to spray pesticides while one is retain ed for providing 
training to the Pilots.  
6.  The learned Attorney General for Pakistan was asked 
about the availability of trained and qualified pilots in Pakistan  and 
the system for their certification and licensing. His attention was 
drawn to the statement of the worth y Minister of Aviation, yesterday Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 5
made on the flo or of the Parliament that pilots flying planes in 
Pakistan have fake flying licenses. If that is true, we are shocked to 
learn that aircraft including  commercial  aircraft  are allowed to be 
flown by pilot s who have fake de grees and licenses.  This poses serious 
danger to life and safety of citizens.   
7.  As far as the issuing of pilot licenses are concerned, it is the 
function of the Civil Aviation Authority . The Director Genera l, Civil 
Aviation Authority is directed to appear before  this Court on the next 
date of hearing and explain why the Civil Aviation Aut hority has not 
traced fake pilot licens es and taken appropriate action in accordance 
with law. It shall also be explained how and why pilots with fake 
educational degrees and/or licen ces are being allowed to be employed 
by the airlines in Pakistan and operate passenger aircraft putting   
lives at risk, which is a serious offence under the law. A 
comprehensive Report shall be filed by the Director General, Civil 
Aviation Authority within two weeks  giving details of :  
i. Total number of Licenses issued;  
ii. Total number of pilots in employment of PIA;  
iii. Verification of degrees and licenses;  
iv. How many pilots with fake degre es and/or licenses have 
been found; and  
v. What action have been taken against them;  
8.  The C EOs of the Pakis tan International Airlines, Air Blue 
and Se reneAir will also appear in Court on the next date of hearing 
with an advance report regarding the present status of pilots 
verification of their educational d egrees and pilot licens es from the 
Civil Aviation Authority . The respondents shall give a list of pilots 
employed  which   shall  be  accompanied by copies of their educational  
 Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 6
testimonials and licen ses.  
 
9.  We note that the Sindh Government has announced its 
Budget for the year 2020 -2021 . It seems that it has not allocated any 
funds for the development schemes in the Province generally and for 
the city of Karachi particularly . Instead it  has made a n allocation of 
about Rs.4 billion for purchas e of luxury vehicles for the use of 
employees of the Sindh Government. We also note that the Sin dh 
Government has made an allocation of about Rs.100 billion for non -
development purposes in the said Budget. In t he absence of funds for 
allocation of new development schemes in the  Province and 
particular ly in Karachi , the Sindh Government has made an allocation 
of about Rs.4 billion for importing of luxury vehicles from abroad , like 
Double -Cabin  Vigo and Parado . We are at a loss to understand  how and 
under what provision of law this has been done . The Sindh 
Government already possesses large number of vehicles for its 
employees and vehicles are also available  from various projects to 
those employees funded by foreig n agencies .  
10.  The Sin dh Government , in its Report submitted before  this 
Court by way of Civil Misc. Application No.3574 of 2020 , has stated 
that it has no funds for payment of salaries to the Sanitary Staff of 
WASA/Hyderabad D evelopment  Authority  (HDA) and that through a 
summary , approved by the Chief Minister , an amount of Rs. 140 
million has been approved for payment of salaries to the Sanitary Staff 
for the months of March and April, 2020 . For the payment of salary of 
seven months , another summary to the Chief Minister has been 
initiated and approved on 10.06.2020. It is further mentioned that for 
permanent solution of payment of salaries to the Sanitary Staff of the 
employee s of HDA,  the Board of Directors  of  HDA  in  its  last  meeting  Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 7
has increase d water charges by 20 % from all consumers. In this state 
of affairs allocation of Rs.4 Billion for purchase of luxury vehicles is a 
matter of grave concern .  
11.  There is also hue and cry in the media regarding non -
clearance of Gujjar  Nala in Karachi . The start of Monsoon  season is 
seriously threatening the people of Karachi . The drains  in the city have 
not been cleaned  which will lead to flooding and spread of diseases in 
the city . The City Government claims  that there are no funds to clean 
the drains . The Sindh Government needs to arrange funds for cleaning 
of the drains to save citizens from hardship  and disease during the 
Monsoon season .  
12.  We have also been informed that , there is no supply of 
water to the people at their homes , and even electricit y is in short 
supply necessitation long period s of load shedding . There are up to 18 
hours ’ load shading of electricity in the city of Karachi and other cities 
of Province of Sindh. The Province of Sindh is being hit by  a  heat-
wave and in the absence  of electricity , the people of Sindh have 
nothing  on the basis of whi ch they can survive at a human level . These 
extreme hardships are plying hav oc with the  lives of  people  and their 
right to life, which is a fundamental right is being denied to them .  
13.  In the circumstances, prima facie , we find that the 
allocation of funds of about Rs.4 billion for importing of luxury 
vehicles is not justifiable  looking at the ground realities prevailing in 
the Province of Sindh . The Province needs  to allocat e funds in 
education, health, water -supply , infrastructure developments and 
safety of people. Thus, till the next date of haring we restrain  the 
Government  of Sindh  from incurring from the budget , 2020 -2021 
expenses for the procurement of vehicles through  import or loca l 
procurement , as noted above.  Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 8
14.  We have also asked the Advocates General of the Punjab, 
KPK and Bal uchistan about allocation of funds in the Budget 2020 -
2021,  for procurement of vehicles.  They have made categorical  
statements  that in the budget of the respective provinces for the year 
2020 -2021 , no allocation of funds for procurement  of vehicles has 
been made by the respective Provinces and further, that they have 
allocated funds for the development schemes in the Province s. 
15.  The learned Attorney Ge neral for Pakistan has  also 
informed us that the Federal Government is preparing a uniform policy 
in consultation with the provinces for application across the countr y to 
deal with the CO VID-19 epidemic , which also includes  incentives, 
protective equipment  and other facilities for the  Doctors and other 
health care staff.  Let a comprehensive report in this regard be filed 
before the next date of hearing.  
16.  We also note that unscrupulous  elements are hoarding 
anti-virus chemicals,  life saving drugs and equi pment used to detect, 
monitor and treat patients affected by Coronavirus (COVID -19). As 
basic instruments  as  oximeters  have  disappeared   from   the 
market and are being sold at exorbitant  prices. Likewise oxygen  
cylinders which are necessary to save l ives have disappeared from the 
market are being hoarded and sold at excessive prices. Effective steps 
have not been taken to remedy such illegal and unethical practices 
either at the Federal or the Provincial level. We therefore, direct the 
relevant regula tory authorities, enforcement agencies and respective 
health ministries of the Federal as well as Provincial Governments as 
follows:  
(i) Strict action in accordance with law be taken against  
hoarders of anti -virus chemicals, life savi ng drugs, oxygen  Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020  
 9
cylinders and equipment used to detect, monitor and treat 
patients affected by Coronavirus (COVID -19);  
(ii) Ensure availabi lity of all requisite equipment  used for 
detection, monitoring and treatment of the disease at 
reasonable prices;  
(iii) Ensure adequate a nd sufficient supply and availability of 
drugs , oxygen and equipment  used in treatment  of the 
disease at reasonable prices;  and  
(iv) The Drug Regulatory Authority shall fast track registration 
of drugs which have already been registered in USA and 
Europe and are used for treatment of Coronavirus 
(COVID -19) to facilitate import of such drugs if not 
manufactured locally and also facilitate local production 
under license   on fast track basis.  
A comprehensive report in this regard shall be filed by DRAP as we ll as 
the Federal and Provincial Governments, ICT and Government of Gilgit 
Baltistan before the next date of hearing.  
17.  Adjourned to a date after three weeks.   
   
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
25th June, 2020  
‘approved  for reporting ’ 
Mahtab/*  
 