IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 Present : 
 Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
 Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
 Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
 Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
 Justice Munib Akhtar  
 Justice Yahya Afridi  
 Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi  
 Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
 Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
 Justice Athar Minallah  
 Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
 Justice Shahid Waheed  
 Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33 of 2023  
[Challenging the vires of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023]  
 
 
Raja Amer Khan and another  
(in Const. P. 6/2023)  
 
Chaudhry Ghulam Hussain and another  
(in Const. P. 7/2023)  
 
Muhammad Shafay Munir,  Advocate High Court, Lahore  
(in Const. P. 8/2023)  
 
Zaman Khan Vardag, Advocate Supreme Court, Lahore  
(in Const. P. 10/2023)  
 
Ghulam Mohiuddin  
(in Const. P. 11/2023)  
 
Muhammad Azhar Siddique, ASC  
(in Const. P. 12/2023)  
 
Muhammad Shahid Rana, Advocate  
(in Const. P. 18/2023)  
 
Mudassar Hassan Jura  
(in Const. P. 19/2023)  
 
Niazullah Khan Niazi  
(in Const. P. 20/2023)  
 
Umar Sadiq  
(in Const. P. 33/2023)  
         … Petitioners  
Versus  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 2 
 
Federation of Pakistan through the Secretary,  
Law and Justice Division, Ministry of Law and  
Justice, Islamabad and others  
(in all cases).  
         … Respondents  
 
For the Petitioners:  
 
(in Const. P. 6/2023):   Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, ASC  
     Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR  
   
(in Const. Ps. 6, 7 & 12/23):  Khwaja Tariq A. Rahim, Sr. ASC  
     assisted by Mr. Hashim and Mr. Hissam  
     Mr. Sabeel, Advocates  
  
(in Const. P. 8/2023):  Mr. Muhammad Hussain Choutya, ASC  
 Mrs. Kausar Iqbal Bhatti, AOR.  
 
(in Const. P. 10/2023):   In-person   
 
(in Const. P. 11/2023):   In-person  
 
(in Const. P. 18/2023):   In-person  
 
(in Const. P. 19/2023):   Mr. Hassan Irfan Khan, ASC  
     assisted by Mr. Saqib Asghar, Advocate.  
 
(in Const. P. 20/2023):   Mr. Muhammad Ikram Ch., Sr. ASC  
     assisted by Messrs Sohail Akhtar, Najmul  
     Hassan and Malik Haroon, Advocates.  
 
(in Const. P. 33/2023):   Dr. Adnan Khan, ASC.  
 
On Court Notice:  
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
     Attorney -General for Pakistan and  
     Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
     assisted by Ms. Maryam A. Abbasi,  
     Maryam Rashid,  
     Ahmed -ur-Rehman and  
     Saad Javid Satti, Advocates.  
    
For PML (N):    Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC.  
     
For PPPP:     Nemo  
 
For PTI:     Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari, ASC  
     Assisted by Mr. Ali Uzair Bhandari and  
     Mr. Awais Asif Ali, Advocates.  
 
For PML(Q):    Mr. Zahid F. E brahim, ASC.  
 
For JUI(P):     Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC.  
 Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 3 
For Jamat -e-Islami:   Mr. Ghulam Mohyuddin Malik, ASC  
     and Mr. Saifullah Gondal, Member  
     Central Legal Committee, Ja mat-e-Islami.  
      
For MQM:     Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC as sisted by  
     Mr. M. Usman Mumtaz and  
     Ms. Sheza Ahmed, Advocates.  
 
For SCBAP:    Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC,  
Mr. Muqtadir Akhtar Shabbir, ASC,  
Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, ASC  
Ms. Bushra Qamar, ASC,  
assisted by Ms. Amna Khalili, Advocate.  
 
For PBC:     Mr. Haroon -ur-Rasheed, ASC and  
Mr. Hassan Raza Pasha, ASC.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
 
Dates of Hearing:    18.9.2023, 3.10.2023, 9.10.2023  
10.10.2023 and 11.10.2023.  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . These petitions, which were filed directly under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan („ the 
Constitution ‟), were disposed of on 11 October 2023, as under:  
„For reasons to be recorded later these petitions are decided 
as under:  
 
1. Subject to paras 2 and 3 below, by a majority of 10 to 
5 (Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, Justice Munib Akhtar, Justice 
Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, Justice Ayesha A. Malik 
and Justice Shahid Waheed dissenting) the Supreme Court 
(Practice and Procedure) Act, 202 3 („the Act ‟) is sustained as 
being in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan („ the Constitution ‟) and to this extent 
the petitions are dismissed.  
 
2. By a majority of 9 to 6 (Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, Justice 
Munib Akhtar, Justi ce Yahya Afridi, Justice Sayyed Mazahar 
Ali Akbar Naqvi, Justice Ayesha A. Malik and Justice Shahid 
Waheed dissenting) sub -section (1) of section 5 of the Act 
(granting a right of appeal prospectively) is declared to be in 
accordance with the Constitution and to this extent the 
petitions are dismissed.  
 
3. By a majority of 8 to 7 (Chief Justice Qazi Faez Isa, 
Justice Sardar Tariq Masood, Justice Syed Mansoor Ali 
Shah, Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan, Justice Jamal Khan 
Mandokhail, Justice Athar Minallah and Justic e Musarrat 
Hilali dissenting) sub -section (2) of section 5 of the Act 
(granting a right of appeal retrospectively) is declared to be 
ultra vires  the Constitution and to this extent the petitions 
are allowed.‟  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 4 
 
2. Constitution Petition Nos. 6 to 8 of 2023 w ere filed when a bill was 
presented in the National Assembly, titled Supreme Court (Practice and 
Procedure) Bill, 2023 („ the Bill ‟). A smaller Bench of this Court1 had heard 
these and other connected petitions and passed order dated 13 April 2023, 
which co ncluded as under:  
„14. This brings us to the question whether it would be 
appropriate to make any interim order in relation to the 
present matter. In Dr. Mobashir Hassan and others v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others PLD 2010 SC 265 the Full 
Court (17 mem ber Bench) observed (at para 164, pg. 451) 
that “ordinarily the provisions of a law cannot be suspended 
because this Court can only suspend a particular order, 
judgment or action, etc….” (emphasis supplied). In our view, 
the facts and circumstances present ed here are 
extraordinary both in import and effect. Prima facie the 
contentions raised disclose that there is a substantial, 
immediate and direct interference with the independence of 
the judiciary in the form of multiple intrusions, in the guise 
of regul ating the practice and procedure of this Court and 
conferring upon it a jurisdiction that appears not to be 
permissible under any constitutional provision. Such 
intermeddling in the functioning of the Court, even on the 
most tentative assessment, will comm ence as soon as the 
Bill becomes the Act. Accordingly, in our view an interim 
measure ought to be put in place, in the nature of an 
anticipatory injunction. The making of such an injunction, to 
prevent imminent apprehended danger that is irreparable, is 
an appropriate remedy, recognized in our jurisprudence and 
other jurisdictions that follow the same legal principles and 
laws. It is therefore hereby directed and ordered as follows. 
The moment that the Bill receives the assent of the President 
or (as the ca se may be) it is deemed that such assent has 
been given, then from that very moment onwards and till 
further orders, the Act that comes into being shall not have, 
take or be given any effect nor be acted upon in any manner.  
 
15. Notices be issued to the respondents in all three 
petitions. Notice also to the Attorney General for Pakistan 
under O. 27A CPC. Notices also to the Supreme Court Bar 
Association through its President and the Pakistan Bar 
Council through its Vice Chairman. Notices also be issued to 
the following political parties who may, if they so desire, 
appear through duly instructed counsel: Pakistan Muslim 
League (N) (PML (N)), Pakistan Peoples Party 
Parliamentarians (PPPP), Pakistan Tehreek e Insaf (PTI), 
Jamiat Ulema  e Islam (JUI), Jamaat e Islami (JI), Awami 
National Party (ANP), Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), 
Balochistan Awami Party (BAP) and Pakistan Muslim League 
(Q) (PML (Q)).  
 
                                                 
1 Comprising of the Chief Justice and seven Judges.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 5 
16. To come up on 02.05.2023 at 11:30 a.m. ‟ 
 
3. Subsequently, the Bill became law on 21 April 2023, that is,  the 
Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 20232 („the Act ‟). On 2 May 
2023 it was ordered that the aforesaid, „ injunction continues and shall 
continue to be in force against the Act till further orders. ‟ Hearing took place 
on 8 May 2023, 1 June 2023 and 8 June 2023, and on 8 June 2023 it was 
ordered that these cases be listed for hearing in July 2023. However, the 
petitions were not fixed in July nor in August 2023.  
 
4. The Bench which had earlier heard these petitions was head ed by the 
former Chief Justice of Pakistan, Justice Umar Ata Bandial, who retired on 
16 September 2023. The senior most Judge of the Supreme Court3 took 
oath as Chief Justice of Pakistan on Sunday, 17 September 2023. A 
number of applications were filed4 requesting that a Full Court be 
constituted to hear the petitions. On Monday, 18 September 2023 the Chief 
Justice and all other Judges of the Supreme Court5 proceeded to hear the 
petitions, and passed the following order on this first date of hearing:  
„2. The Chief Justice stated that in view of the challenge 
thrown to the Supreme Court (Practice & Procedure) Act, 
2023 and as the matter is pending adjudication he will be 
consulting with his two senior colleagues, namely, Justice 
Sardar Tariq Masood and Justic e Ijaz ul Ahsan with regard 
to the constitution of Benches and fixation of cases to which 
both of them have agreed.‟  
 
5. The language of the Bill and the Act is identical. The Act is 
reproduced hereunder:  
 „THE SUPREME COURT (PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE)  
ACT, 2 023 
Act No. XVII of 2023  
21st April, 2023  
 
An Act to provide for certain practices and procedures of the 
Supreme Court.  
 
WHEREAS Article 191 of the Constitution provides 
that subject to the Constitution and law, the Supreme Court 
may make rules regulating the practice and procedure of the 
Supreme Court;  
 
                                                 
2 Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, dated 21 April 2023.  
3 Justice Qazi Faez Isa.  
4 CMAs No. 3166, 3199 and 4207/2023.  
5 Comprising of the Chief Justice and fourteen  Judges.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 6 
AND WHEREAS Article 10A, of the Constitution 
mandated right to fair trial and due process, Article 4 of the 
Constitution guarantees treatment in accordance with law, 
Articles 25 of the Constitution prohibit s discriminatory 
treatment and right of appeal is a universal fundamental 
principle of jurisprudence and Islam guarantees right of 
appeal, therefore, pursuant of Article 175(2) read with Article 
191 of the Constitution this law is being enacted;  
 
AND WHERE AS it is expedient to make a law providing 
for certain practices and procedures of the Supreme Court.  
 
It is hereby enacted as follows: – 
 
1. Short title and commencement. ––(1) This Act 
shall be called the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) 
Act, 2023.  
 
(2) It shall come into force at once.  
 
2. Constitution of Benches. ––(1) Every cause, appeal 
or matter before the Supreme Court shall be heard and 
disposed of by a Bench constituted by the Committee 
comprising the Chief Justice of Pakistan and two next most  
senior Judges, in order of seniority.  
 
(2) Soon after commencement of this Act, the 
Committee constituted under sub -section (1) shall hold its 
first meeting to determine its procedure, including for 
holding meetings and constitution of Benches etc.:  
 
Provided that, till such time the procedure is 
determined under this sub -section, the meeting of the 
Committee for the purposes of sub -section (1) shall be 
convened by the Chief Justice or other two members of the 
Committee, as the case may be.  
 
(3) The decisi ons of the Committee shall be by 
majority.  
 
3. Exercise of original jurisdiction by the Supreme 
Court. –– Any matter invoking exercise of original jurisdiction 
under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution shall be 
first placed before the Committee co nstituted under section 
2 for examination and if the Committee is of the view that a 
question of public importance with reference to enforcement 
of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of 
Part II of the Constitution is involved, it shall co nstitute a 
Bench comprising not less than three Judges of the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan which may also include the members of 
the Committee, for adjudication of the matter.  
 
4. Interpretation of the Constitution. ––In the 
matters where interpretation of the  constitutional provision 
is involved, Committee shall constitute a Bench comprising 
not less than five Judges of the Supreme Court.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 7 
 
5. Appeal. ––(1) An appeal shall lie within thirty days 
from an order of a Bench exercising jurisdiction under 
clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution to a larger Bench 
of the Supreme Court and such appeal shall, within a period 
not exceeding fourteen days, be fixed for hearing.  
 
(2) The right of appeal under sub -section (1) shall also 
be available to an aggrieved perso n against whom an order 
has been made under clause (3) of Article 184 of the 
Constitution, prior to the commencement of this Act:  
 
Provided that the appeal under this sub -section shall 
be filed within thirty days of the commencement of this Act.  
 
6. Right  to appoint counsel of choice. ––For filing a 
review application under Article 188 of the Constitution, a 
party shall have the right to appoint counsel of its choice.  
 
Explanation : For the purpose of this section, „counsel‟ 
shall mean an Advocate of the Su preme Court.  
 
7. Application for fixation of urgent matters. ––An 
application pleading urgency or seeking interim relief, filed in 
a cause, appeal or matter, shall be fixed for hearing within 
fourteen days from the date of its filing.  
 
8. Act to override ot her laws etc. ––The provisions of 
this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law, rules or regulations for the time being in 
force or judgement of any Court including the Supreme 
Court and a High Court.‟  
 
6. The learned couns el representing the petitioners, and those 
representing themselves, submitted that:  
 
(i) The Act had seriously undermined the independence of the 
judiciary;  
 
(ii) Article 142(a) empowered the Parliament to make laws with 
respect to any matter in the Federal Legislative List in the 
Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, which did not empower 
Parliament to enact the Act;  
 
(iii) None of the entries in the Federal Legislative List enable 
Parliament to make any law pertaining to the practice  and 
procedure  of the Supreme Court;  
 Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 8 
(iv) The power to enact the practice  and procedure  of the Supreme 
Court lay within the exclusive domain of the Supreme Court‟s 
rule making powers stipulated in Article 191 of the 
Constitution;  
 
(v) In addition to the Act enacting the practice  and procedure  it 
also provided for an appeal under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, which was neither a matter of practice  nor of 
procedure ; 
 
(vi) Whenever the Constitution provides for an appeal or vests 
appellate/review jurisdiction it is ment ioned in the 
Constitution, as in: Article 63A(5) (against a decision of 
Election Commission), 185 (appellate jurisdiction), 188 (review 
jurisdiction), 203F (appeal against the decision of Federal 
Shariat Court) and 212(3) (appeal against decision of 
Admini strative Court or Tribunal);  
 
(vii) The Act contravenes Article 4 of the Constitution which 
mandates that individual rights are to be dealt with in 
accordance with law;  
 
(viii) The Act violates the Fundamental Rights prescribed in Articles 
4, 9, 10 and 10A  of the Constitution;  
 
(ix) The Act contravenes Article 175(2) of the Constitution therefore 
Parliament could not enact it;  
 
(x) The Act micro manages the affairs of the Supreme Court and 
thus undermines the independence of the judiciary;  
 
(xi) The Act eff ectively abolishes the powers hitherto before vesting 
in the Chief Justice of Pakistan, which adversely effects the 
independence of the judiciary; and  
 
(xii) It is long established practice/convention that the Chief Justice 
of Pakistan is the Master of the  Roster  and the Committee 
constituted under section 2 of the Act, which includes the next 
two senior Judges, with regard to fixation of cases has 
rendered ineffective the Master of the Roster . Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 9 
 
The learned Mr. Adnan Khan, who represents the petitioner in C P No. 
33/2023, states that the petitioner does not challenge the Act to the extent 
it allows a change of counsel when a review petition is filed.  
 
7. Notices had been issued to political parties. The learned Mr. Zahid 
Ebrahim represented the Pakistan Muslim League -Quaid („ PML-Q‟), and  
filed a concise statement6 supporting the Act and submitted that:  
 
(i) Parliament has the right to legislate matters pertaining to the 
practice  and procedure  of the Supreme Court under Article 191 
of the Constitution, rep roduced hereunder:  
 „Subject to the Constitution and law, the Supreme 
Court may make rules regulating the practice and 
procedure of the Court.‟  
 
(ii) Consolidation of power in the hands of one fallible individual, 
as opposed to three, under section 2(1) of  the Act, undermines  
the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law and the 
enforcement of  Fundamental Rights of fair trial  and due process  
as provided in Article 10A of the Constitution;  
 
(iii) The Act harnesses the unstructured discretion hitherto  before 
exercised by Chief Justices in exercising jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3)  of the Constitution, and particularly when the 
pre-requisites thereof – question of public importance with 
reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights  – 
were disregarded;  
 
(iv) Section 4 of the Act which mandates that a minimum of five 
Judges of the Supreme Court shall hear cases requiring 
interpretation of the Constitution  lends greater legitimacy and 
credibility to the decisions of the Supreme Court;  
 
(v) If by a decision of the Supreme Court in the exercise of 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution a person is 
aggrieved , section 5 of the Act grants an appeal to an aggrieved 
person against whom an order has been made  to a larger Bench 
                                                 
6 CMA No. 3991/2023.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 10 
of the Supreme Court, which adheres to Article 10A of the 
Constitution and to the basic concepts of justice the world 
over, and to the injunctions of Islam;  
 
(vi) To seek the review of a judgment of the Supreme Court is a 
right granted by the Constitution in Article 188, which does not 
restrict its filing  by the same counsel, which restriction  the 
Supreme Court Rules, 1980 („ the Rules ‟) had impose d and 
section 6 of the Act redresses this and brings the Rules to 
conform to the Constitution;  
 
(vii) To have an application pleading urgency  fixed within fourteen 
days, which is what section 7 of the Act prescribes, accords 
with the principles of good administration of justice; and  
 
(viii) Parliament  was constitutionally competent to  enact the Act in 
exercise of its  constitutional power under Article 142(a) of the 
Constitution read with entries 55 and 58 and Article 191 of the 
Constitution.  
 
8. The Pakistan Muslim League -Nawaz („ PML-N‟) was represented by the 
learned  Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed who adopted  the su bmissions o f learned 
Mr. Zahid E brahim and added that:  
 
(i) The Act neither challenges nor undermines the authorit y or 
power of the Supreme Court, instead it confirms and 
strengthens it;  
 
(ii) The Act checks/controls the arbitrary powers exercised by 
Chief Justices which now better  adhere s to Article 176 of the 
Constitution which prescribes that the Chief Justice alone does 
not constitute the Supreme Court, but that it consist s of the 
Chief Justice… and so many other Judges as may be 
determined by Act of Parliament ; and 
 
(iii) The Constitution in Article 67 does not permit law to regulate 
the practice/procedure but specifically permits  laws to be made 
with regard to  practice  and procedure  of the Supreme Court in 
Article 191 of the Constitution, just  as Article 202 of t he Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 11 
Constitution permits the practice  and procedure  of a High Court 
to be  regulated by law.  
 
9. The Muttahida Qaumi Movement („ MQM ‟) wa s represented by the 
learn ed Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, who  while adopting the submissions of learned 
Messrs  Ibrahim and Ahmed elaborated thereon most skillfully and 
comprehensively. He added that Order XI of the Rules specifically  
recognizes that the constitution of Benches may be regulated by law . 
 
10. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan („ AG‟) filed con cise 
statements7 on behalf of the Federation of Pakistan and in addition to 
reiterating the  submission s of learned Messrs Zahid E brahim, Salahuddin 
Ahmed and Faisal Siddiqui, stated that:  
 
(i) The petitions filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, 
challenging the Bill/Act, are not maintainable because they are  
not in respect of  a question of public importance with reference 
to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights ; 
 
(ii) The Master of the Roster  concept is alien t o the Constitution, 
and if  it is consi dered to be a convention it can not prevail over 
the text of the Constitution ; 
 
(iii) Article 8(1) of the Constitution only recognizes (and endorses) 
abiding by any law or any custom or usage having the force of 
law, and conventions are not incl uded therein ; 
 
(iv) The Supreme Court has complete power to interpret laws, and 
its decisions are binding on all other courts in Pakistan  as per 
Article 189, but it cannot undermine Parliament‟s  power to 
legislate, unless the law made by Parliament is 
unco nstitutional or violates any of the Fundamental Rights  
which is not the case in enacting the Act ; 
 
(v) Jurisdiction is  conferred on courts  by the Constitution or by or 
under any law , as stipulated under Article 175(2) of the 
Constitution, therefore, if Parliament grants a right of appeal 
by section 5 of the Act against judgments of the Supreme Court 
                                                 
7 CMAs No. 3160, 7936 and 8303/2023.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 12 
passed under Article 184(3), it is in conformity with the 
Constitution; and  
 
(vi) Granting a right of appeal to a larger Bench of the Supreme 
Court does not diminish or impair the power, authority or 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.  
 
11. The Jamaat -e-Ulema Islam („ JUI-F‟) represented by the  learned Mr. 
Kamran Murtaza endorsed the Act and stated that it accords fully with the 
Constitution and adopted the submission s made by learned Messrs Zahid 
Ebrahim, Salahuddin Ahmed, Faisal Siddiqui and  the AG. 
 
12. The Pakistan Ba r Council had filed an application8 seeking 
constitution of a full co urt and placed on record a number of press releases 
issued by it expressing concerns regarding  the conduct and demeano ur of 
some Judges who appeared  not to have  come across as  being neutral and 
impartial, and that Judges should not be perceived as favourin g any 
political party . The representatives of the Pakistan Bar Council stated that 
the Act was in accordance with the Constitution, and unless an act of 
Parliament is demonstrably unconstitutional it should not be interfered 
with.  
 
13. The learned counsel for both sides also referred to a very large 
number of precedents which for the sake of brevity are not mentioned, 
however, quite a few find mention hereunder.  
 
14. These petitions were filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, 
which stipulates that,  „The Supreme Court shall, if it considers that a 
question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II is involved, have the 
power to make an order of the nature mentioned in the  said Article .‟ The  
referred to  said Article  is Article 199 of the Constitution.  
 
15. The first petition (CP No. 6 of 2023) was filed by two Lahore -based 
lawyers who were represented by learned Messrs Khawaja Ahmad Tariq 
Rahim and Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui. T he Office of the Supreme Court had 
noted five legal objections  on the filing of the petition in the Supreme Court , 
the first two of which are reproduced hereunder:  
                                                 
8 CMA  No. 4207/2023.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 13 
„a. That the petitioners have not pointed out as to what 
questions of public importance in t he instant case are 
involved with reference to enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed under the Constitution, so 
as to directly invoke jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution.‟  
„b. That ingredients for in voking extra ordinary jurisdiction of 
this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution have not 
been satisfied.‟  
 
An eight -member Bench of this Court proceeded to hear these petitions, but 
did not attend to the office objections , nor whether  the petitio ns were 
maintainable under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Another three 
petitions (Constitutional Petitions No. 10 to 12 of 2023) were filed, seeking 
the same relief, and when all six petitions came up for hearing on 2 May 
2023, it was ordered „ That i njunction continues and shall continue to be 
enforced against the Act till further orders ‟. 
 
16. On 21 April 2023 the Bill became the Act. Section 2(1) of the Act 
requires that cases be heard and disposed of by a bench constituted by the 
Committee comprising the Chief Justice of Pakistan and two most senior 
judges, in order of seniority , however, this provision was disregarded.   
 
17. The Act comprises of only eight sections  as under:   
 Section 1 states its name and that it shall come into force at once.  
 Section 2 constitutes a Committee comprising of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan and two next most senior Judges  („the Committee ‟) 
which shall decide by majority  the constitution of Benches for 
hearing of cases.  
 Section 3 stipulates that when the original Jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court, under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , is 
involved  the Committee will first ascertain if it is a matter of public 
importance requiring enforcement of Fundamental Rights .  
 Section 4 stipulates that wherever the int erpretation of a 
constitutional provision is involved the case shall be heard by not 
less than five judges of the Supre me Court.  
 Section 5 provides  an appeal to a person aggrieved  by the 
Supreme Court‟s decision under Article 184(3).  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 14 
 Section 6 provides t he party the right to appoint counsel of its 
choice  when  seeking review under Article 188 of the Constitution, 
of a decision.  
 Section 7 requires that urgent applications shall be fixed for 
hearing within fourteen  days from the date of  its filing. 
 Section 8 is in the nature of a non obstante clause.  
 
18. There appears to be nothing unconstitutional, illegal or objectionable  
in the Act on a plain  reading of these provisions. T he matter could have 
been decided in the  first hearing . However,  on the very  first day o f hearing 
stay was granted, while  the proposed law was at the bill stage, and 
thereafter the stay was extended. T he learned counsel spent many hours 
propositioning that the independence of the Judiciary had come under 
imminent collapse, and tha t the constitutional structure as it exists would 
develop  fissures and  furthermore  the position of the Chief Justice as the 
Master of the Roster would be come redundant . The matter was heard by us 
at great length. Therefore, let us begin by examining the sc heme of the 
Constitution with regard to the Judicature and its jurisdiction.  
 
19. The Constitution establishes the Judicature.9 It stipulates that, „ No 
court shall have any jurisdiction save as is or may be conferred on it by the 
Constitution or by or under any law. ‟10 The Constitution does not bestow 
unlimited jurisdiction on the Supreme Court, let alone on its Chief Justic e. 
The Constitution confers  the following jurisdictions on the Supreme Court: 
(1) original jurisdiction,11 (2) appellate jurisdiction ,12 (3) advisory 
jurisdiction,13 (4) power to transfer cases jurisdiction,14 (5) review 
jurisdiction,15 (6) contempt jurisdiction16 and (7) appellate jurisdiction with 
regard to decisions of administrative courts and tribunals .17 The Judiciary 
has the responsibi lity to decide cases in accordance with the Constitution 
and the law ,18 by applying due process  and providing a fair trial19. Every 
Judge before entering office  is required to take an  oath which also provides 
                                                 
9 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Part VII, Articles 175 to 212.  
10 Ibid. , Article 175(2).  
11 Ibid. , Article 184.  
12 Ibid. , Article 185.  
13 Ibid. , Article 186.  
14 Ibid., Article 186A.  
15 Ibid. , Article 188.  
16 Ibid. , Article 204.  
17 Ibid. , Article 212(3).  
18 Ibid. , Article 4(1).  
19 Ibid. , Article 10A.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 15 
that: „I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the 
best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan and the law‟ (emphasis added), and also swear s an 
oath to „preserve, protect and d efend the Constitution ‟. 
 
20. The Supreme Court comprises of the Chief Justice and all the Judges 
of the Supreme Court. The Constitution does not grant to the Chief Justice 
power to decide cases  unilaterally and arbitrarily . The Chie f Justice cannot 
substi tute his wisdom with that of the Constitution. Nor can the Chief 
Justice‟s opinion prevail over that of the Judges of the Supreme Court . 
And, t he term „Master of the Roster ‟ is not mentioned  in the Constitution, in 
any law or even in the Rules , let alone stating therein that the Chief 
Justice, is the Master of the Roster and empowered to act completely in his 
discretion.  
 
21. The word  master  is offensive in a constitutional dispensation founded 
on democracy. Master  also connotes servitude, the extreme form of which is 
slavery which is prohibited by the Constitution .20 Islam  establishes  the 
principle of equality , and the Constitution does not permit transgressi ng 
the Injunctions of Islam,21 the State religion of Pakist an.22 The opening 
words of the Constitution are the most beautiful names of the Creator , Ar-
Rahman  (the most Beneficent ) and Ar-Rahim  (the most Merciful ). It 
proceeds by recognising  that, „ sovereignty over the entire Universe belongs to 
Almighty Allah alone ‟ and that the exercise of authority is a sacred trust .23 
The only servitude the Constitution (and Islam) envisages is to the Creator.  
 
22. Servitude also negates consultation . The Holy Qur‟an mandates, „ Do 
that which is in agreement amongst the people ‟.24 Qur‟anic exegetes25 are 
unanimous in the interpretation of this verse, and say that consultation is 
obligatory in respect of all matters pertaining to more than one person. 
Because: (a) no one should impose their will on others, (b) imposing one‟s 
will on o thers either means that one does not give importance to others or 
                                                 
20 Ibid., Article 11(1). 
21 Ibid. , Article 227.  
22 Ibid., Article 2.  
23 Ibid., Preamble/Objectives Resolution, which is now  a, ‘substantive part of the Constitution and shall have 
effect accordingly ’ as stipulated in Article 2A.  
24 Al Qur’an, surah Ash-Shura  (42) verse 38.  
25 To cite just two examples, the Pakistani Islamic scholar A bul A'la Maududi (1903 -1979) in his Tafhim Al -  
Qur’an  (vol. 4, pp. 508 -510) and the great Qur'anic exegete and hadith scholar ( muhaddith ) of Cordoba, Spain 
Abu Abdullah Muhammad bin Ahmad al -Qurtabi (1214 -1273) in his Al-Jami li -Ahkam Al -Qur’an (vol. 18, pp. 
586-588).  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 16 
that one deems oneself to be more intelligent, bot h of which are morally 
reprehensible  and (c) deciding an issue that pertains to the people is a 
serious thing and one should fear Allah. And the following principles  may 
be derived  from the said  verse: (1) all requisite information be provided, (2) 
appointments should not be made on the basis of fear or favour, (3) leaders 
should seek advice from advisors, (4) advisors must give their honest a nd 
well considered opinion and (5) matters should preferably be resolved 
consensually, failing which through majority opinion.  
 
23. History stands witness to the fact that when power is concentrated in 
an individual , disastrous consequences invariably follow. Irreparable 
damage is caused to the Judiciary and to the people of Pakistan when the 
legitimacy, integrity and credibility of the Judiciary is undermined. If the 
people lose their trust in the Judiciary , it will render decisions made by it 
mere words on paper , without  credibility and moral authority. The surest 
way for this to happen is when cases are not decided in accordance with 
the Constitution.  
 
24. On behalf of the petitioners it was contended that to discard the 
Master of the Roster  concept would negate stare decisis (Latin for „to stand 
by things decided‟), a concept that requires judicial precedents be followed. 
The House of Lords of the United Kingdom summed up the principle of 
stare decisis  thus:  
„… a decision of this House once given upon a point of law is 
conclusive upon this House afterwards, and that it is 
impossible to raise that question again as if it was res integra 
and could be reargued, and so the House be asked to reverse 
its own decision. That is a principle which has been, I believe, 
without any real decision to the contrary, established now for 
some centuries‟  
 
„Under these circumstances it appears to me that your 
Lordships would do well to act upon that which has been 
universally assumed in the profession, so far as I know, to be 
the principle, namely, that a decision of this House upon a 
question of law is conclusive, and that nothing but an Act of 
Parliament can set right that which is alleged to be wrong in a 
judgment of this House.‟26 
 
However, even the originators  of the principle of stare decisis , in the 
country without a written constitution , maintained that an Act of 
Parliament would prevail over a decision of the House of Lords. However, 
                                                 
26 London St. Tramways Co. v. London County Council  [1898], A.C. 375.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 17 
Pakistan has a written Constitution  and the Constitution stipulates that  
the decisions of the Supreme Court are binding on all other courts ,27 but 
not on the Supreme Court itself, however, decisions of larger Benches 
prevail over those of smaller ones.  
 
25. A Practice Statement  was issued  by the Hou se of Lords , on behalf of 
all the Judges , justifying deviation  from past preced ent when the interest of 
justice  requires it : 
„Their lordships regard the use of precedent as an 
indispensable foundation upon which to decide what is the 
law and its application to individual cases. It provides at least 
some degree of certainty upon which individuals can rely in 
the conduct of their affairs, as well as a basis for orderly 
development of legal rules.  
 
Their lordships nevertheless recognise that too rigid 
adherence to precedent may lead to  injustice in a particular 
case and also unduly restrict the proper development of the 
law. They propose therefore to modify their present practice 
and, while treating formal decisions of this House as normally 
binding, to depart from a previous decision w hen it appears 
right to do so .‟28 
 
26. It was also contended on behalf of the petitioners that the Master of 
the Roster  is an established conventio n and has to be given effect to . 
Therefore, we should  first understand what constitutes legal conventions  in 
the land of their birth , that is, in England. A. V. Dicey in the Law of the 
Constitution29 made a distinction between laws and conventions and their 
enforceability and un enforceability by the courts. And, O. Hood Philips in 
his Constitutional and Administrat ive Law  explained that „conventions‟ 
„refers to rules of political practice which are regarded as binding by those 
whom they concern especially the sovereign and statesmen – but which 
would not be enforced by the courts if the matter came before them ‟. In the 
United Kingdom , conventions are not judicially enforceable. Geoffrey 
Marshall in his The Theory of Convention since Dicey30 says, that the 
separation of law and conventions distinction by Dicey „ is clear enough and 
worth maintaining ‟. Colin R Munro in Laws and Conventions Distinguished31 
stated that, „ The validity of conventions cannot be the subject of proceedings 
                                                 
27 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 189.  
28 Practice Statement , [1966] 3 All E.R. 77 (H.L.) (U.K.).  
29 1885.  
30 Marshall, Geoffrey, 'The Theory of Conve ntion Since Dicey', Constitutional Conventions: The Rules and 
Forms  of Political Accountability  (Oxford, 1987; online edn, Oxford Academic, 22 Mar. 2012).  
31 1975 LQR 218, 228.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 18 
in a court of law. Reparation for breach of such rules will not be effected by 
any legal sanction. There are no cases which contradict these propositions. In 
fact, the idea of a court enforcing a mere convention is so strange that the 
question hardly arises .‟ 
 
27. The Privy Council of England held that conventions cannot be given 
effect to by a court of law because they „ are considerations of p olicy and 
propriety , they are not legal restrictions which a court of law, interpreting the 
relevant provisions of the Constitution, can import into the written document 
and make it his legal duty to observe ‟.32 In Canada,  a commonwealth 
country,  it was obs erved that there is „no instance of an explicit recognition 
of a convention as having matured  into a rule of law ‟.33 The Court further 
held that conventions are not enforced by the courts and if there is a 
conflict between conventions and law, the courts mu st enforce the law. „The 
very nature of a convention, as political in inception and as depending on a 
persistent course of political recognition by those for whose benefit and to 
whose detriment (if any) the convention developed over a considerable period 
of time is inconsistent with its legal enforcement‟ .  
 
28. Significantly Article 8(1) of the Constitution states, „ any law or any 
custom or usage having  the force of law ‟ (emphasis added). It  does not state 
that custom and usage has the force of law. A cus tom or usage having the 
force of law  is section 5 of the Punjab Laws Act , 1972, which provides that 
in any question regarding succession „ the rule of administration shall be any 
custom applicable to the parties concerned ‟ and its section 7 states that „all 
local customs and mercantile usages shall be regarded as valid unless they 
are contrary to justice, equity or good conscience .‟ The C ustoms and usages 
mentioned in the Punjab Laws Act , 1972 ha d the force of law, because the 
law stated so, and not because  on its own  it had  the force of law.  
 
29. The Supreme Court in Federation of Pakistan v  United Sugar Mills 
Limited34 held that law is „a formal pronouncement of the will of a competent 
lawgiver and did not include what are mere legal percepts and theories ‟. One 
may however add that  many British constitutional conventions are 
incorporated into the Constitution and these  the courts are bound to 
                                                 
32 Adegbenro v. Akintola  (1963) 3 All ER 544.  
33 (1982) 125 DLR (3d) 1.  
34 PLD 1977 Supreme Court 397.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 19 
recognize and enforce because they are  part of the Constitution , and not 
because they are  conventions.  
 
30. We are aware that conventions have in a few cases been given 
extraordinary importance, which  phenomena  is best explained  by Justice 
Fazal Karim in his  essential reading  book Judicial Review of Public Actions  
thus:35  
„Al-Jehad Trust case (PLD 1996 SC 324) a nd Malik Asad 
Ali36 case were the product of a period of unfortunate tension 
between the political organs and the judicial organ of the 
State of Pakistan. That period evokes painful memories, and 
it is better to forget it. Even the Judges of the Supreme Cou rt 
could not remain unaffected so much so that at the time of 
Malik Asad Ali case, the Supreme Court itself was a divided 
house. In such a polarized setting the venerable principle of 
the comity of Judges is naturally the major casualty. In our 
humble opin ion therefore the decisions in those cases should 
be confined to them only.‟  
 
31. We take heed from the wise words of Justice Fazal Karim. The 
Constitution  has erected  the legislature and the judicature and sets out 
their respective jurisdictions, boundaries and powers , which each must 
respect. In Jackson v Her Majesty‟s Attorney General37, the House of Lords 
observed  that, „the delicate balance between the various insti tutions whose 
sound and lasting quality Dicey in his “The Law of the Constitution”, likened 
to the work of bees when construing a honeycomb is maintained to a larger 
degree by the mutual respect which each institution has for the other .‟ 
Mutual respect req uires that the Supreme Court should not substitute its 
own opinion for that of Parliament , no matter how correct it considers it to 
be. Intervention s should be restricted to  only when Parliament enacts 
legislation which is demonstrably unconstitutional. In  respect of the Act 
this has not been demonstrated.  
 
32. We have  very carefully considered each and every provision of the 
Act, and are of the view  that it has facilitated  access to justice , instilled 
transparency , made the realization of Fundamental Rights more effective, 
                                                 
35 Second edition, Vol. 1, p. 96.  
36 Malik Asad Ali v Federation of Pakistan , PLD 1998 SC 161.  
37 (2005) UKHL 56.  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 20 
and the Supr eme Court more independent. T he office  of the Chief Justice 
has also been strengthened as there is an element of continuity when 
consultation takes place with the two most senior Judges . The measures 
taken in the Act ensure j udicial independence , and the Supreme Court has 
been made to better serve the people ; we endorse the following definition of 
judicial independence:  
„Judicial independence refers to the existence of judges who 
are not mani pulated for political gain, who are impartial 
towards the parties of a dispute, and who form a judicial 
branch which has the power as an institution to regulate the 
legality of government behavior, enact „neutral‟ justice, and 
determine significant constit utional and legal value s.‟38 
 
33. The Constitution empowers Parliament to legislate with regard to 
making the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court as it specifically 
stipulat ed in Article 191 . Parliament enacted the Act  which does not in any 
manner i nfringe any of the Fundamental Rights, rather facilitates their 
enforcement. The Act also grants an appeal to one who is aggrieved by a 
decision of the Supreme Court which is passed in exercise of the original 
jurisdiction  of the Supreme Court under Articl e 184(3) of the Constitution. 
A standard good worldwide practice and the Injunctions of Islam ,39 require 
that an appeal be provided  and when two interpretations are possible, the 
one that conforms with the Injunctions of Islam shall be adopted .40 Article 
175(2) of the Constitution envisages the conferment of jurisdiction. A larger 
Bench of the Supreme Court has been  conferred with this a dditional 
jurisdiction of appeal which fully accords with the Constitution. The Act 
does not in any manner viola te the Constitution , it does not undermine the 
Supreme C ourt, nor does it compromise the independence of the judiciary . 
In effect it does the very opposite  in ensur ing the enforcement of 
                                                 
38 Christopher M. Larkins,  ‘Judicial Independence and Democratization: A Theore tical and Conceptual Analysis. ’ 
The Am erican Journal of Comparative Law , vol. 44, no. 4, 1996, pp. 605 –26.  
39 Generally, surah an-Nisa’  (4), verse 59  is cited for the right to appeal . Moreover, there are several Qur’anic 
verses and Prophetic traditions which emphasize that  human beings could commit error and that whenever an 
error in a judgment becomes apparent, it needs to be corrected. ‘Every son of Adam commits error; and among 
those who commit erro r those who repent are the best ’ (Sunan al -Tirmidhi , Abwab Sifat al -Qiyam ah, Hadith 
No. 2499).  The Shariat Appellate Bench of the Supreme Court  declared that the Islamic Injunctions mandate 
at least one righ t to appeal in  Federation of Pakistan v General Public , PLD 1988 Supreme Court 202 and in 
Pakistan v General Public , PLD 1989 Supreme Court 6.  
40 Section 4 of the Enforcement of the Shariah Act, 1991 stipulates : ‘For the purpose of this Act (a) while 
interpreting the statute  law, if more than one interpretation is possible, the one consistent with the Islamic 
principl es and jurisprudence shall be adopted by the Court; and (b) where two or more interpretations are 
equally possible, the interpretation which advances the Principles of Policy and Islamic provisions in the 
Constitution shall be adopted by the Court. ’  Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 21 
Fundamental Rights, strengthen ing the Judiciary and creat ing greater 
independence therein.  
 
34. Having found the Act to be fully compliant with the Constitution 
there is no need to consider the other points raised by the petitioners 
because the same will have no bearing on the outcome , and this Court does 
not generally dilate upon academic propositions.  
 
35. Therefore, for the aforesaid reasons these petitions are dismissed and 
the constitutionality of the Act is upheld.  
 
 
 
     Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
 
 
 
     Sardar Tariq Masood, J  
 
 
 
       Ijaz ul Ahsan, J  
 
 
 
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J  
 
 
 
      Munib Akhtar, J  
 
 
 
         Yahya Afridi, J  
 
 
 
        Amin -ud-Din Khan, J  
 
 
 
      Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, J  
 
 
 
         Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J  
 
 
 
 Muhammad Ali Mazhar, J  
 Const. Petition No. 6/2023 etc.  
 22 
 
 
   Ayesha A. Malik, J  
 
 
 
     Athar Minallah, J  
 
 
 
 Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi, J  
 
 
 
    Shahid Waheed, J  
 
 
 
    Musarrat Hilali, J  
 
 
 
Islamabad  
15 December 2023.  
(Farrukh /Hassan K.W. )  
 
 
Approved for Reporting  
 