IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
 
 
Criminal Petition  No. 883-L of 20 22 
(Against the order dated 12.05.2022 of 
the Lahore High Court, Lahore passed in 
Crl. Misc . No. 18600 -B/2022)  
  
 
Salamat Mansha Masih.       … Petitioner  
     Versus  
The State and another.       … Respondent s 
                 
 
For the  Petitioner : Mr. Abdul Hameed Rana, ASC.  
 (Through video -link from Lahore)  
 
For the State : Ch. Muhammad Sarwar Sid hu,  
Addl. Prosecutor -General, Punjab.  
 Mr. Asim Iftikhar, IO/SP, Model Town , Lahore .  
 Sohail Kazmi, DSP, Model Town , Lahore .  
 
For the Complainant:  Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, ASC.  
   
Date of Hearing :   23.08.2022   
 
ORDER  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, J . Through this petition the petitioner seeks post -arrest bail 
in the case arising out of the FIR No. 61 dated 13 February 2021 registered 
under sections 295 -A, 295 -B and 295-C of the Pakistan Penal Code (‘PPC’) 
at Police Station Model Town, Lahore. Section 295 -A sets out  the offence of 
‘deliberate and malicious intention  of outraging the religious feelings of any 
class of the citizens …insults or attempts to insult the religion or religious 
beliefs of that class ’. Section 295 -B makes it an offence to willfully defile, 
damage or desecrate  a copy of the Holy Qur’an . And, a section 295 -C 
offence  is committed by one who ‘defiles the sacred name of the Holy 
Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) ’. Section 295 -A offence prescribes  
a maximum imprisonment of ten years,  section 295 -B an imprisonment for 
life and section 295 -C the punishment  of death.  
 
2. The incident giving rise to the registration of the case was  reported to 
the Police at 11:20  pm on 13 February 2021 and the FIR was registered 
soon afte r at 11.30 pm . The complainant (respondent No. 2 ), a student of 
Khawaja Rafiq Shaheed Intermediate College situated on Walton Road, 
Lahore (‘the College ’), stated that he along with three fellow students and Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  2
friends (‘the four friends ’) had come to  Model Town Park (‘Park’) where the 
petitioner and his companion were preaching and ma king blasphemous 
remarks. The petitioner was arrested on 1 April 2021 and ever  since then 
has remained incarcerated . His bail was declined by the learned Sessions 
Judge  and by the learned Judge of the High Cour t; in declin ing bail, both 
the learned Judges  placed complete reliance on the contents of the FIR and 
the statements of the four friends.  
 
3. The learned counsel representing  the petitioner submits that the FIR 
refers to a publication ‘ Zindagi Ka Pani’, which has n o blasphemous 
content; that the FIR was registered after a n inordinate delay of about eight 
hours , even though the Model Town Police Station was in the vicinity  of the 
Park; that the four friends, all of whom admittedly had mobile phones with 
them, did not  record the incident  on their mobile phones  despite it lasting 
for about thirty minutes ; that the four friends did not disclose what  they 
had said during the said period of thirty minutes , and, it is most unlikely 
that they would idly stand by and listen  to someone blaspheming  for half 
an hour ; the Model Town Society  deploy s round -the-clock security guards 
at the Park but neither any guard nor any other visitor to the Park 
complain ed or record ed their statements ; and that  two Christians would be 
foolhardy  to say what was alleged before four young Muslim men and in a 
public Park in which the majority of persons , if not all,  would be Muslims.  
 
4. The learned Additional Prosecutor -General, Punjab (‘APG’) opposes 
bail and states that the police report1 (challan ) was submitted , charge 
framed,  and Trial Court has rec orded the statement s of five witnesses while  
five prosecution witnesses remain to testify . Therefore, it would not be 
appropriate to extend the concession of bail to the petiti oner at this sta ge, 
and according to the contents of the FIR and the statements of the four 
friends  the petitioner appears to have committed the crimes for which he is 
charged. Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, the learned counsel representing the 
complainant , supports the conte ntion of the learned APG and states that 
the p etitioner is delaying the conclusion of the trial by not cross -examining 
the prosecution witnesses who have already been examined.  
 
5. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and exam ined the 
document s on record  and those produced by the learned APG . The 
investigation of the case was conducted by a Superintendent of Police 
(‘SP’).2 On our query the learned APG and the SP state that the book 
                                                
1 As per section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.  
2 Section 156A o f the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898  stipulates that an offence under section 295 -C of the 
PPC must be investigated b y an officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police.  Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  3
(Zindagi Ka Pani) mentioned in the FIR doesn’ t contain any blasphemous 
material . We then enquired from them whether any incriminating material 
was recovered from the petitioner , either at the time of his arrest or 
thereafter , and were informed that nothing incriminating w as recover ed. 
The SP inform s us that the dista nce of the Park from the College , where the 
four friends study , and from where they had come to the Park, was about 
ten kilometers , but there is nothing on record to show how they got there . 
We were also informed that the petitioner is employed as a sweepe r with the 
Lahore Waste Management Company.  
 
6. We have read the FIR and  the challan , which reproduces the contents 
of the FIR and  does not bring forth any addition al incriminating evidence 
against the accused . The charge was framed on 5 April 20 22 by the learned 
Additional Sessions Judge , which is reproduced hereunder:  
‘That you accused alongwith you [sic] co-accused/Ayoub 
Masih (proclaimed offender) on 13.0 2.2021, at 03:35 pm, in 
Model Town Park, Lahore defiled Holy Quran and used 
derogatory remarks and d efiled the sacred name of Holy 
Prophet Hazrat Muhammad  ﷺ .Thus, you accused Salamat 
Masih and your co accused / Ayoub Masih (since P.O) have 
committed an offence punishable under section 295 -A, 295 -
B & 295 -C PPC, which is within the cognizance of this cour t. 
 
And I hereby direct that you accused Salamat Masih be tried 
by this court on the above said charge. ’ 
 
  An examination of t he charge reveals material deficien cies therein 
and it does not contain a number of prescribed requirements with regard to 
the fr aming of the charge .3 A charge must give a  brief description of the 
offence and a statement of essential facts which constitut e the offence . The 
charge (as framed ) combine d three distinct offences into one . Each  offence  
has separ ate ingredients, but the ch arge does not state this . The charge 
must convey to the accused  the case he ha s to answer,  and he must  be 
able to properly defend the offence  he is accused of  having committed.4 
There was no allegation made (either in the FIR or challan ) with regard to 
the defilement of the Holy Qur ’an yet the petitioner was also charged under 
section 295 -B.  
 
7. The prosecution evidence against the petitioner comprises of the 
statements of the four friends . We have examined their testimony which 
commence s by stating that t he petitioner’s co -accused produced the 
Zindagi Ka Pani  book and that,  ‘both accused intentional ly started preaching 
                                                
3 Chapter XIX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 titled Form of Charg es.  
4 S. A. K. Rehmani v State  (2005 SCMR 364, para 20, pp. 381 -382); Muhammad Bux v State , a decision of the 
Federal Shariat Court, (2021 MLD 1725, para. 7, p. 1730) . Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  4
Christianity ’. Preaching of Christianity is not a crime nor can it be made 
into one because of the Fundamental Right ‘ to profess, practice and 
propagate his religion ’.5 They then state that  both the accused spoke  about  
the marital status of Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon 
him), compared it  with that of Prophet Isa (peace and blessings be upon 
him), and made an insinuation and passed a remark  about the Holy Qur’an 
and the Bible . We are not repeating the allegedly blasphemous allegations , 
which must be avoided, and also because they may needlessly hurt and 
enflame passions .6 
 
8. Unfortunately, such cases receive wide publicity whic h has an 
adverse  effect and may also jeopardiz e a fair tri al. Irresponsible and 
sensational broadcast s and publication s repeat  what allegedly the accused 
had said or done; those repeating this  may themselves be committing the 
same offence . Offences relatin g to religion  are very serious offences  and a  
section 295 -C offence prescribes  only the punishment  of death. Therefore, 
utmost care must be exercised by all concerned that no injustice in the 
administration of justice takes place. Courts have  taken  notice of the fact 
that many a time false allegations are leveled to settle personal scores and 
cases are also registered for mischievous  purposes  or on account of ulterior 
motives .7 
 
9. The offences affecting life and the human body ,8 before the 
transformation o f the criminal justice system into one based on Islamic 
jurisprudence , were considered to be offences against the State . These 
offences are now primarily considered to be offences violating the rights of 
the victims or their heirs. A five -member Bench of t he Shariat Appellate 
Bench of t his Court9 explained the said transformation:  
‘Under the Injuncti ons of Islam  ... the individual victim or his 
heirs retain from the beginning to the end entire control over 
the matter including the crime and the criminal. T hey may 
not report it. They may not prosecute the offender. They may 
abandon prosecution of their  free will. They may pardon the 
criminal at any stage before the execution of the sentence. 
They may accept monetary or other compensation to purge 
the crime a nd the criminal. They may compromise. They may 
accept Qisas from the criminal. The State cannot i mpede, 
but must, to its best, assist them in achieving their object 
and in appropriately exercising their rights.’   
 
                                                
5 Article 20(a)  of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan;  see also the d ecision in SMC No. 1 of 
2014 (PLD 2014  Supreme Court 699, p. 718).  
6 Punjab Religious Book Society v State , a decision by a Bench of three learned Judges (PLD 1960 Lahore 629, 
640). 
7 Also noted in Muhammad Mahboob v State  (PLD 2002 Lahore 587 , para 30, p. 601); Ayub Masih v State  
(PLD 2002 SC 1048) . 
8 Chapter XVI of the Pakistan Penal Code.  
9 Federation of Pakistan v Gul Hasan Khan  (PLD 1989 Supreme Court 633, pp. 684 -685).  Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  5
Section 345 (compounding of offences ), and Schedule II of the Criminal 
Procedure Code, 1898 ( ‘the Code ’) were also amended and murder and 
most ty pes of hurt10 were made compoundable. However, no offence 
relating to religion11 is compoundable  (except the  lesser  offence of hurting 
the religious feelin gs of a person,12 for which the maximum  punishment 
that is prescribed is  imprisonment for three years) . With regard to  the 
offence s relating to religion the position of the State is predominant , and 
the State  is responsible for prosecuting these offences . If in such cases a 
private complainant takes too keen an interest it may impinge on his 
credibility and may  be indicat ive of mischief or an ulterior m otive. However, 
in quite a few cases it has been noted that complainant s grandstand  and 
are joined in by ot hers who try to pressur ize the prosecution and the 
Courts. In the present case the complainant , who is a student , came to 
Islamabad from Lahore to oppose this bail petition ; there was no need for 
him to do this because  the case was  to be attended to by the  State and its 
law officers . And, when we  were address ing queries to the learned APG and 
the SP , the complainant and his counsel kept providi ng answers to the 
learned A PG and SP.  
 
10. The petitioner has remained incarcera ted for almost a year and a half 
and throughout this period (as stated above) no incriminating material was 
recovered from him. The SP and the learned APG state that the petitioner’s 
mobile phone was also checked but that  too did not reveal any 
incrim inating material, or material to sugges t that the petitioner had the 
propensity to do what he is alleged to have done. The FIR and the challan 
allege  that the petitioner was preaching but there is no  material  to support 
this statement, and its verac ity is undermined when admittedly, the 
petitio ner is not stated to be a preacher , but is a simple  sweeper.  The 
entire prosecution case rests on  the testimony of the four friends. However, 
there is nothing to corroborate their testimonies. Therefore, the question 
arises whe ther corroboration was requi red. 
 
11. Corroboration means support  or confirmation  and corroborative 
evidence is some evidence other than the one it confirms.13 Corroboration 
minimizes errors in judicial proceedings and is dictated by prudence. The 
object of corroboration is to ensure the convi ction of the guilty and to 
prevent that of  innocent s. However, corroboratory evidence does not 
                                                
10 Offences under Chapter XVI of the Pakistan Penal Code.  
11 Chapter XV of the Paki stan Penal Code.  
12 Section 29 8 of the Pakistan Penal Code.  
13 Irshad Ahmad v State  (1990 P Cr L J 374, 383A).  Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  6
convert an unreliable witness , or evidence , into a reliable one.14 In this case 
there is only the  testimony  of the four friends against the petitioners. We 
should bear in mind the serious ness of the  offence s and that in res pect of a 
section 295 -C offence the only prescribed punishment is death. Therefore, 
pruden ce requires that their statements , which at this stage appear 
improbable,  be corroborated by oth er evidence, which could be 
circumstantial, document ary and /or scientific. Islamic jurisprudence also 
considers th e necessity of  corroboration in certain cases.15 
 
12. An accused  person ’s Fundamental Right to a fair tri al and due 
process16 must also be ensur ed, and all the more so in cases for which 
severe pu nishments are prescribed. There have been instances  when 
tempers were provoked and enflamed by provocateurs , and a mob was 
collected and enraged to  take the  law into its own hands , to hurt and even 
kill the accused , before h e was ever adjudged guil ty. The law prohibits the 
taking of the law into one’s hands , let alone to cause hurt or death, and 
this protection is  also fully applicable to one who may be guilty.  In Islamic 
jurisprudence  even if a person has been found guilty and sentenced to 
death , the sente nce cannot be executed  by one who is not so authorized , 
and if he kills the convict , he is liable for the offence of iftiyat  (wasting the 
right of th e State) and is to be punished.17  
 
13.   Islamic jurisp rudence18 considers offences relating to reli gion to be 
offences against God ; they pertain to the rights of God in the terminology of 
Islamic jurists who categorize these offences as hadd offences.  To establish 
the guilt of an accused in a hadd offence , as per Islamic jurisp rudence,  
require s the high est, or best , form of evidence , and any doubt exonerates 
                                                
14 Director of Public Prosecutions v Kilbourne  ([1973] Appeal Cases 729) where the House of Lords held 
(p.746) ‘Corroboration can only be afforded  to or by a witness who is oth erwise to be believed. If a wi tness’s 
testimony falls on its own inanition the question of his needing, or being capable of giving, corrob oration does 
not arise.’ And, in Director of Public Prosecutions v  Boardman ([1975] Appe al Cases 421) the House of Lor ds 
held (p.455), that, ‘…unles s a witness’s evidence is intrinsically credible he could neither afford corroboration 
nor be thought to require it. In such cases, the witness’s evidence is rejected before the question of 
corrob oration arises.’ Irshad Ahmad v State  (1990 P Cr L J 374, 38 5B).  
15 Abu-Isa al -Tirmidhi  (824-892), Sunan , Chapter 11, Hadith No. 1180; Abu Bakr al -Sarakhsi (1009 -1090), al-
Mabsut , published by Dar al -Kutub al -‘Ilmiyyah, 1997, vol. 16, p. 122.  
16 Article 10A  of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan; Naveed Asghar v State  (PLD 2021 
Supreme Court 600, 618H) . 
17 Sarakhsi al-Mabsut , Vol. 9, p. 121; Ibn ‘Abidin al -Shami (1784 -1836), Radd al -Muhtar , published by 
Mustafa al -Babi, Cairo, Vol. 3, p. 176. ; Ibn ‘Abd a l-Barr al-Andalusi (978 -1071) , al-Tamhid , published by 
Ministry of Awqaf and  Islamic Affairs, Morocco, 1967, vol. 21, p. 256; Abu Ishaq al -Shirazi (1003 -1083), al-
Muhadhdhab , published by Dar al -Kutub al -‘Ilmiyyah, Beirut, 2002, vol. 3, 258.  For instance , if a war 
criminal after being captured has been held liable to death punish ment and a person kills him without the 
permission of the State, he would face punishment for committing iftiyat . Sarakhsi, Sharh al -Siyar al -Kabir , 
published by Dar al -Kutub al -‘Ilmiyyah, 1997, vol. 3, p. 126. 
18 However, not so stated in the Pakistan Penal Code.  Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  7
the accused. A well-know n authentic hadit h19 narrated by several 
companions of the Prophet (peace and bless ings be upon him) states :20 
  ادْرَءُوا  اﻟْﺤُﺪُودَ  ﺑِﺎﻟﺸﱡﺒُﮭَﺎتِ  
 ‘Avoid punishments in case of doubt .’  
The Second Rightly -Guided Caliph, Umar ibn al -Khattab  (Allah be pleased 
with him) , reiterated this principle in the following words:  
    ادْرَءُوا  اﻟْﺤُﺪُودَ ﻣَ ﺎ اﺳْ ﺘَ ﻄَ ﻌﺘُ ﻢْ  
 ‘Avoid punishments as fa r as you can .’21  
This Court in a case under section  295-C PPC recognized this principle  by 
stating that  ‘It will not be out of place to mention here that this  [benefit of 
doubt ] rule occupies a pivotal place in Islamic law and is enforced 
rigorously in  view of the saying of the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h .) that the 
“mistake of Qazi (Judge) in releasing a criminal is better than his mistake 
in punishing an innocent ”.’22    
 
Wael B. Hallaq  (1955 -), Professor in Islamic Law at the Institute of Islamic 
Studies of McGill University, aptly observes:   
‘The severe san ctions applied to hudud  offences were intended 
to deter ( zajr) and were thus infrequently implemented in 
practice. … Their commission, when not punished in this 
world, landed the offender in eternal Hellfire,  an eschatological 
notion that tended to engende r moral compliance on a deep 
psychological level. The extreme economy with which hudud  
were invoked was motivated by the maxim, generated from a 
Prophetic hadith , that they had to be “averted at the existence  
of the slightest doubt” .’23 
 
14. Abiding by Islamic jurisprudential principles, applying the 
constitutionally g uaranteed right to fair trial and due process , and a cting  
prudently to ensure that an innocent is not  convicted  wrongly  in respect of 
offences relating  to religion , when there is only  the improbable  oral 
testimony of witnesses, then  there must be corroboration . Oftentimes 
righteous zeal, moral outrage, and /or indignation  also steers the  
prosecution to a pre-determined destination by eclips ing the g eneral 
standard of proof in criminal  cases ; that is,  beyond reasonable doubt .24  
                                                
19 Tradition of Prophet Muhammad, peace and b lessing  be upon him.  
20 Abu-Yusuf (729 -798), Kitab al -Kharaj , published by Dar al -Ma‘rifah, Beirut, 1979, pg. 152; ‘Ala’ al -Din al -
Haskafi (1616 -1677) Musnad Abi -Hanifah , Kitab al -Hudood , Hadith No. 4; Abu -‘Isa al -Tirmidhi (824 -892), 
Sunan , Ch. 15, Hadith No. 142 4.  
21 Muhammad ibn al -Hassan (749 -805), Kitabl al -Asl, published by Dar Ibn Hazm, Beirut, 214, Vol. 7, p . 150.  
22 Ayub Masih v State  (PLD 2002 Supreme Court 1048, 1056B).  
23 Sharia : Theory, Practice, Transformation , Cambridg e University Press 2009, part II, chapter 10, p. 246.   
24 Naveed Asghar v State  (PLD 2021 S upreme Court 600, 617F); Salman Rafique v National Accountability 
Bureau (PLD 2020 S uprem e Court 456); Rahmat v S tate (PLD 1977 Supreme Court 515, p. 527E ). Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  8
Therefore, i n all cases relating to religion, the State must  also proceed with 
meticulosity and dil igently investi gate the alleged crime . This is also the 
clear intent of the Legislature which inserted section 156A into the Code. 
And, this is all the more necessary when  the offence (s) are not self -evident  
(as in the present case) .  
 
15. The investigating SP appears to have accepted the word of the four 
friends against that of the tw o accused and no reason, let alone a valid one, 
is given f or the preference . It is prohi bited for an investigating  officer to 
discriminate or give preference o n religious grounds .25 The defense  version  
should also not be ignored.26 It may not be out of place  to mention that t he 
Federal Shariat Court27 had noted the views of a few eminent Islamic 
scholars who had opined that  even in cases where blasphemy was 
committ ed, if the accused had repented , he should not be punished.28  
 
16. We were informed  that the profes sion of the petitioner is clean ing 
public places , which is commendable . The rel igion of Islam encourages and 
loves cleanliness  of the mind, body , and  of surroundings. The H oly Qur’an 
states that : 
 ﻦَ ﻤُﺘَﻄَﮭِّﺮِﯾ ﻟۡ ٱ وَﯾُﺤِﺐﱡ  ﻟﺘﱠﻮﱠٰﺑِﯿﻦَ ٱ ﯾُﺤِﺐﱡ  ﱠَ ๡ٱ إِنﱠ  
‘Allah loves those who are constantly repentant and loves 
those who purify  themselves .’29  
Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon him) said: 
   اَﻟطﱠ ﮭُ ورُ  ﺷَ طْ رُ  اﻹِْ ﯾﻣَ ﺎنِ  
 ‘Cleanline ss is half of faith .’30 
The companions of the Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings be upon 
him) observed that he would himself perform menial household chores.31 
The First Rightly Guided Caliph, Abu -Bakr (Allah be pleased with him) , 
used to visit the house of an old blind woman and remove  her rubbish and 
excrement.32   
 
17. We now proceed to consider whether the petitioner should be 
released on bail pending the conclusion of his trial . These are the facts of 
the case and the evidence on r ecord  which have helped us decide  this bail 
petition . The four friends came to the Park from their College , which is 
situated at a distance of ten kilometers without  offering an explanation why 
                                                
25 Articles 14, 20, 25(1) and 26(1) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  
26 Ubaidullah v State  (1991 SCMR  1734, 1736B) .  
27 Muhammad Ismail  Qureshi v Pakistan  (PLD 1991 Federal Sh ariat Court 10).  
28 Ibid, Maulana Mufti Ghulam Sarwar Qadri para. 5, p. 17; Maulana Hafiz Salahuddin Yousuf, para. 6, p.  17 
and Maulan a Saeed -ud-Din Sherkoti, para. 10, p. 18.  
29 Al-Qur’an, surat Al -Baqarah  (2), verse 2 22, also verse 151.   
30 Muslim bin al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri (815-875), Sahih Mu slim, Chapter 2 , Hadith No. 2 23. 
31 Muhammad bin Isma ‘il al-Bukhri , (810-870), Sahih al -Bukhari , Chapter 10, Hadith No. 676.  
32 Ibn ‘Asaki r (1106 -1176), Tarikh Dimashq , published by Dar al -Fikr, Beirut, 1995, vol. 30, p. 322.   Criminal Petition No. 883 -L of 2022  9
they chose th is distant  Park or how they g ot to it from their College.  
Significant ly, others who would be present  in the Park and guard s posted 
at the Park  did not raise their accusing finger at the petitioner , nor  were 
they associated with the investigation . The four friends testified that the 
petitioner was intentionally preaching Christianity  suggesting thereby that 
they considered thi s to const itute a crime (which it is not, as stated above). 
Evidence of the petitioner being a preacher was also not  produced which 
also undermines their testimony . Then the complainant took about eight 
hours to inform the Police, even though  the police station was in the 
immediate vicinity of the purported crime scene. Admittedly , the petitioner  
who works as a s weeper  is also far less educated than the four friends , 
making it difficult to accept that they would  not have rebutted  his 
purported assertion s, and  stood  by silentl y for thirty minutes.  Moreover, no 
incriminating material was recovered from the petitioner. All these factors 
make this a case for further inquiry and entitle the petitioner to bail.  
 
18. Therefore, the petitioner is admitted to bail , subject to  furnishing bail 
bond in the sum of fifty thousand rupees with one surety in the like 
amount to the satisfaction of the Trial Court. This petition is converted into 
an appeal and allowed by settin g aside the impugned order  in the said 
terms.  
 
19.  We have exercised extre me care  not to say anything on the merits of 
the case  which may adversely affect  the case of the petitioner or the State  
except what was necessary to decide  this bail petiti on. However, since th e 
trial of the petitioner was not proceeding  in accordance  with the law and 
the Constitution , we would  have failed in our duty if we had not pointed out 
the above -mentioned  discrepancies . We expect the learned Judge of the 
Trial Court  will attend  to the same.  
 
20. Copy of this order be sent to the Pr osecution Department of all the 
four provinces and of the Islamabad Capital Territory  for information and 
compliance  to ensure that the investigation of offences relating to religion, 
under Chapter X V of the Pakistan Penal Code, are conducted in accordance  
with the law and Constitution of the Islam ic Republi c of Pakistan as 
highlighted  and explained herein.  
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad   
23.08.2022 
(M. Tauseef)   
Approved for reporting.  