   
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
   Present  
 
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Muhammad Sair Ali  
   Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
   Mr. Justice Khalil -ur-Rehman Ramday  
 
SMC NO. 18 OF 2010  
 
ACTION REGA RDING VIOLATION OF PUBLIC 
PROCUREMENT RULES, 2004 IN PROCUREMENT 
LOSS OF BILLIONS OF RUPEES OF PUBLIC 
EXCHEQUER CAUSED BY NATIONAL INSURANCE 
COMPANY LTD.  
 
On Court notice:    Moulvi Anwarul Haq  
     Attorney General for Pakistan   
 
For NICL:     Mr. Abdul H afeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
     Mr. Tariq Iqbal Puri, CE TDAP   
     Acting Chairman, NICL  
 
For M/o Commerce:   Mr. Zafar Mehmood, Secretary  
      
For M/o Interior:    Mr. Qamar Zaman Ch, Secretary  
 
For the FIA:  Mr. zafar Iqbal Qureshi, Addl. Director  
     Mr. M. Azam Khan, Director (Law)  
     Mr. Moazzam Jah , Director , Karachi   
Mr. Basharat Shehzad, Dy. Dir/IO  
     Mr. Muhammad Ahmad, Asstt.Dir/IO  
 
For Athar Naqvi:    Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC  
 
For Casa Bella:    Ms. Romaisa Ahmad  
 
For Naveed Zaidi:    Nemo  
 
For Hur Riahi:    Nemo  
 
For NAB:     Mr. Muhammad Akbar Tarar, Acting PG  
     Mr. Fauzi Zafar, DPGA  
      
Date of hearing   : 25.01.2011  
…….  
O R D E R  
  Ch. Qamaruzzaman, Secretary, Ministry of Interior, 
Government of Pakistan has placed on record the notification dated SMC 18/2010  2 
24.01.2011, issued by the Government of Pakistan where by Capt. 
(Retd.) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, M anaging Director, National Police 
Foundation has been appointed as Additional Director General, FIA in 
addition to his present assignment  with immediate effect till further 
orders to supervise investigation of the NICL case at Lahore.  
2.  It is to be noted that during the period when he was 
supervising the investigation and the investigation was likely to make 
effective progress , he was abrupt ly transferred on the pretext that 
after his promotion in Grade 21 he c ould not continue as a Director 
over there, but we feel that this device was adopted with a mala fide 
intention otherwise by an identical notification as has now been issued, 
the author ities could have allowed him to continue with the 
investigation of an important case, involving a huge public money , 
which has allegedly been looted.  
3.   Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi is present. He has explained the 
progress made by him so far in the investig ation of the case. When 
inquired as to why he is not treating all the accused persons at par 
because one of the Directors  of NICL , Amin Qasim Dada  has not been 
arrested whereas remaining Directors have already been taken in 
custody of the FIA, he answered that despite his best efforts he was 
not allowed to do it. He stated that whenever any person is required 
from Lahore where he is posted as a Director, the needful is done, but 
when he had gone to Karachi and contacted Moazzam Jah , Director 
FIA over there in connection with the arrest of Amin Qasim Dada , 
Moazzam Jah told him that Amin Qasim Dada used to sit with DG, FIA 
in his camp office , therefore, how he could cause his arrest. On Court 
query, the Director FIA, Karachi, who is present, stated that 4 -5 days 
before the registration of the case and after the order had already SMC 18/2010  3 
been passed by this Court , Amin Qasim Dada was present with the 
DG, FIA. Be that as it may, DG, FIA is equally responsible for not 
causing his arrest. It seems that instead of allowing his Director to 
make progress in the case , he is providing shelter to the accused 
persons ; therefore, we direct the Additional Director General, FIA, 
Zafar Ahmed Qureshi to take all necessary steps for causing his arrest 
and if on a further probe he comes to the conclusion that the accused 
is being given shelter by the DG, FIA , then he should proceed against 
the DG  too in accordance with law because no one is above the law. 
He further explained that all efforts shall be made to explore the 
possibility as to  how the Government money was taken out of the 
accounts of the NICL , where the same was spent and in whose 
accounts the same was deposited. In this behalf, he has particularly 
made reference to the case of M/S Al -Tahoor Co., whose Manager 
Abdul Maalik has already been arrested and stated during interrogation 
that the account was opened in Allied Bank Ltd, Airport Road Branch, 
Lahore in the name of one Adil Manzoor whose name/NIC was used 
but when said Adil Manzoor  was interrogated, he stated that he had no 
knowledge of the same, but according to the statement of Manager 
Abdul Maalik , an amount of 22 crores of rupees has been given to 
Moonis Elahi . According to him, as progress  was being made  in the 
meanwhile , he was transferred and made under orders of DG 
(Waseem Ahmed) to relinquish the charge immediately. Be that as it 
may, Zafar Ahmed Qureshi has now again been posted as Additional 
Director General, FIA, therefore, he would be supervising investigation 
of the case pertaining the persons concerned.    
4.   Director Moazzam Jah  also gave progress report, which 
does not seem satisfactory as no step has been taken by him as well SMC 18/2010  4 
to cause arrest of the accused persons, who had left the country 
inasmuch as Amin Qasim Dada, who was available in Karachi and 
accordin g to his information he was sitting with DG, FIA after passing 
of order by this Court, he ought to have taken necessary steps  to 
cause his arrest . Similarly, he had taken no steps to recover the 
amount from the account of Ayaz Khan except making attachment  of 
the property but making no probe in the matter thoroughly fixing the 
responsibility upon the accused persons , which indicate s that the 
investigation is not being carried out honestly, fairly and properly. 
However, we may give him another chance to proc eed with the matter 
strictly in accordance with law and submit report on the next date of 
hearing in this behalf.  
5.  The Secretary Commerce has stated that he ha s sent a 
letter to the Auditor General of Pakistan to conduct special audit of the 
NICL.  
6.  The report submitted by the Secretary Interior is also 
placed on record.  
7.   Adjourned to 01.02.2011 when the Additional Director 
General, FIA , Lahore  and Director , FIA,  Karachi shall attend the Court 
and submit their report s.   
 
          CJ.  
 
 
 
          J.  
 
 
 
          J.      
 
 
 
          J.      
Islamabad,  
25.01.2011  