 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
 
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN  
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE TARIQ PARVEZ  
MR. JUSTICE MI AN SAQIB NISAR  
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ATHER SAEED  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO. 77 TO 85 & 89 OF 2011  
& CMA NO. 5505/2011 IN CONST. P. 79 OF 2011  
[Constitution Petition under Article 184(3) of the Cons titution 
regarding alleged Memo randum to Admiral Mike Mullen by Mr. 
Hussain Haqqani, former Ambassador of Pakistan to the United 
States of America]  
…  
 
Watan Party       … PETITIONER  
         [CP 77/2011]  
 
M. Tariq Asad Advocate Supreme Court   … PETITION ER  
         [CP 78/2011]  
 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif     … PETITIONER  
         [CP 79/2011]  
 
Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar & another   … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 80/2011]  
 
Iqbal Zafar Jhagra & another     … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 81/2011]  
 
Lt. General ® Abdul  Qadir Baloch & 2 others  … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 82/2011]  
 
Raja Muhammad Farooq Haider Khan & another…  PETITIONERS  
         [CP 83/2011]  
 
Syed Ghous Ali Shah & 2 others    … PETITIONERS  
         [CP 84/2011]  
 
 
Hafeez Ur Rahman      … PETITIONER  
         [CP 85/2011]  
 
Shafqatullah Sohail      … PETITIONER  
         [CP 89/2011]  CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  2 
VERSUS  
 
 
Federation of Pakistan & others    …  RESPONDENTS  
 
 
For the petitioners:   Barrister Zafarullah Khan, ASC in person  
Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC in person  
Mr. Rashid A. Rizvi , Sr. ASC  
Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar &  
Khawaja Muhammad Asif, MNA in person  
Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Rajwana, ASC  
Mr. Attique Shah, ASC  
Dr. M. Salahuddin Mengal, ASC  
Sardar Asmatullah Khan, ASC  
Syed Ghous Ali Shah, ASC  
Dr. M. Shamim Rana, ASC  
Mr. Naseer Ahmad Bhutta, ASC  
     Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
 
 
For the President of Pakistan:   Nemo .  
 
 
For the Prime Minister of Pakistan:  Nemo .  
 
 
For Chief of Army Staff,    Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
DG, ISI & M/O of Cabinet,    Attorney General for Pakistan   
Defence, Foreign  Affairs,   Mr. Dil Muhammad Alizai, DAG  
Interior & Law:     
 
 
For Hussain Haqqani:    Ms. Asma Jahangir, ASC  
      Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR assisted by  
      M/s Idrees Ashraf and Asad Jamal, Adv ocates  
 
For Mansoor Ijaz:    Nemo .  
 
Date of hearing:     19-23 & 27-30 December, 2011  
 
…  
 
O R D E R  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ.  – The 
Objectives Resolution , which has been made substantive part of the 
Constitution  by means of Article 2A of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan  commands that:  CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  3 
“And w hereas it is the will of the people of Pakistan to 
establish an order;  
Wherein integrity of the territories of the Federation, its 
independence and all its rights, including its sovereign 
rights on land, sea and air, shall be safeguarded;  
So that people o f Pakistan may prosper and attain their 
rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the 
World and make their full contribution towards 
international peace and prog ress and happiness of 
humanity.”  
2.  This short order shall be followed by detailed re asons, to 
be recorded later. The above petitions  have been instituted under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan .  
3.  For the purpose of understanding the issues involved in 
these petitions precisely the facts noted from the pleadings of the 
parties are that on 10th October, 2011 , the respondent Mansoor Ijaz 
wrote an Article in Financial Times, London . The contents  of the said 
Memo  have already been reproduced in the order dated 1st December, 
2011, however, same are repeated h erein below: - 
“CONFIDENTIAL MEMO RANDUM  
BRIEFING FOR ADM . MIKE MULLEN , CHAIRMAN , JOINT 
CHIEFS OF STAFF  
 
During the past 72 hours since a meeting was held between the 
president, the prime minister and the chief of army staff, there 
has seen a significant d eterioration in Pakistan’s political 
atmosphere. Increasingly desperate efforts by the various 
agencies and factions within the government to find a home – 
ISI and/or Army, or the civilian government – for assigning 
blame over the UBL raid now dominate the  tug of war between 
military and civilian sectors. Subsequent tit -for-tat reactions, 
including outing of the CIA station chief’s name in Islamabad by 
ISI officials, demonstrates a dangerous devolution of the ground 
situation in Islamabad where no central c ontrol appears to be in 
place.  
Civilians cannot withstand much more of the hard pressure 
being delivered from the Army to succumb to wholesale 
changes. If civilians are forced from power, Pakistan becomes a 
sanctuary for UBL’s legacy and potentially the p latform for far CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  4 
more rapid spread of al Qaeda’s brand of fanaticism and terror. 
A unique window of opportunity exists for the civilians to gain 
the upper hand over army and intelligence directorates due to 
their complicity in the UBL matter.  
Request your direct intervention in conveying a strong, urgent 
and direct message to Gen Kayani that delivers Washington’s 
demand for him and Gen Pasha to end their brinkmanship aimed 
at bringing down the civilian apparatus – that this is a 1971 
moment in Pakistan’s hi story. Should you be willing to do so, 
Washington’s political/military backing would result in a revamp 
of the civilian government that, while weak at the top echelon in 
terms of strategic direction and implementation (even though 
mandated by domestic poli tical forces), in a wholesale manner 
replaces the national security adviser and other national security 
officials with trusted advisers that include ex -military and 
civilian leaders favorably viewed by Washington, each of whom 
have long and historical ties  to the US military, political and 
intelligence communities. Names will be provided to you in a 
face-to-face meeting with the person delivering this message.  
In the event Washington’s direct intervention behind the scenes 
can be secured through your perso nal communication with 
Kayani (he will likely listen only to you at this moment) to stand 
down the Pakistani military -intelligence establishment, the new 
national security team is prepared, with full backing of the 
civilian apparatus, to do the following:  
 1. President of Pakistan will order an independent 
inquiry into the allegations that Pakistan harbored and 
offered assistance to UBL and other senior Qaeda 
operatives. The White House can suggest names of 
independent investigators to populate the panel, a long 
the lines of the bipartisan 9 -11 Commission, for example.  
 2. The inquiry will be accountable and independent, 
and result in findings of tangible value to the US 
government and the American people that identify with 
exacting detail those elements resp onsible for harboring 
and aiding UBL inside and close to the inner ring of 
influence in Pakistan’s Government (civilian, intelligence 
directorates and military). It is certain that the UBL 
Commission will result in immediate termination of active 
service o fficers in the appropriate government offices and 
agencies found responsible for complicity in assisting 
UBL.  
 3. The new national security team will implement a 
policy of either handing over those left in the leadership 
of Al Qaeda or other affiliated ter rorist groups who are 
still on Pakistani soil, including Ayman Al Zawahiri, 
Mullah Omar and Sirajuddin Haqqani, or giving US 
military forces a “green light” to conduct the necessary 
operations to capture or kill them on Pakistani soil. This 
“carte blanche”  guarantee is not without political risks, 
but should demonstrate the new group’s commitment to 
rooting out bad elements on our soil. This commitment 
has the backing of the top echelon on the civilian side of 
our house, and we will insure necessary collate ral 
support.  
 4. One of the great fears of the military -intelligence 
establishment is that with your stealth capabilities to 
enter and exit Pakistani airspace at will, Pakistan’s 
nuclear assets are now legitimate targets. The new 
national security team is prepared, with full backing of CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  5 
the Pakistani government – initially civilian but 
eventually all three power centers – to develop an 
acceptable framework of discipline for the nuclear 
program. This effort was begun under the previous 
military regime, with a cceptable results. We are prepared 
to reactivate those ideas and build on them in a way that 
brings Pakistan’s nuclear assets under a more verifiable, 
transparent regime.  
 5. The new national security team will eliminate 
Section S of the ISI charged with m aintaining relations to 
the Taliban, Haqqani network, etc. This will dramatically 
improve relations with Afghanistan.  
 6. We are prepared to cooperate fully under the 
new national security team’s guidance with the Indian 
government on bringing all perpetra tors of Pakistani 
origin to account for the 2008 Mumbai attacks, whether 
outside government or inside any part of the government, 
including its intelligence agencies. This includes handing 
over those against whom sufficient evidence exists of 
guilt to the Indian security services.  
 
Pakistan faces a decision point of unprecedented importance. 
We, who believe in democratic governance and building a much 
better structural relationship in the region with India AND 
Afghanistan, seek US assistance to help us pig eon-hole the 
forces lined up against your interests and ours, including 
containment of certain elements inside our country that require 
appropriate re -sets and re -tasking in terms of direction and 
extent of responsibility after the UBL affair.  
We submit t his Memo randum for your consideration collectively 
as the members of the new national security team who will be 
inducted by the President of Pakistan with your support in this 
undertaking.”   
 
4. Petitioners invoked original jurisdiction of this Court  by m eans of 
Constitution Petitions, questioning therein the contents of above Memo  
on stated allegations that question of public importance involving their 
fundamental rights under the Constitution has been made out as 
according to the version of Mansoor Ijaz -respondent , Memo  was 
prepared/drafted for the purpose of delivering the same to Chairman 
of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen t hrough  Gen. 
(Retd.)  James Logan Jones, former US National Security Advisor.  
5.  All the petitions were taken up f or hearing on 1st 
December, 2011 when after hearing the petitioners , either through 
counsel or in person, notices were issued to the respondents for filing CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  6 
of their replies and to conduct a probe regarding the Memo , Mr. Tariq 
Khosa, former Secretary Narcot ics/DG, FIA, subject to his consent , 
was directed  to act as a Commission. On the same day, by means of 
press -conference held in PID office by  Dr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC along  
with two Ministers and others, the order of the Court was criticized 
contemptuously.  Inasmuch as , brother of Mr. Tariq Khosa , namely , Mr. 
Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa , a learned Judge of this Court , who  
althoug h was not member of the Bench , was referred in terms which 
prima facie  are contemptuous , therefore, for such reasons, Mr. Tariq 
Khosa recused to act  as a Commission. In this context , reaction of the 
Chief Executive/Prime Min ister of Pakistan had  been obtained and 
appropriate directions shall be passed in the later part of th e order.  
6. Parties , including the Chief of Army Staff, DG, ISI, Mansoor Ijaz 
as well as Hussain Haqqani and the Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary Interior, Foreign Secretary represented by learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan , filed their replies . No separate reply has been 
filed by the President of Pa kistan.   
7. With a view to narrow down the controversy between the 
parties, directions were issued to them to file counter affidavits/re -
joinders to the replies of each others vide order dated 19.12.2011. A 
perusal of the pleadings suggests: -  
(i) After th e publication of above Article along with 
Memo  in Financial Times, London on 10th of October, 
2011, DG, ISI (Mr. Shujah Pasha) established his 
contact with Mansoor Ijaz in London and on his 
return to Pakistan shared his views with the Chief of 
Army Staff, General Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, thus, 
both of them in their replies to the petitions as well CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  7 
as affidavits have maintained that Memo  dated 10th 
May, 2011 exists.  
(ii) On 16th November, 2011 Mr. Hussain Haqqani 
addressed a letter to the President of Pakistan 
wherein after mentioning certain facts, he desired to 
tender his resignation from the post of Ambassador 
of Pakistan in United States and expressed to probe 
into the matter.  
(iii) About 3 to 4 meetings were held between the Prime 
Minister and Chief of Army Staff , the President and  
Chief of Army Staff and joint meeting between the 
President, Prime Minister, Chief of Army Staff , DG 
ISI and Hussain Haqqani, whereafter,  Hussain 
Haqqani  on account of their persuasion tendered his 
resignation  on 22.11.2011 , which was a ccepted vide 
notification dated  23.11.2011.  
(iv) Former Ambassador, Hussain Huqqani has denied 
categorically about his role in preparation of the 
Memo who at the same time has relied upon an  
affidavit tendered by James Jo nes, to establish that 
Mansoor Ijaz has concocted this story that such 
Memo was sent by him for delivering to Admiral Mike 
Mullen before 9th May, 2011.  
(v) In the meanwhile, vide letter dated 28.11.2011, 
issued under the signatures of Mr. Khushnood Akhter 
Lashari, Principal Secretary to the Prime Mi nister 
referred the matter to the Parliamentary Committee 
to conduct probe on the subject issue. The proposed 
terms of the reference are as under: -  
a. To probe into the memo purportedly written 
and sent by Mr. Mansoor Ijaz.  
b. To give consequential recommendati ons. 
(vi) Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Interior 
had not denied the existence of the Memo in their 
counter affidavits except raising technical flaws in 
respect of undertaking journey by DG, ISI to London CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  8 
to conduct a meeting with Mansoor Ijaz without  
permission of the Prime Minister.  
(vii) Mansoor Ijaz in his reply and in counter affidavit has 
contradicted the stand taken by Mr. Hussain 
Haqqani, former Ambassador and he has offered to 
provide further evidence to substantiate his plea  that 
allegedly on persu asion of Mr. Hussain Haqqani, 
Memo dated 10th may, 2011 was drafted to  be 
deliver ed to Mike Mullen through James Jones.  
8.  On 1st of December, 2011 the Court itself raised the 
question about the maintainability of the petitions and at the same 
time it wa s observed that  it would be appreciated if the outcome of the 
proposed inquiry by the  Parliamentary  Committee on National Security 
is shared with the Court, if possible.  
9.  After having heard the parties and having taken into 
consideration the relevant pr ovisions of the Constitution and the law, 
judgments cited on behalf of both the sides and the pleadings of the 
parties carefully, we hold  as under :- 
(a) In exercise of powers of Judicial Review,  we hold 
that in these petitions, petitioners have succeeded in 
establishing that the issues involved are justiciable 
and question of public importance with regard to  
enforcement of  fundamental rights , prima facie , 
under Articles 9, 14 and 19A of the Constitution has 
been made out . Thus, the petitions under Article 
184(3 ) of the Constitution are maintainable.  
(b) To delineate measures with a view to ensure 
enforcement of the fundamental rights noted in para 
ibid, a probe is called for to ascertain the origin , 
authenticity and purpose of creating/drafting  of 
Memo  for deliveri ng it to Chairman of the US Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen through Gen. 
(Retd.) James Logan Jones, former US National CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  9 
Security Advisor . Thus,  in exercise of powers  
conferred  upon this Court under Article 187  of the 
Constitution , Order XXXII, R ules 1 and 2 read with 
Order XXXVI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 
coupled with the principle of Civil Procedure Code , a 
Commission is appointed.  As the due process of law 
is the entitlement of all the stakholders, therefore, to 
ensure probe into the matter  in an transparent 
manner  the Commission shall be comprising of:  
(i) Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa,    (Chairman)  
 Chief Justice of Balochistan High Court  
 
(ii) Mr. Justice Iqbal Hameed -ur-Rehman  (Member)  
 Chief Justice, Islamabad High Court  
 
(iii) Mr. Justic e Mushir Alam    (Member)  
 Chief Justice, High Court of Sindh  
 
Raja Jawwad Abbas  Hassan , District & Sessions Judge , 
Islamabad  is appointed as Secretary to the Commission.  
(c) The Commission shall hold its meetings in the 
building of Islamabad High Court. The Co mmission 
shall be exercising all the powers of Judicial Officers 
for the purpose of carrying out the object  mentioned 
hereinabove  and it shall be free to avail services of  
advocates , experts of forensic science  and cyber 
crimes . All the Federal Secretaries , including Interior 
Secretary, Secretary Cabinet, Secretary Foreign 
Affairs ; Chief Secretaries of all the provinces ; DG, 
FIA; Inspector Generals of Police  of all the provinces  
and Ambassadors of Pakistan in USA and UK , shall 
provide necessary assistance t o the Commission.  
(d) Government of Pakistan through Secretary Cabinet 
Division shall provide logistic support to the 
Commission , subject to its demand s through  the 
Secretary of the Commission.  
(e) The Commission shall be authorized to collect 
evidence within an d outside Pakistan according to 
prevailing laws on the subject.  CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  10 
(f) The Commission shall provide full opportunity of  
hearing  to all the parties .  
(g) The Commission is required to complete this task 
within a period of four weeks  after receipt hereof .  
10.  It is t o be noted that t he reply submitted before the Court 
by Mr. Mansoor Ijaz, inter alia, comprises of certain documents 
including exchange of e -mails and other communications using the 
BlackBerry Messaging service commonly known as BBM between them 
i.e. Manso or Ijaz and Hussain Haqqani were in constant touch either 
through BBM, e -mails or voice calling w.e.f. 9th to 12th May, 2011. In 
fact during relevant  days, as many as 85 BBMs, voice calls and e -mails 
were exchanged between the two. Prima facie these commun ications 
form the most important piece of evidence regarding purported 
contacts between the two for the purposes of drafting the alleged 
Memo . In addition to these dates, Mansoor Ijaz also claims that he had 
electronic/telephonic interactions with Hussain Haqqani on October, 28 
and November, 1 2011. Therefore, in the interest of justice, it is 
appropriate to get the confirmation about the veracity and authenticity 
of these communications from the original company known as 
Research in Motion (RIM) based in C anada being the sole and 
exclusive custodian of such information. Therefore, the learned 
Attorney General is directed to contact the said Company RIM through 
Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs for getting confirmation about the 
authenticity of the abov e mentioned electronic communications 
exchanged between Mansoor Ijaz and Hussain Haqqani. This 
confirmation may be obtained at the earliest and in order to save and 
protect the forensic evidence and to scrutinize the same it should be 
produced before the C ommission.  As forensic evidence is likely to be CONST P 77 -2011 /2010 , etc.  11 
collected from the company Research in Motion (RIM) based in 
Canada, therefore, the High Commission of Pakistan in Canada is 
directed to cooperate and assist the Commission as well.  
11.  Vide order dated  1st December, 2011,  Mr. Hussain Haqqani 
was directed not to leave the country without the permission of the 
Court. This order is kept intact . 
12.  Office is directed to put a separate note in the Chambers of 
Chief Justice of Pakistan along  with the transcripti on of the press -
conference dated 1st December, 2011 of Mr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC 
along with replies/reactions of the Pri me Minister of Pakistan dated  
23rd December and  26th December, 2011 for passing appropriate 
orders.  
13.  The petitions are adjourned for a date to be fixed  by the 
office after receipt of the report from the Commission.     
 
 IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
 
 
 
MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN , J.   TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI , J.  
 
 
 
JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA, J.   TARIQ PARVEZ, J.    
 
 
 
MIAN SAQIB NISAR, J.    EJAZ AFZAL KHAN, J.   
 
 
 
IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY, J.   MUHAMMAD ATHER SAEED, J.  
 
 
Islamabad, the  
30th December , 2011   
 
   Approved For Reporting  