IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE NASIR -UL-MULK  
MR. JUSTICE ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALI  
MR. JUSTICE ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA  
MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO . 9 OF 2014  
(Constitution petition under Article 184 of the Constitution 
regarding seniority of the Judges of Lahore High Court, 
Lahore)  
 
Muhammad Aslam Awan, ASC    … Petitioner  
VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan and others    … Respondents  
 
For the Petitioner:  Mr. Zaka ur Rehman Awan, ASC  
 
On Court Notice:  Mr. Salman Aslam Butt, Attorney General  
 Mr. Taimur Khan, Consultant to Attorney 
General  
 Sardar Dilnawaz Cheema, Consultant to 
Attorney General  
  
Dates of Hearing:   05 & 06.05.2014  
 
ORDER  
 
  TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, CJ .- The question of 
inter se  seniority of High Court Judges has been raised off and on 
either on the administrative side in the respective High Courts or 
through representations addressed to the President of Pakistan. 
Such issues though important  for the Judges concerned, yet have 
a potential to cause some ripple in the comity of Judges and it is 
imperative that those be resolved in the light of some objective 
criterion to be laid down by this Court.  
2.  Leaving the question of seniority to be de cided by the 
President or by the concerned Chief Justice of a High Court 
without reference to any objective criterion may raise issues of 
judicial independence which is mandated under the Constitution 
and is essential in a democracy. Judicial independence both of the Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  2
individual Judge and of the Judiciary as an institution is essential 
so that those who bring their causes / cases before the Judges and 
the public in general have confidence that their cases would be 
decided justly and in accordance with law. J udicial independence 
is one of the foundational values of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan which is based on trichotomy of powers in 
which the functions of each organ of the State have been 
constitutionally delineated . The very Preamble of the Constitution 
pledges “ wherein the independence of judiciary shall be fully 
secured ”. The Constitution makers conferred this independence 
because they wanted the Judges to “ do right to all manner of 
people, according to law, without fear or favour, affe ction or ill -will” 
(Oath of office of Judges). The fundamental rights guaranteed 
under the Constitution cannot be secured unless Judiciary is 
independent because the enforcement of these rights has been left 
to Judiciary in terms of Articles 184(3) & 199 o f the Constitution 
and the relevant law. Judiciary has not been made part of the 
Executive or the Legislature (Article 7). The separation of Judiciary 
from the Executive was made a Constitutional mandate (Article 
175(3). So jealously this independence has been guarded that even 
in the appointment of Judges (Article 175A) and in their removal 
(Article 209) the primacy is that of the Judiciary. The Judicial 
Commission is headed by the Chief Justice of Pakistan and its 
Members comprise of four senior most Judg es of the Supreme 
Court, a former Chief Justice or Judge of the Supreme Court, Chief 
Justices and senior puisne Judges of the respective High Courts (if 
the appointment is that of the Judge of the High Court), Minister 
for Law and Attorney General for Paki stan as also representative of Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  3
the Bar. The recommendations made by the Judicial Commission 
are sent to the Parliamentary Committee which is to decide within 
14 days, failing which the recommendations made by the Judicial 
Commission are deemed to have been  affirmed. The primacy in the 
entire process of appointment of Judges is still with the Judiciary. 
The Court through this judgment  in laying down a criterion / 
guideline to determine the inter se  seniority of the Judges of the 
High Courts has partly been influenced to protect and preserve 
this seminal Constitutional value.  
3.  The questions raised in this petition are two fold: (i) 
From which date the inter se  seniority of Judges of the High Court 
appointed under Article 193 of the Constitution vide the sa me 
order and date be reckoned i.e. from the date of their appointment 
as Additional Judges under Article 197 or from the date they are 
appointed as Judges under Article 193 of the Constitution , and (ii)  
what should be the criterion to determine the inter s e seniority of 
Judges appointed the same day and vide the same order both from 
the Bar and District Judiciary ? These questions have been raised 
in the following set of circumstances:  
  On 14.9.2009, the President of Pakistan in exercise of 
his powers unde r Article 19 7 of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan appointed following 12 Additional Judges of 
the Lahore High Court “for a period of one year , with effect from the 
date they take oath of their offices ”: 
 1. Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
 2. Mr. Justice Sh. Najam ul Hassan  
 3. Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
 4. Mr. Justice Asad Munir  
 5. Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
 6. Mr. Justice Hafiz Abdul Rehman Ansari  
 7. Mr. Justice  Sardar Tariq Masood  
 8. Mr. Justice Tariq Javaid  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  4
 9. Mr. Justice Nas ir Saeed Sheikh  
 10. Mr. Justice Mansoor Akbar Kokab  
 11. Mr. Justice  Kh. Imtiaz Ahmad  
 12. Mr. Justice Sagheer Ahmad Qadri  
 
4.  On 17.2.2010 yet another notification was issued with 
regard to the appointment of 22 Additional Judges under Article 
197 of th e Constitution  “for a period of one year ” with effect from 
the date they took oath of their offices. Their names are: - 
1. Mr. Justice  Mian Shahid Iqbal  
2. Mr. Justice  M. Farrukh Irfan Khan  
3. Mr. Justice  Mamoon Rashid Shaikh  
4. Mr. Justice  Shaukat Umar Pir zada 
5. Mr. Justice  Waqar Hassan Mir  
6. Mr. Justice  Yawar Ali Khan  
7. Mr. Justice  Muhammad Khalid Mahmood  
8. Mr. Justice  Ch. Shahid Saeed  
9. Mr. Justice  M. Anwar Bhour  
10. Mr. Justice  Ijaz Ahmad  
11. Mr. Justice  Sardar Muhammad Shamim Khan  
12. Mr. Justice  Hassan Raza Pasha  
13. Mr. Justice  Syed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi  
14. Mr. Justice  Muhammad Anwar ul Haq  
15. Mr. Justice  Muhammad Qasim Khan  
16. Mr. Justice  Shahid Hameed Dar  
17. Mr. Justice  Ch. Muhammad Tariq  
18. Mr. Justice  Mazhar Iqbal Sidhu  
19. Mr. Justice  Rauf Ahmad Shaikh  
20. Mr. Justice  Shaikh Ahmad Farooq  
21. Mr. Justice  Muhammad Naseem Akhtar  
22. Mr. Justice  Syed Akhlaq Ahmad  
 
5.  The President vide the notification dated 17.2.2011 
under Article  197 of the Constitution , extended the period of 
following 18 out of 34 Additional Judges  (appointed vide the 
notifications referred to above) as Additional Judges  “for a period of 
one year  with effect from the date their present term expires ”: 
1. Mr. Justice Sagheer Ahmad Qadri  
2. Mr. Justice Nasir Saeed Sheikh  
3. Mr. Justice Sh. Najam ul Hassan   
4. Mr. Justice Kh. Imtiaz Ahmad   
5. Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik   
6. Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood   
7. Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan   
8. Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah   
9. Mr. Justice Sheikh Ahmad Farooq   
10. Mr. Just ice Ch. Shahid Saeed   Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  5
11. Mr. Justice Rauf Ahmad Shaikh   
12. Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmad   
13. Mr. Justice Muhammad Khalid Mehmood Khan   
14. Mr. Justice Shahid Hameed Dar  
15. Mr. Justice Muhammad Anwaarul Haq   
16. Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Shamim Khan   
17. Mr. Justice Muhammad Qasim Khan   
18. Mr. Justice Mazhar Iqbal Sidhu   
  
6.  Out of the afore -mentioned 18 Judges, 15 were 
appointed as Judges under Article 193 of the Constitution vide the 
notification dated 11.5.2011  on the recommendation of Judicial 
Commiss ion, who are as follows: - 
1. Mr. Justice Nasir Saeed Sheikh  
2. Mr. Justice Sh. Najam ul Hassan  
3. Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
4. Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
5. Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
6. Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
7. Mr. Justice Sheik h Ahmad Farooq  
8. Mr. Justice Ch. Shahid Saeed  
9. Mr. Justice Rauf Ahmad Shaikh  
10. Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmad  
11. Mr. Justice Muhammad Khalid Mehmood Khan  
12. Mr. Justice Shahid Hameed Dar  
13. Mr. Justice Muhammad Anwaarul Haq  
14. Mr. Justice Sardar Mu hammad Shamim Khan  
15. Mr. Justice Mazhar Iqbal Sidhu  
7.  On 25.8.2011  the President (on the recommendation of 
the Judicial Commission and Parliamentary Committee ) appointed 
another three Additional Judges as Judges of the High Court 
under Article 193 of  the Constitution with effect from the date they 
make oath of their offices and they took oath on 5.9.2011 . Those 
are:- 
1. Mr. Justice Sagheer Ahmad Qadri  
2. Mr. Justice Kh. Imtiaz Ahmad  
3. Mr. Justice Muhammad Qasim Khan  
 
8.  On 2.12.2013 , the Hon’ble S enior Puisne Judge of the 
Lahore High Court  Mr. Justice Nasir Saeed Sheikh requested the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court  that the inter se  
seniority of the Judges appointed under Article 193 of the Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  6
Constitution be determined in conformity wi th the law laid down 
by this Court and , thereafter, the Administration Committee of the 
High Court be reconstituted. The Administration Committee was 
reconstituted on 14.12.2013 . 
9.  Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the 
notification dated 14.12.2013 wherein the Administration 
Committee was reconstituted is violative of the Constitution  and 
the law laid down by this Court in Nadeem Ahmed vs. Federation 
of Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 10 62) and Federation of Pakistan  through 
Secretary,  Ministry of Law  and Parliamentary Affairs and Justice 
Vs. Sindh High Court Bar Association through President  (PLD 
2012 SC 1067); that the inter se  seniority of the Judges had to be 
determined by the Chief Justice; that it’s a long standing practice 
of the High Court that  the Judges whose appointments are made 
by a single order take seniority according to age; that an Additional 
Judge  appointed  under Article 197 of the Constitution is a specie 
apart ; that  if he is made permanent , a fresh appointment order is 
made under Art icle 193 of the Constitution  and his service as 
Additional Judge cannot be counted towards his seniority ; that the 
inter se  seniority has to be reckoned from the date when an 
Additional Judge is made permanent Judge of the High Court  
under Article 193 of t he Constitution . He contended that when a 
person is appointed as Judge of the High Court under Article 193 
of the Constitution, he has to take fresh oath and, therefore, it is a 
fresh appointment. He referred to Article 255(3) of the Constitution 
to conten d that it has specifically been provided  that “where, under 
the Constitution, a person is required to make an oath before he 
enters upon an office, he shall be deemed to have entered upon the Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  7
office on the day on which he makes the oath ”. The effect of the  
afore -referred provision, according to learned counsel, is that it is 
only the day a person becomes a Judge under Article 193 of the 
Constitution when he can be considered as a permanent Judge 
and, therefore, the inter se  seniority has to be reckoned from  the 
said date.  
ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR PAKISTAN  
10.   Learned Attorney General  for Pakistan traced the 
history of appointment of Additional Judges in India which dates 
back to East India (High Courts of Judicature) Act, 1861 , under 
which the Judges of the High Courts were appointed  by Her 
Majesty and held office during Her Majesty’s pleasure; that there 
was a provision of appointing an Acting Judge  in absence of a 
permanent Judge who was to perform the duties until the return of 
the said Judge or until the Governor General cancels the 
appointment of the Acting Judge. This arrangement continued till 
the Government of India  Act, 1935 , when the expression 
‘Additional Judges ’ was used for the first  time in Section 222 of the 
Act and that appointment was to be ma de when the office of any 
Judge was vacant and the Judges so appointed were for a period 
“not exceeding two years ” as the case may be . In India the 
Constitution was promulgated in 1950, Article 217 of which 
empowered the President to appoint a Judge of the  High Court and 
there was no mention of Additional or Acting Judge . Under Article 
224 of the said Constitution, however, the Chief Justice of a High 
Court with the consent of the President could request any person 
who ha d held the office of a Judge of the High Court ‘ to sit and act 
as a Judge of the High Court for that State ”. In 1956 , Article 224 Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  8
was amended and it was provided that “if by reason of any 
temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason of 
arrears of work therein, it appears t o the President that the number 
of the Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, 
the President may appoint duly qualified persons to be additional 
Judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two years as he 
may specify. ” In India, now, every Additional Judge becomes 
permanent when vacancy occurs. The first Constitution of Pakistan 
was promulgated in 1956 , Article 165 of which  provided for the 
appointment of a Judge of the High Court. On 18.11.1958 by 
virtue of Presidential Order No.  3 (The Courts (Additional Judges) 
Order, 1958)  issued by General Muhammad Ayub Khan  it was 
stipulated that “if by reason of any temporary increase in the 
business of the Supreme Court or of a High Court or by reason of 
arrears of work in any such Court it  appears to the President that 
the number of the Judges of the court should be for the time being 
increased, the President may appoint persons duly qualified for 
appointment as Judges to be additional Judges of the Court for such 
period not exceeding two y ears as he may specify .” The mode of 
appointment of Additional Judge became pari materia  with Article 
224 of the Indian Constitution. In 1962, the second Constitution 
was promulgated, Article 96 of which codified in pith an d 
substance what was provided in Presidential Order No. 3 of 1958 
regarding mode of appointment of Additional Judge of the High 
Court. In 1973, the Constitution  of Pakistan which is in vogue 
today was promulgated. However, Article 193 regarding the mode 
of appointment of Chief Justice and  Judges of the High Court was 
amended and it was laid down that the President shall appoint Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  9
these Judges in accordance with Article 175 A of the Constitution. 
After such an appointment, oath is administered to such an 
appointee in terms of Article 194 which  mandates that “ before 
entering upon office, the Chief Justice of a High Court shall make 
before the Governor, and any other Judge of the Court shall make 
before the Chief Justice, oath in the form set out in the Third 
Schedule ”. Learned Attorney General s ubmitted that Article 194 
makes no difference between an Additional Judge and a permanent 
Judge. In support of his submission that the Constitution does not 
make a difference between the two offices, he referred to (i) Article 
160, (ii) Article 177(2)(a) , (iii) the wording of oath of office, and (iv) 
the mode of appointment provided in terms of Article 175A of the 
Constitution .  
11.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan cited the case of 
appointment of Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar, Hon’ble 
former Jud ge, as Judge of the Supreme Court which appointment 
was challenged before this Court Supreme Court Bar Association 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2002 SC 939)  to submit that in the 
said case the petitioner / President of the Supreme Court Bar 
Association had challenged the appointment inter alia  on the 
ground that he had  not completed five years of service as Judge of 
the High Court to be eligible for appointment to the Supreme Court 
but this Court while computing the requisite service of five years as 
Judge of the High Court included the period he served as 
Additional  Judge.  
12.  Learned Attorney General referred to many precedents 
in the Lahore High Court in which the seniority of Judges went 
along with their appointment as Additional Judges. He contende d Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  10
that a Judge of the High Court enters the office from the day he 
makes oath as Judge of the said Court as Additional Judge. This 
Constitutional intent is evident from Article 194 of the Constitution 
which provides as under: - 
“194.  Before entering upon of fice, the Chief Justice of a High 
Court shall make before the Governor, and any other Judge 
of the Court shall make before the Chief Justice, oath in the 
form set out in the Third Schedule.”  
 
13.  This intent is further reinforced in Article 255(3) of the 
Constitution which reads as follows: - 
“where, under the Constitution, a person is required to 
make an oath before he enters upon an office, he shall be 
deemed to have entered upon the office on the day on 
which he makes the oath ” 
 
14.  Similar is the impor t, according to him, of Article 
275(4) of the Constitution. In support of the submissions made, 
learned Attorney General relied on Begum Tahira Sultan in Re:  
(1989 MLD 4701) , para 2 & 3 of which reads as follow: - 
2. I requested the immediate presence of Mr . Abdul Hafeez 
Memon, the Advocate -General of Sindh, because although I 
could not expect him to argue the question at such short 
notice I wanted a clear statement on behalf of the 
Government whether it was their stand that this Court 
continues to exist or not. He assured me in categorical terms 
on behalf of the Government of Sindh, that Government 
regarded this Court as a continuing body with all the powers 
and functions that it had so far enjoyed and performed. In 
this view of the matter Mr. Niamat Ullah M olvi agreed to file 
another application expressly challenging our jurisdiction 
and it was agreed that the question would be argued today 
as it has been done.  
 
3. Today Mr. Molvi has filed an application in which it is 
expressly stated that this Court has n o jurisdiction to take up 
any matter unless a fresh oath is taken by the Court, by 
which I suppose he meant the judges of this Court, on the 
ground that the Constitution of 1972 stood repealed as on 
10-4-1973 the date of its enactment. Without prejudice to  this 
contention, it was also urged in the application that the 
Constitution of 1973 had already come into force and that 
we could not function unless we took oath under that 
Constitution. So far as the last question is concerned it is 
easily dealt with be cause, even assuming that the 
Constitution of 1973 has come into force Article 275 of that 
Constitution expressly continues in office the Chief Justice 
and other Judges of the High Courts and sub -Article (4) of 
that Article does not require that an oath be  taken before any Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  11
functions are performed by such an official but only that he 
shall take as soon as is practicable after the commencing 
date, the prescribed oath. It is to be noted that in the 
Constitution of 1973, as in the Constitution of the 1972, 
certain functionaries enter upon their office only after taking 
an oath but that both these Constitutions provided in respect 
of such persons as were already in office that they would 
continue to be in office and that they would take oath as 
soon as was practi cable. In point of fact even when the 1972 
Constitution came into force, the Judges of this Court 
including myself, did not take the oath upon the commencing 
date but a few days later.”  
 
15.  In support of the above contention, he relied upon yet 
another j udgment in Hira Singh and others Vs. Jai Singh etc  (AIR 
1937 Allahabad 588) .  
16.  He also referred to Muhammad Siddique Ahmed Khan 
vs. Pakistan Railways  (1997 SCMR 1514)  to contend that even in 
civil service, the seniority  in grade of an officer is with e ffect from 
his continuous officiation in that grade and not from his 
confirmation . At page 1520 of the judgment, this Court observed 
as follows: - 
“It is settled position of law that seniority in a grade will be 
accorded to an officer with effect from the d ate of his 
continuous officiation in that grade and not from the date of 
his confirmation. Similar view was taken in the case Araab 
Mukhtar Ahmed v. Secretary to Government of Pakistan, 
Establishments Division, Rawalpindi (1983 PLC (C.S.) 104). 
Learned cou nsel for the appellants Engineering Officers' 
Association and others v. State Maharashtra and others (AIR 
1990 SC 1607), (sic) where it was observed by the Supreme 
Court of India that once an incumbent is appointed to a post, 
his seniority has to be counte d from the date of his 
appointment and not from the date of confirmation. It was 
also observed that where an appointment is not made by 
following the procedure laid down by the rules but the 
appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the 
regulari zation  of his service in accordance with the rules, the 
period of officiating service will be counted.”  
 
17.  He also referred to the Indian judgment reported at 
The Director Recruits Class -II Engineering Officers Association and 
others Vs. State of Mahara shtra and others  (AIR 19 90 SC 1607)  
wherein the seniority of a civil servant was counted from the date Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  12
of his appointment and not from the  date of his confirmation, 
relevant  portion of the judgment is as under: -  
“44. To sum up, we hold that:  
 
(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to 
rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his 
appointment and not according to the date of his 
confirmation. The corollary of the above rule is that where the 
initial appointment is only ad hoc and  not according to rules 
and made as a stop -gap arrangement, the officiation in such 
post cannot be taken into account for considering the 
seniority.  
 
(B) If the initial appointment is not made by following the 
procedure laid down by the rules but the appoi ntee continues 
in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his 
service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating 
service will be counted.  
 
18.  He also relied on Al-Jehad Trust Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 324) wherein t his Court  dilated upon the 
distinguishing feature of the appointment of Judges in the High 
Court made under the Indian Constitution and appointment of 
Additional Judges of the High Court in Pakistan, wherein at page 
506, it was held as follows: - 
 “It will not be out of context to mention that the above 
provision was lifted from clause (1) of Article 224 of the 
Indian Constitution, 1950, which reads as follows: -- 
  
"224. Appointment of -additional and acting 
Judges. ---(1) If by reason of any temporary 
increas e in the business of a High Court or 
by reason of arrears of work therein, it 
appears to the President that -the number of 
the Judges of that Court should be for the 
time being increased, the President may 
appoint duly qualified persons to be 
additional Jud ges of the Court for such 
period not exceeding two years as he may 
specify."  
  
 At this juncture, it may be pertinent to mention that in 
1956 Constitution, there was no provision for appointment of 
Additional Judges in view of above speech of Quaid -e-Azam 
made by him in 1931 in the aforesaid Sub -Committee 
deprecating  the practice of appointing Additional Judges. But 
in 1958, the then President Ayub Khan issued the above 
President Order. Article 96 was incorporated in 1962 
Constitution for appointment of Add itional Judges even 
against permanent vacancies. This provision has been lifted Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  13
in 1972 Interim Constitution and 1973 Permanent 
Constitution.  
  
 It may be noticed that under the above President 
Order of 1958 and under clause (1) of Article 224 of the 
India n Constitution, an Additional Judge could be appointed 
in the following, two contingencies: -- 
  
(i) temporary increase in the business of a High Court; and  
  
(ii) temporary increase in arrears of work.  
  
Whereas under Article 197 of the Constitution, an 
Additional Judge can be appointed against a permanent 
vacancy or when a High Court Judge is absent or is unable 
to perform the functions of his office due to any other cause 
or for any reason it is necessary to increase the number of 
Judges of a High Court.  In other words, under Article 224(l) 
of the Indian Constitution, the appointment of an Additional 
Judge is purely temporary to achieve the above two objects, 
whereas under our Constitution, though the appointment of 
an Additional Judge is to be made for a  period not exceeding 
two years but an Additional Judge can be appointed against 
a permanent vacancy. This makes a lot of difference.  
  
I may observe that the parity of reasoning for not 
appointing an Acting Chief Justice or an Acting Judge in the 
Supreme Court against, permanent vacancies for a long 
period is equally applicable to an appointment of an 
Additional Judge in the High Court against a permanent 
vacancy. However, I may point out that a 
practice/convention has developed in Pakistan that in the 
High Courts Judges are first appointed as Additional Judges; 
either for a period of one year initially and then this period is 
extended to two years or they are initially appointed for a 
period of two years (during 1977 Martial Law this   period 
was extended t o three years) and then they are appointed as 
permanent Judges. Since there was no provision in the late 
Pakistan Constitution of 1956, which remained operative for 
a short period, for appointment of Additional Judges, in those 
days Judges in the High Cour ts initially were appointed 
permanently .” (Emphasis is supplied)  
 
19.  He added that even in India when an Additional Judge 
of the High Court is appointed as Judge / (permanent ) Judge his 
seniority is reckoned from the date of his initial appointment as an  
Additional Judge. He relied on Shanti Bhushan and another Vs. 
Union of India  (AIR 2008 SC  (Supp) 895 ) wherein at page 904 it is 
observed as under :- 
“10. It is to be noted that an Additional Judge cannot be 
said to be on probation for the purpose of appoin tment as a 
Permanent Judge. This position is clear from the fact that 
when an Additional Judge is appointed there may not be Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  14
vacancy for a Permanent Judge. The moment a vacancy 
arises, the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court  is 
required to send a pro posal for appointment of the Additional 
Judge as Permanent  Judge along with material as indicated 
in para 13. The rigour of the scrutiny and the process of 
selection initially as an Additional Judge and a Permanent 
Judge are not different. The yardstick s are the same. 
Whether a person is appointed as an Additional  Judge or a 
Permanent  Judge on the same date, he has to satisfy the 
high standards expected to be maintained as a Judge. 
Additionally, on being made permanent , the effect of such 
permanency relates  back to the date of initial appointment as 
an Additional Judge. The parameters of paragraph  12 of the 
memorandum cannot be transported in its entirely to 
paragraph 13. To being with, while making the 
recommendations  for appointment  of an Additional Judge as 
a perm anent Judge, Chief Justice of the High Court is not 
required to consult the collegium of the High Court . 
(Emphasis is supplied)  
 
20.  On being asked by this Court, learned Attorney 
General submitted that eversince the creation  of this country, the  
practice is that the seniority of Judges of the High Courts is 
reckoned from the date of their initial appointment as Additional 
Judges. He cited the example of late former Chief Justice of 
Pakistan  Mr. Justice Anwar ul Haq who was appointed as 
Additional  Judge of the West Pakistan High Court on 24.10.1959 
and was made a Judge / permanent Judge on 24.10.1962 . As 
against this , two Hon’ble Judges of the High Court  Mr. Justice 
Moulvi Mushtaq Hussain and Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal 
were directly appointe d as Judges of the High Court on 1.10.1962 
which is before Mr. Jusice Anwar ul Haq was made a Judge / 
permanent Judge (i.e. 24.10.1962) but he always ranked senior  to 
the former Judges. He added that he did not find any contrary 
practice in this regard. Th is practice, he further contended, has 
become almost a Constitutional convention and it has to be 
considered accordingly. In this regard he referred to a judgment of 
this Court reported at Malik Asad Ali and others Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 1 61). Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  15
21.  He also referred to another judgment of this Court 
reported at Federation of Pakistan Vs. Sindh High Court Bar 
Association  (PLD 2012 SC 1067) wherein this Court reiterated the 
view that the seniority of Judges shall be reckoned from the date of 
their initial appointment.  
22.  In the case regarding  pensionary benefits of the 
Judges of Superior Courts (PLD 2013 SC 829) , this Court candidly 
held that an Additional Judge is covered under the definition of a 
Judge and, therefore, entitled to pension s imilarly as Judge of the 
High Court. In para 84, the Court observed as under: - 
“84.       The submissions made by some of the learned 
Advocate Supreme Courts that "Additional Judges" of the 
High Court, being covered with the definition of "Judge" as 
define d under Article 260(1)(c) of the Constitution, are equally 
entitled for right to pension like permanent judges of the High 
Court, have much force as at one place the definition of 
'Judge' in the above referred Article of the Constitution clearly 
defines th at in relation to the High Court, a person who is an 
Additional Judge of the High Court, is also included in the 
definition of a Judge and at the other place under Article 197 
of the Constitution, relating to appointment of Additional 
Judges also, no discr imination is identified for the purpose of 
holding them disentitled for right to pension 
like  any  permanent   judge   of  the  High   Court, who, in 
terms of Article 195 of the Constitution, will retire on 
attaining the age of 62 years, unless he resigns so oner or 
removed from the office in accordance with the Constitution. 
It will be also pertinent to mention here that under 
paragraph -2 of the President's Order 3 of 1997, "Additional 
Judge" and "Judge" of the High Court have been separately 
defined as under :-- 
  
"2(c) "Additional Judge" means a Judge appointed by 
the President to be an Additional Judge."  
  
"2(f) "Judge" means a Judge of High Court and include 
the Chief Justice, and Acting Chief Justice and an 
Additional Judge."  
  
 From the reading of above t wo definitions, again it is 
clear that definition of a Judge of the High Court also 
includes additional judge, therefore, no exception could be 
taken in determination of his right to pension for the reason 
that he has not yet been appointed as permanent ju dge of 
the High Court in terms of Article 193 of the Constitution. 
Another added reason in support of this conclusion emerges 
from the combined reading of paragraph -2 of the Fifth 
Schedule to Article 205 of the Constitution, speaking about 
"every judge", a nd the definitions of Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  16
"judge"   under   Article   260(1)(c)(b)   of  the  Constitution and 
paragraph -2(f) of President's Order 3 of 1997, which leave no 
room for exclusion of "Additional Judge" from the category of 
"every judge" within the meaning of paragraph -2 (ibid). 
However, it is necessary to state and clarify here that in 
such eventuality, for claiming right to pension a retired judge 
of the High Court "additional judge" will also have to have 
minimum five years actual service to this credit.”  
 
23.  On Co urt query, learned Attorney General informed 
that none of the Judges of the Lahore High Court whose seniority 
is a point in issue in this case has filed any representation qua his 
seniority.  
24.  Mr. Zakar ur Rehman Awan, petitioner’s learned 
counsel in h is right of reply submitted that the practice of treating 
seniority of Judges from the date they were appointed as 
Additional Judges is not a Constitutional / legal convention and, 
therefore, cannot be sanctified by this  Court, because of following 
reasons :- 
“1. While the practice under question may no doubt have 
been consistently followed over a long period of time, 
it is well -settled that mere practice cannot 
automatically acquire the status of “Constitutional 
convention” unless some other requirements ar e met.  
 
2. It cannot truly be said that the Chief Justice acts 
deliberately when he treats a Judge’s date of 
appointment as Additional Judge to be the starting 
point for purposes of determining inter se seniority of 
High Court Judges. There may in fact be no element of 
“deliberation” at all in his determination.  
 
3. Additionally, given the fact that neither the 
Constitution has fixed any rules for determination of 
inter se seniority of High Court Judges, nor the 
legislature has sought to lay down criteria f or the 
same, it cannot be said that the Chief Justice acts “in 
accordance to a rule” when he endeavours to make 
such a determination. As has already been 
established, the existence of “obligations” and “rules”  
lies at the very heart of determining whether or not a 
practice is in fact a “Constitutional convention”.  
 
4. Even if the Chief Justice, in fixing inter se seniority in 
the manner that he does, feels bound by a rule not 
laid down by the Constitution  or the legislature, but by 
general principles of eq uity, there must be some good 
reason behind the rule. In other words , there must be 
some good reason that compels the Chief Justice to Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  17
treat the date of appointment as Additional Judge to 
be the starting point for purposes  of determining inter 
se seniority  of High Court Judges, rather than the 
date of appointment as (permanent) Judge. If there is 
no good reason at all, then the practice in question is 
merely an anomalous/erroneous application of a 
mistaken ‘rule”, not worthy of being deemed a 
“Constitutiona l convention”.  
   
25.  We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan.  
26.   The question inter alia  as to from which date the 
seniority of a Judge appointed under Article 193 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Repu blic of Pakistan should be reckon ed 
i.e. from the date of his initial appointment as Additional Judge 
under Article 197 of the Constitution or from the date of his 
appointment under Article 193 of the Constitution , would of 
necessity require reference to b oth these provisions, which are as 
under: - 
“193.  [(1) The Chief Justice and 
each of other Judges of a High 
Court shall be appointed by the 
President in accordance with 
Article 175A.]  
 
(2) A person shall not be 
appointed a Judge of a High Court 
unless he is  a citizen of Pakistan, 
is not less than [forty -five] years of 
age, and ---  
 
(a) he has for a period of, or  
for periods aggregating, not less 
than ten years been an advocate 
of a High Court (including a High 
Court which  existed in Pakistan at 
any time  before the commencing 
day);or  
 
(b) he is, and has for a period 
of not less than ten years been, a 
member of a civil s ervice 
prescribed by law for the 
purposes of this paragraph, and 
has, for a period of not less  than 
three years, served as  or  
exercised  the  functions of a 
District Judge in Pakistan; or  
 
(c) he has, for a period of  not 
less than ten years, held a   197.  − At any time when ---  
 
(a) the office of a Judge of a 
High Court is vacant; or  
 
(b) a Judge of a High Court is 
absent or is unable to perform the 
functions of his office due to any 
other cause; or  
 
(c) for any reason it is 
necessary to increase the number of 
Judges of a High Court, the 
President may, in the manner 
provided in clause (1) of Article 193, 
appoint a person qualified for 
appointment as a Judge of the High 
Court to be Additio nal Judge of the 
Court for such period as the 
President may determine, being a 
period not exceeding such period, if 
any, as may be prescribed by law. ” Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  18
judicial office in Pakistan.  
 
Explanation .- In computing the 
period during which a person has 
been an advocate of a High Court 
or held judicial off ice, there shall 
be included any period during 
which he has held judicial office 
after he became an advocate or, 
as the case may be, the period 
during which he has been an 
advocate after having held judicial 
office.  
 
(3) In this Article, "District 
Judge" means Judge of a principal 
civil court of original jurisdiction.  
 
27.  The qualification for a person to be appointed as 
Additional Judge is the same as provided under A rticle 193 of the 
Constitution because  Article 19 7 provides  that “ the President may, 
in the manner provided in clause (1) of Article 193, appoint a person 
qualified for appointment as a Judge of the High Court to be 
Additional Judge of the Court for such p eriod as the President may 
determine, being a period not exceeding such period, if any, as may 
be prescribed by law .” As defined under Article 260(1)(c) of the 
Constitution, a ‘Judge ’ in relation to a High Court includes the 
Chief Justice of the Court and also “ a person who is an Additional 
Judge of the Court ”. A similar  oath is prescribed for both the offices  
in terms of Article 194 of the Constitution and both are “ deemed to 
have entered upon the office ” on the day on which they make the 
oath (Article 255 (3). Thus when an Additional Judge enters upon 
the office having taken oath in terms of Article 194 of the 
Constitution and is later appointed as a Judge (under Article 193), 
his service in the office continues, there is no break in service and, 
therefore,  the period spent as Additional Judge has to be counted 
towards his seniority while computing the period of service of a 
permanent Judge in the High Court. This is also evident from Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  19
Article 177 (2)(a) of the Constitution relatable to the appointment of 
a Judge of the Supreme Court, which provides as follows: - 
“177(2)  A person shall not be appointed a Judge of the 
Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of Pakistan and --- 
 
(a) has for a period of, or for periods aggregating, not less 
than five years been a judg e of a High Court 
(including a High Court which existed in Pakistan at 
any time before the commencing day) ” (Emphasis is 
supplied)  
 
28.  The expression used in Article 177(2)(a)  “for periods  
aggregating, not les s than five years been a judge of a High Cour t” 
indicates  that both the periods i.e. as Additional Judge and as 
Judge have to be counted for the requisite qualifying period of five 
years. It was precisely for this reason that this Court in the case of 
a challenge to the appointment of Mr. Justice Muh ammad Gul as 
Judge of the Supreme Court on the ground that he had not 
completed the requisite service of five years as Judge of the High 
Court in Ghulam Jillani Vs. Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul  (1978 
SCMR 110)  held as under: - 
 “Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul was thu s appointed a 
Judge of the High Court of Pakistan more than five yeah 
before his elevation to this Court which fulfilled the 
requirement of Article 178(2) (a) but the petitioner contended 
that it was necessary that he should have functioned as a 
Judge of t he High Court for five years. In his opinion mere 
appointment as a Judge did not achieve the object 
underlying Article 178(2) (a) viz., experience of functioning as 
a Judge for five years which would equip sufficiently a 
Judge of the High Court to be consi dered for elevation to the 
Supreme Curt.  
  
 The phraseology of Article 178(2) (a) of the Interim 
Constitution does not hear out the intent attributed to it by 
the petitioner. The words used are ‘he has for a period of, or 
for periods aggregating not leas t han five years been a Judge 
of the High Court. If the authors of the Constitution had so 
intended they would have used some other words to Indicate 
that not only has he held the Office of a Judge but also 
functioned or worked as a judge.”  
 
29.  This view  has been reiterated in a later judgment 
reported at Supreme Court Bar Association Vs. Federation of Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  20
Pakistan  (PLD 2002 SC 939) when the question of appointment of 
Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar as Judge of the Supreme 
Court was raised before this Court  and the Court held as follows: - 
 “The precise contention is that having not performed 
judicial functions as a Judge of the Lahore High Court for a 
period of five years he was not, qualified for appointment as 
a Judge of the Supreme Court and his appointmen t was also 
hit by the cardinal principle of natural justice 'no one should 
be a judge in his own cause' on account of the pivotal role of 
the incumbent of the office of Law Secretary in the process of 
the Constitutional appointments. This contention too is  
without any substance as it is incompatible with the 
provisions of Article 177 of the Constitution and ignores the 
law laid down by this Court in Malik Ghulam Jilani v. Mr. 
Justice Muhammad Gul (1978 SCMR 110). With regard to 
experience, Article 177 of th e Constitution only provides that 
a person shall not be appointed as a Judge of the Supreme 
Court unless he has been a Judge of a High Court for a 
period of or for periods aggregating not less than five years 
and does not prohibit appointment of a Judge of  a High Court 
as a Judge of the Supreme Court who has not worked as a 
Judge of the High Court for a period of five years.  
  
 The disqualification set up by the petitioners cannot 
be read into Article 177 of the Constitution. Mr. Justice Faqir 
Muhammad Khok har was appointed as a Judge of the 
Lahore High Court on 10th December, 1996 and as Secretary 
Law, Justice and Human Rights' Division on 1st January, 
2000. Having held the office as a Judge of the Lahore High 
Court for a period of five years he fulfilled t he experience -
related Constitutional requirement on, the eve of his 
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court. Besides, the 
issue was addressed and settled in the case of Justice 
Muhammad Gul wherein it was held that contention that a 
'person in order to  be qualified for appointment as a Judge of 
the Supreme Court must have had experience of functioning 
as a Judge of High Court for five years was not correct. In 
that case also Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul was Secretary, 
Ministry of Law and Parliamentary Affai rs, Government of 
Pakistan, at the time of his appointment as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court and the appointment was challenged through 
a writ petition under Article 199 of the Constitution on the 
ground that he did not fulfil l the requirement of Article 178 (2) 
of the Interim Constitution, 1972 that a person shall not be 
appointed as a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he has for 
a period of or for periods aggregating not less than five years 
been a Judge of a High Court. The writ petition was 
dismissed in li mine by a Division Bench of the Peshawar 
High -Court and the petition for special leave to appeal was 
dismissed by this Court, inter alia, with the following 
observations: -- 
  
"The phraseology of Article 178(2) of the Interim 
Constitution does not bear out the intent attributed 
to it by the petitioner. The words used are he has for 
a period of, or for periods aggregating not less than 
five years been a Judge of the High Court. If the 
authors of the Constitution had so intended they Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  21
would have used some other  words to indicate that 
not only has he held the office of a Judge but also 
functioned or worked as a Judge."  
 
  Somewhat similar principle was laid in Hira Singh and 
others Vs. Jai Singh etc  (AIR 1937 Allahabad 588) wherein at page 
590 it is held as follo ws:- 
“4. All that Section 220(4) requires is that every person 
appointed to be a Judge of a High Court shall, before he 
enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the 
Governor or some other person appointed by him an oath 
according to the form presc ribed. The oath is necessary 
before entering upon his office as a Judge. As already 
pointed out, Bajpai, J. entered upon his office as a Judge of 
this Court long ago and took the oath which was then 
prescribed under Clause 3 of our Letters Patent. The mere  
fact that he has now been made a permanent Judge does not 
mean that he "enters upon his office" as a Judge of this Court 
afresh, necessitating a fresh oath which is required for a 
person who enters upon his office for the first time. If this 
were not the correct interpretation, then the result would be 
that every time that an additional Judge's term is extended, 
he would have to take a fresh oath. This is contrary to the 
established practice of this Court. It may also be pointed out 
that under Section 223 of the Act the powers of the Judges of 
a High Court in relation to the administration of justice in this 
Court are the same as immediately before the 
commencement of Part 3 of this Act. ” (Emphasis is 
supplied)  
 
30.  In Federation of Pakistan Vs. Sindh High  Court Bar 
Association  (PLD 2012 SC 1067) , this Court held that notification 
for appointment as permanent Judge of the High Court shall have 
effect from an earlier date when four other Judges were notified. 
The Court observed as follows: - 
 “Referring to th e arguments of Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, 
Senior Advocate Supreme Court, we may further add here 
that it is well recognized and settled principle of legal 
jurisprudence that if an illegal action/wrong is struck down 
by the Court, as a consequence, it is also t o be ensured that 
no undue harm is caused to any individual due to such 
illegality/wrong or as a result of delay in the redress of his 
grievance. It is for this reason that in number of judgments of 
the apex Court, out of which two have been referred to 
above, in service matters, concept of reinstatement into 
service with original seniority and back benefits has been 
developed and followed on case to case basis to give 
complete relief to an aggrieved party. Following the same 
equitable principle, while pass ing our short order, we have 
specifically mentioned that the issuance of notification for 
permanent appointment of the two Judges shall have its Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  22
effect from 17 -9-2011 when four other recommended of the 
Commission in the same batch were notified after clear ance 
by the Committee, so that they shall have their respective 
seniority and all other benefits as permanent judges of the 
High Court. ” (Emphasis is supplied ) 
 
31.  Similarly in Application by Abdul Rehman Farooq 
Pirzada regarding pensionary benefits of t he Judges of Superior 
Courts from the date of their respective retirements, irrespective of 
their length of service as such Judges  (PLD 2013 SC 829) , this 
Court  granted equal pensionary benefits to Additional Judges as it 
found no difference between the tw o as defined in Article 
260(1)(c)(b)  of the Constitution. We find that even in service  
matters, while considering the seniority of civil servants, the 
seniority is reckoned from the date of initial appointment and not 
from the date of confirmation or regul arization.  
32.  There is force in the argument of learned Attorney 
General that eversince the creation  of this country, the practice 
has been to reckon the seniority from the date of initial 
appointment as Additional Judge of the High Court. The  
appointme nt of Mr. Justice Anwar ul Haq, the former Chief Justice 
of Pakistan is a case in point. He was appointed as an Additional 
Judge of the West Pakistan High Court on 24.10.1959 and was 
made a permanent Judge on 24.10.1962  whereas the other  two 
Judges of the same Court namely Mr. Justice Moulvi Mushtaq 
Hussain and Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Iqbal were appointed 
as permanent Judges directly on 1.10.1962  which is prior to the 
date when Mr. Justice Anwar ul Haq was made permanent i.e. on 
24.10.1962 . However, he always ranked senior to both of them. He 
confirmed on Court query  that there is no contrary precedent. No 
wonder, learned Attorney General further confirms , that none of Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  23
the Judges whose seniority  is a point in issue in the instant case of 
the Lahore High Court ha s made any representation with regard to 
their seniority as Judge , which presently has been determined 
from the date of their initial appointment as Additional Judges  of 
the Lahore High Court.  In the history of the Lahore High Court  
(http://courtsofpakistan.wordpress.com/all –courts –of–pakistan/ 
lahore -high-court -history ), it is recorded that:- 
“On 10th February 1985,  the Administration Committee of 
the High Court considered the recommendations of a Sub -
Committee appointed to look into the question of inter se 
seniority of the Judges of the High Court and decided (i) that 
Judge who was younger in age, when the appointment was 
made in the same batch , whether from the Bar or from the 
Service; (ii) that if two or more Judges were appointed from 
the Service in the same batch, they would retain their Service 
seniority as existing on the day of their appointment and, (iii) 
that if two or more Judges were appointed from the Bar and 
from the Service in the same batch, then the junior Judge 
from the Service would rank after the senior Judge from the 
service, even though he may be older in age to any Judge 
appointed from the Bar.  
In 1985, one of the Judges who  had come in the batch in 
November, 1981, and had claimed seniority over three 
others, attempted to settle his account vis -a-vis another 
brother Judge by seating himself as the senior Judge. This 
resulted in an unhappy situation, on coming to know of it, t he 
Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Javed Ibqal, hurriedly convened a 
meeting of the Administration Committee on 10th February, 
1985, where the above decision regarding seniority was 
taken. This decision required confirmation of the Full Court. 
Apprehending unpl easantness at the meeting that would be 
held for the purpose, it was decided that views of all the 
Judges be obtained by circulation. On receipt of the views, 
the Chief Justice referred the matter to the Law Ministry. The 
Ministry took it to the President,  who was the appointing 
authority for the High Court Judges. It was directed by the 
President that an equitable principle consistently adopted in 
regard to inter se seniority of Judges, appointed by a single 
order, was that service Judges appointed with th at of 
candidates from the Bar, the Service Judges should retain 
their existing seniority in the Department, regardless of their 
age, which of course would be determining factor in respect 
of their seniority vis -a-vis candidates from the Bar. While 
conveyin g this directive of the President to the High Court, 
vide letter No. 12(5)/86 -AII, dated 20th April, 1987, the 
Ministry asked the High Court to revise its seniority list 
accordingly and send the revised list to the Ministry for 
onward transmission to the P resident’s Secretariat (Public), 
but this was never done and the further batch of Judges that 
came in July, 1983, march, 1984, and October 1988, had 
some complaints and though all the Judges aggrieved by Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  24
their incorrect rankings attempted to secure justice , all the 
Chief Justices, one after the other, felt paralysed and 
avoided to take a decision. The oldest High Court in the 
country could not find a Chief Justice brave enough to 
implement the President’s letter, or have the matter solved 
one way or the oth er. 
The above President’s ruling is clear that Judges who come 
in one batch, should first be ranked in order of seniority by 
age. The next question as to how a Service Judge who is 
junior in age to another Service Judge, but otherwise senior 
to him in Serv ice, is to be placed, has not been clearly stated 
is the senior Service Judge to be taken out of his normal 
place and placed one position ahead of the junior Service 
Judge, or the junior Service Judge to be taken out of his 
normal place and placed one posi tion below the senior 
Service Judge. Till this is answered, the difficulty will 
remain. ” 
33.  However, notwithstanding  the disconcerting episode 
referred to above in the history of the Lahore High Court , the fact 
remained that by and large in all the High Courts of Pakistan the 
inter se  seniority of Judges of the High Courts was determined with 
reference to the order / date of their  initial appointment as 
Additional Judges under Article 197 of the Constitution.  On a 
query from this Court , the Registrar of t he Lahore High Court 
intimated that vide notification dated 4.8.1994, following 20 
persons were appointed as Additional Judges of the Lahore High 
Court under Article 197 of the Constitution, which incidently 
included the author :- 
1.  Ch. Khurshid Ahmad  
Advoca te, Faisalabad.  
 
2.  Raja Abdul Aziz Bhatti,  
Advocate, Rawalpindi  
 
3.  Rao Naeem Hashim Khan  
Advocate, Sahiwal  
 
4.  Miss Fakhar -un-Nisa Begum  
Advocate, Multan  
 
5.  Mr. Arif Iqbal Bhatti  
Advocate, Lahore  
 
6.  Mr. Amir Alam Khan  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  25
President, Lahore High Court Bar 
Assoc iation, Lahore  
 
7.  Mr. Tassaduq Hussain Jillani  
Addl. Advocate General Punjab,  
Multan  
 
8.  Miss Talat Yaqub  
Advocate Lahore  
 
9.  Mr. Mohammad Asif Jan  
Advocate, Lahore  
 
10. Mr. Sharif Hussain Bokhari  
Advocate Lahore  
 
11. Mrs. Nasira Javed Iqbal  
Advocate Lahore  
 
12. Mr. Ahmad Saeed Awan  
Advocate, Faisalabad  
 
13. Ch. Iftikhar Hussain  
Dy Attorney General  
Islamabad/Rawalpindi  
 
14. Mr. Javed Ahmad Butter  
Advocate, Lahore  
 
15. Mr. Riaz Hussain  
Advocate, Jampur  
 
16. Mr. Mohammad Aaqil Mirza  
Advocate Lahore  
 
17. Mr. Karamat Nazir Bhin dari 
Advocate Lahore  
 
18. Rana Mohammad Arshad Khan  
Addl. Advocate General Punjab  
 
19. Mr. Abdul Hafeez Cheema  
District and Sessions Judge  
Lahore  
 
20. Ch. Mohammad Nasim  
District & Sessions Judge,  
Bahawalpur  
 
34. On 1st of June, 1995, following 11 out of 20 Ju dges 
were made Judges while the remaining in the same batch 
continued to be Additional Judges:  
1.  Mr. Justice Ch. Mushtaq Ahmed Khan  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  26
2.  Mr. Justice Raja Abdul Aziz Bhatti  
3.  Mr. Justice Arif Iqbal Hussain Bhatti  
4.  Mr. Justice Abdul Hafeez Cheema  
5.  Mr. Justice Ch. Muhammad Naseem  
6.  Mr. Justice Ch. Khurshid Ahmed  
7.  Mr. Justice Ahmed Saeed Awan  
8.  Mr. Justice Fakhur -un-Nisa Khokhar  
9.  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Hussain Chaudhry  
10. Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani  
11. Mr. Justice Muhammad Aqil Mirza  
 
35. For a sho rt per iod, by order of the then Chief Justice 
of the Lahore High Court, the afore -mentioned Judges were made 
senior to those of the same batch who continued to be Additional 
Judges . However, subsequently on 19th of March, 1996, when 
those Additional Judges were made Judges of the Lahore High 
Court under Article 193 of the Constitution, the seniority list of 
those who were made Judges earlier on vide notification dated Ist 
of June, 1995 was altered and the seniority was re -determined 
with effect from the date when  they were appointed as Additional 
Judges.  
36.  Similarly on a query from this Court, the Registrar  of 
the Peshawar High Court confirm ed this practice. Vide his letter 
dated 13.5.2014 addressed to the Registrar of this Court, he has 
referred to various in stances in which this principle was followed. 
The letter reads as follows: - 
 “Subject:  SENIORITY OF HON’BLE JUDGES  
 
 Dear Sir,  
Apropos telephonic …………………. , the following 
instances have been found: - 
1. In the year 1994, the foll owing three Hon’ble 
Judges we re elevated vide notification  dated 5.6.1994  as 
Additional Judges of this Court;  
 
i. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jawaid Nawaz  Khan 
Gandapur (From Cadre, Date of Birth 
17.1.1943)   
 
ii. Hon’ble Justice Mrs. Khalida Rachid (From 
cadre, Date of Birth 25.09.1949)  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  27
 
iii. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Nasir -ul-Mulk (From Bar, 
Date of Birth 17.08.1950)  
 
Accordingly seniority list was issued in the same 
order.  
 
 Subsequently vide notification dated 31.5.1995, 
Hon’ble, Justice Mrs. Khalida Rachid and Mr. Justice  Nasir -
ul-Mulk were con firmed while the tenure of Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice Jawaid Nawaz Khan Gandapur as Additional Judge 
was extended vide notification  dated 31.5.1995. On this a  
fresh seniority list was issued  on 18.10.1995  in which 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jawaid Nawaz Khan Gandapur wa s 
placed junior to the other two Hon’ble Judges.  
 
 Vide notification dated 30.9.1996 the appointment of 
Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jawaid Nawaz Khan Gandapur was 
regularized , therefore, a fresh seniority list was issued on 
8.10.1996 in which again Hon’ble Mr. Jus tice Jawaid Nawaz 
Khan Gandapur was placed senior to the other two Hon’ble 
Judges on the basis of age.  
 
2. The second instance is that vide No. F.8(1)/97 -AII 
dated 1.2.1997, the following Hon’ble Judges were 
elevated: - 
i. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Malik Hamid Sa eed (From 
Bar, Date of Birth 4.4.1943)  
 
ii. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shah Jehan Khan (From 
Bar, dated 3.4.1950)  
 
iii. Hon’ble Mr. Justice  Tariq Pervez Khan (From 
Bar, date of Birth 15.2.1948)  
 
The then Hon’ble Chief Justice of this Court vide letter 
dated 24.2. 1997  brought to the notice of Minister of Law, 
Justice and Parliamentary Affairs that since Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice Tariq Pervez Khan was elder than Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice shah Jehan Khan, therefore, the seniority was re -
determined vide notification dated 17.3.19 97 and Hon’ble 
Mr. Justice  Tariq Pervez Khan was placed senior to Mr. 
Justice Shah Jehan Khan .  
 
3. The third instance is that vide notification dated 
13.12.2007 the following Hon’ble Judges were elevated: - 
i. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Shaji Rehman Khan (From 
Cadre, Date of Birth 14.08.1949)  
 
ii. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ghulam Mohayuddin Malik 
(From Cadre, Date of Birth 13.01.1950)  
 
iii. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Syed Yahya Zahid Gillani 
(From Cadre, Date of Birth 27.04.1953)  
 
iv. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ziauddin Khattak (From  
Cadre, Date of Birth 19.02.1995)  
 
v. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Syed Mussaddiq Hussain 
Gillani (From Cadre, Date of Birth 01.01.1953)  
 Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  28
vi. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Muhammad Alam Khan 
(From Bar, Date of Birth 15.01.1949 ) 
  
Subsequently, another seniority list  was issu ed on 
18.8.2008 wherein Mr. Justice Muhammad Alam Khan being 
elder than the other Hon’ble Judges of his batch was placed 
senior to them. ” 
 
 
37.  Vide notification dated 1.2.1997  following Judges were 
appointed as Additional Judges of the Peshawar High Cour t and 
the inter se  seniority mentioned in the notification dated 1.2.1997 
was as under: - 
1. Malik Hamid Saeed  
2. Shah Jehan Khan  
3. Tariq Pervez  
 
38.  However, the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Peshawar High 
Court sent a letter on 24.2.1997 to the then Secretar y Law  with a 
request that their inter se  seniority be determined on the basis of 
age since all the afore -referred Judges were appointed the same 
day. The letter reads as follows: - 
 “My dear Law Secretary,  
 
Please refer to your Notification No. F.8(1)/97 -AII 
dated Ist February, 1997 whereby Mr. Justice  Malik Hamid 
Saeed, Mr. Justice Shah Jehan Khan and Mr. Justice Tariq 
Pervez were appointed as additional Judges of this Court.  
 
The inter se seniority mentioned in the Notification is 
as under:  
 
1. Malik Hamid  Saeed  
2. Shah Jehan Khan  
3. Tariq Pervez  
  
The date of birth of the 3 additional Judges is as 
under: - 
1. Mr. Justice  Malik Hamid Saeed   4.4.1943  
2. Mr. Justice Shah Jehan Khan   3.4.1950  
3. Mr. Justice Tariq Pervez    15.2.1948  
 
  
All the 3 additional Judge s had taken oath of office on 
one and the same day, namely, Ist of February, 1997. 
Therefore, Mr. Justice Tariq Pervez being elder in age is to 
rank senior to Mr. Justice Shah Jehan Khan. Their inter se 
seniority may, therefore, be re -determined accordingl y.” Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  29
  
39.  The Judicial Commission of Pakistan in its meeting 
dated 13.02.2014  while deciding the question of confirmation of 
Additional Judges / their appointment as Judges followed this 
practice and held that the inter se  seniority of Judges shall be 
reckoned from the date of their initial appointment as Additional 
Judges. A reference to the minutes of the said meeting would be 
pertinent in this regard, which record as under: - 
“2. The Secretary informed that Chief Justice, Peshawar 
High Court has recommen ded the names of the two batches 
of Additional Judges for confirmation. The Additional  Judges 
in the first batch were initially appointed in 2012 but their 
tenure was extended for another year, whereas the 
Additional Judges in the second batch were appoint ed in 
March 2013 and therefore are due for confirmation or 
otherwise. The names are: - 
 
First Batch  
 (1) Mrs. Irshad Qaiser  
 (2) Mr.Shah Jehan Khan Akhunzada  
 (3) Mr. Asadullah Khan Chamkani  
 (4) Mr. Roohul Amin Khan  
 
Second Batch  
 (5) Syed Afsar Shah  
 (6) Mr. Muhammad Daud Khan  
 (7) Mr. Abdul Latif Khan  
 (8) Malik Manzoor Hussain  
 (9) Mr. Ikramullah Khan  
 (10) Ms. Musarrat Hilali  
 (11) Mr. Lal Jan Khattak  
 
3. The Chairman invited the Chief Justice, Peshawar 
High Court to brief the members about the nominati ons 
initiated by him. The Chief Justice  responded that he has, in 
consultation with the Senior Puisne Judge, considered and 
initiated simultaneously the names  of both the batches of 
Additional Judges for confirmation, so as to ensure that inter 
se seniorit y of Additional Judges  in the two batches is not 
disturbed. The Senior Puisne Judge endorsed the views of 
the Chief Justice, Peshawar High Court. ” 
 
40.  The Commission ultimately decided to confirm 
Additional Judges  as Judges  in terms as follows: - 
“5. The Commission had in -depth discussions about the 
professional caliber, legal acumen, judicial skills , quality / 
quantum of judgments, commitment / devotion  to duty of the 
Additional Judges, and decided by consensus as follows:  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  30
A. The Additional Judges at seri al 1 to 4 and 7 to 11 are 
recommended for confirmation.  
 
B. The Additional Judges at serial No. 5 & 6  are 
recommended for extension for one year with effect 
from the date of expiry of their tenure.  
 
C. The seniority  of the Additional Judges in the two 
batches shall be reckoned from the date of their initial 
appointment, and so reflected in the notification. ”  
 
41.  There is yet another letter dated 25.7.2012  which the 
Registrar of the Peshawar High Court, Peshawar had sent to the 
Secretary Law, Government  of Pakistan  requesting that the 
seniority of Additional Judges  appointed the same day should be 
determined  on the basis of age and not the length of their practice 
at the Bar. The letter reads as follows: - 
“Subject:  SENIORITY AMONG THE JUDGES OF 
PESHAWAR HIGH COURT  
 
Dear Madam,  
 
 The President of Pakistan vide Notification No. F.7 
(1)/2012 -AII dated 19/07/2012  has appointed four new 
additional judges of this court in the sequence as under:  
 1. Mrs. Irshad Qaiser  
 2. Mr. Shah Jehan Khan Akhunzada  
 3. Mr. Ro oh ul Amin Khan  
 4. Mr. Asadullah Khan Chamkani  
 
 I am directed to say that appointment of a judge or 
additional judge of the High Court, being a Constitutional 
post, is an elevation and not promotion, therefore, length of 
service or practice as an advocat e at the Bar is not the 
criteria to be taken as yardstick for fixing seniority among 
them when some of the judges are from service and some 
from the Bar. The reasonable criteria would be that a judge 
senior in age has to be considered senior to younger one  in 
the above mentioned circumstances. However, judges from 
service when are elevated to  the bench, then of course their 
seniority is to be reckoned on the basis of length of 
continuous service.  
  
 Keeping in view the practice prevailing in this court 
and the letter of Mr. Justice Irshad Hassan Khan the then 
Federal Secretary Law bearing No. 126 of the year 1986 
Secretary (L) dated 12/06/1986, the seniority of the above 
mentioned additional judges would be as under: - 
 
S
# Name of Hon’ble 
Judges  From  Date of  
Birth  
 Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  31
1 Mr. Justice Asadullah Khan 
Chamkani  Bar 21/03/1954  
2 Mrs. Justice Irshad 
Qaiser  Service  16/06/1954  
3 Mr. Justice Shah Jehan 
Khan Akhunzada  Service  21/01/1957  
4 Mr. Justice Rooh -ul-Amin 
Khan  Bar 01/04/1961  
 
 I am, therefore, to request you t o refix the seniority 
and also inform this court if any other uniform policy has 
been adopted for the determination of seniority among the 
judges of the High Court.”  
 
42.  It appears that the then Secretary Law, Government of 
Pakistan  was conscious of thi s long standing practice  and in 
response to a query from the High Courts in this context, 
addressed letters to Hon’ble Chief Justices of all the High Courts 
and apprised them of this long standing practice. The letter 
addressed to the Chief Justice of Sind h High Court reads as 
follows: - 
“No.F.12(5)186 -AII,    Dated 20.4.1987  
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN  
MINISTRY OF JUSTICE AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS  
(JUSTICE DIVISION)  
 
Subject:  SENIORITY LIST OF HIGH COURT JUDGES  
 
My dear Chief Justice,  
 
Please refer to the corre spondence  resting with High Court of Sindh 
letter No. Gaz -IV, Z.14( i) dated the 30th March, 1987, on the  subject 
noted above.   
 
(2) An equitable principle consistently adopted in this regard is 
that Judges whose appointments are made by a single order, tak e 
seniority according to age. If the appointment of two or more service 
candidates is also simultaneously made with that of candidate from 
the Bar, the service Judges will retain their existing seniority in the 
department regardless of their age which of c ourse would be the 
determining factor in respect of their seniority vis -à-vis candidates 
from the Bar. This principle has the approval of the President.  
 
(3) I am to request you to please confirm whether the seniority 
list of Sindh High Court Judges has b een prepared in the light of the 
above principle.  
  
 With kind regards.  
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
-sd- 
(Irshad  Hasan Khan)”  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  32
43.  It would be pertinent to refer to y et another letter 
dated 6.8.1997  from Registrar of the High Court of Balochistan, 
Quetta, address ed to the Registrar of the High Court of Sindh, 
Karachi, which reads as follows :- 
“With reference to your letter No. GAZ/IV.8.26  (Seniority ) 
dated 31.7.1997, on the subject captioned  above, it is  
submitted that this Court has been following the decision of  
Lahore High Court, on the question of interse seniority of 
Judges who  are elevated to the Bench on the same day that 
“a Judge older in age shall rank senior to a Judge who is 
younger in age when an  appointment is made in the same 
batch whether from the Ba r or from the Services”. On this 
formula, the question of interse seniority of Hon’ble Mr. 
Justice (Retd) Mir Hazar Khan Khoso and Mr. Justice  
Munawar Ahmed Mirza, was determined. It may further be 
pointed out that in the meeting of Chief Justices’ Committ ee 
held on 31st October, 1996 at Murree, it was decided that 
“such disputes  relating to seniority of Judges can be resolved 
by the Chief Justices of the concerned High Courts.”  
 
44.  On a query from this Court about the principle being 
followed in determin ing the inter se  seniority of Judges appointed 
as Additional Judges (under Article 197) and made Judges (under 
Article 193) on later dates, the Hon’ble Chief Justice of the Sindh 
High Court vide his letter dated 16.5.2014  has candidly stated  that 
barring o ne exception, the seniority lists of the Judges of the High 
Court of Sindh , issued from time to time, seem to be consistent 
with the criteria laid in the aforesaid order  (short order of this 
Court dated 6.5.2014 in the instant case ).(Emphasis is supplied)  
The letter  reads as follows: - 
“Karachi, dated: 16th May, 2014  
 
Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain Jillani,  
Honourable Chief Justice of Pakistan  
Supreme Court Building,  
Islamabad . 
 
Dear Sir,  
 
 As directed by your Lordship, I am enclosing  herewith 
documents pertai ning to the seniority of the High Court 
Judges from our record as per the list attached hereto.  
 Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  33
 Amongst the documents, the two letters at Sr. No. 1 
and 2 are  self-explanatory , whereas reading of the second 
para at page -55 of the Minutes of the meeting, listed at Sr. 
No. 3, would convey the gist of the decision as contained 
therein. However, the dissenting note attached to the said 
Minutes seems to be more in line with the order dated 
06.05.2014, authored by your Lordship in C.P. No. 09/2014.  
 
 The other documents are seniority lists of the Judges 
of the High Court of Sindh, issued from time to time, which 
seem to be consistent with the criteria laid down in the 
aforesaid order .” (Emphasis is supplied)  
 
 I remain  
 
Yours faithfully,  
-sd- 
 
(Maqbool Baqar)  
Chief Justice  
Sindh High Court”  
 
45.  The only exception to which the learned Chief Justice 
of the Sindh High Court has alluded to is the decision of the 
Administrati on Committee dated 12.11.1997. The reasoning given 
by the Committee was :- 
“In this backgroun d, it was manifest that when two sets of 
persons were separately appointed, one as regular Judges 
under Article 193 and the other as Additional Judges under 
Article 197, such appointments could not be equated for 
determination of seniority, more so when th e appointments 
were not in the same batch. In this context it was obvious to 
the Committee that an Additional Judge , if and when 
subsequently appointed as a Judge, would rank as a Judge 
from the date of his appointment and from the date he took 
oath of his  office as such Judge and the  appointment  as 
Judge could not be related back to the point of time when his 
appointment as Additional Judge or  administration of oath 
as such Additional Judge came about. The conclusion, 
therefore, was that Mr. Justice Nazim  Hussain Siddiqui, who 
was appointed independently under a notification  pursuant 
to Article 193, as a Judge, was senior to those who were 
appointed on the same date through a separate notification 
under Article 197, as Additional Judges.”  
 
46.  In the light  of the above , the Committee  determined 
the inter se  seniority of 5 Judges in terms as under: - 
 1) Justice Nazir Hussain Siddiqui  
 2) Justice Mrs. Majida Rizvi  
 3) Justice Ali Mohammad Baloch  
 4) Justice Deedar Hussain Shah  
 5) Justice Rana Bhagwandas  Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  34
47.  The reasoning given by the Administration Committee , 
we may observe with respect, is against the Constitutional intent 
and the law declared. Because, first, it does not take into account 
Article 260(1)(c)  wherein a Judge in relation to a High Court 
includ es an Additional Judge.  Second, when an Additional Judge 
is made a Judge (permanent) and takes fresh oath, it does not 
mean that he has entered the office of a Judge freshly . Third, the 
decision of the Administration Committee is not in accord with the 
law laid down in Ghulam Jillani Vs. Mr. Justice Muhammad Gul  
(1978 SCMR 110) & Supreme Court Bar Association Vs. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2002 SC 939 , Justice Faqir Muhammad 
Khokhar’s case ) wherein the service as Additional Judge was treated 
at par with  service as Judge of the High Court in view of Article 
177(2)(a) which lays down qualifying period for a Judge of the 
Supreme Court of at-least 5 years as Additional Judge or Judge of 
the High Court “for periods aggregating, not less than five years ”.    
48.  It may be pointed out that a n Hon’ble Judge of the 
Sindh High Court had given a dissenting opinion ( Mr. Justice 
Amanullah Abbasi ). This appears to be in consonance with 
Constitutional provisions and practice being followed. The 
dissenting opinion was:- 
 “The meeting of special administrative committee was 
held on 12.11.1997. I had agreed to the minutes which were 
to be recorded. After the meeting I reconsidered the entire 
matter again and I feel that there are some areas of 
difficulty.  
 
 The first area of  difficulty is that the honorable Chief 
Justices in the meeting held on 31st August 1996  had 
decided that the disputes relating to seniority of Judges can 
be resolved by the chief justices of the concerned High 
Courts. The then chief justice of High Court of Sindh Mr. 
Justice Mamoon Qazi was present in the same meeting and 
in pursuance  of decision  he decided the dispute of seniority 
by his order dated 1.11.97. The Para No. 7 of his order is as 
under: - Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  35
“Consequently, unless the full court before which the 
matter is  still pending final decision or the appointing 
authority as the case may be, comes to a different 
conclusion, Justice Ms. Majda Rizvi, Mr. Justice Ali 
Muhammad Bal ouch, Mr. Justice Deedar Hussain 
Shah and Mr. Justice Rana Bhagwandas are to be 
consi dered senior to Mr. Justice Nazim Hussain 
Siddiqi.”  
 
 The then honorable Chief Justice has left it for the full 
court to come to different conclusion and till full court takes 
contrary view , the order of the then Chief Justice will have to 
prevail. It has not lapsed as full court has not t aken a 
contrary decision. The grievance of Mr. Justice  Nazim 
Hussain may be placed before full court because this is one 
way where by contrary decision can be arrived at. In case 
full court agrees with  the order of the the n Chief Justice then 
the matter will stand resolved in accordance with decision of 
Chief Justices dated 31.8.1996.  
 
 The 2nd era of difficulty relates to the dispute of 
seniority, Mr. Justice Nazim Hussain was appointed as 
permanent Judge by notification dated 5.6.1994 . The other 
honorable Judges who are claiming to be senior to Mr. 
Justice  Nazim Hussain were also appointed on the same 
date that is 5.6.1994 as additional Judges . Mr. Justice 
Nazim Hussain claims seniority on the ground that he was 
appointed  as permanent Judge under Article  193 of the 
Constitution and other honorable Judges were appointed as 
additional Judges under article 197, his case was separate 
and different. As against this the case of honorable Judges is 
that they and Mr. Justice Nazim  Hussain  were appointed on 
the same date, regularized on the same date from the date of 
initial appointment and took oath on same date, therefore, 
the principal mentioned in letter of Ministry of Justice and 
Parliamentary Affairs  dated 20.4.1987 be followe d as 
according to this principle  senior in age will become senior. 
At this stage I find it necessary to reproduce relevant 
portions of notifications dated 30.9.1996.   
 
1st Notification  
 
 “The President is pleased to regularize the 
appointment of Mr. Justi ce Nazim Hussain  Siddiqi Judge of 
the High Court of Sindh from the date of his appointment as 
such”  
 
2nd Notification  
 
 “The President  is pleased to regularize the 
appointment of following Judges of the High Court of Sindh 
as additional Judges and appoint them Judges of the said 
Court from the date of their appointment as additional 
Judges.  
 
 The 2nd Notification includes names of Justice Ms. 
Majda Rizvi , Mr. Justice Ali Muhammad Balouch, Mr. Justice 
Deedar Hussain Shah and Mr. Justice Rana Bhagwandas. 
They have been appointed as Judges from the date of 
appointmen t as additional Judges that is 5.6.1994. Therefore 
the initial appointment of Mr. Justice Nazim Hussain  as Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  36
Judge and the other honorable Judges is on the same date. 
The other honorable Judges have been made Judges from 
the date of their initial appointment. Although there are 
separate notifications but one seniority list has to be 
maintained. Therefore the principle  of senior in age to be 
senior is to be followed.  
 
 On administrative side we cannot  say that 2nd 
notification is incorrect.  There is no bar in Constitution which 
restricts the power of President to give retrospective  effect to 
appointment so far as the notification remains in field. It has 
to be followed and decision will have to be take n in 
accordance with the rights conferred by the notification. 
Apart from this the two notifications were issued in 
pursuance of decision of the Supreme Court reported in PLD 
1996 SC 324. This fact is also mentioned in the two 
notifications mentioned above .” 
 
 
49.  An examination of the practices / precedent s from the 
High Courts in determining the inter se  seniority of Judges 
(appointed under Article 193 and 197 of the Constitution ) would 
indicate that  in all cases seniority  was determined with effect from  
the date of the initial appointment as Additional Judges and in 
accordance with the principle laid down  in the letter dated 
20.4.1987  issued by the Ministry of Justice and Parliamentary 
Affairs . The solitary  exception from Sindh would not offset the 
effect of the consistent practice being followed by the High Courts 
in this regard  and the said practice may qualify to be called a 
Constitutional convention. Moreover the order of the 
Administration Committee of the Sindh High Court was an 
administrative order  and does not have even the trappings of a 
judicial order.  An administrative decision would not assume the 
characte r of a precedent to be followed but a judicial decision may 
assume such a character.  To appreciate the distinction (between 
an administrative  and judicial decision ), a reference may be made 
to a judgment of Indian Supreme Court  reported as Jaswant Sugar Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  37
Mills Vs. Lakshmi Chand  (AIR 1963 SC 677)  wherein while defining 
a judicial decision, it was held: - 
 “A judicial decision is not always the act  of a judge or 
a tribunal invested with power  to determine questions of law 
or fact: it must however be the act of a body or authority 
invested by law with authority to determine questions of 
disputes affecting  the rights of citizens and under a duty to 
act judicially. A judicial decision always postulates the 
existence of a duty laid upon the authority to act judicially. 
Administrative authorities are often invested with authority 
or power to determine questions, which affect the rights of 
citizens . The au thority may have to invite objections  to the 
course of action proposed by him, he may be under a duty to 
hear the objectors, and his decision may seriously affect the 
rights of citizens but unless in arriving at his decision he is 
required to act judiciall y, his decision will be executive or 
administrative. Legal authority to determine questions 
affecting the rights of citizens, does not make the 
determination judicial; it is the  duty to act judicially which 
invests it with that character. What distinguishe s an act 
judicial from administrative is therefore the duty imposed 
upon the authority to act judicially.  AIR 1950 SC 222, Rel. 
on.  
 To make a decision or an act judicial, the following 
criteria must be satisfied:  
 
 (1) it is in substance a determination upon 
investigation of a question by the application of objective 
standards to facts found in the light of pre -existing legal 
rules;  
 
 (2) it declares rights or imposes upon parties 
obligations affecting their civil rights; and  
 
 (3) that the investigatio n is subject to certain 
procedural attributes contemplating an opportunity of 
presenting its case to a party, ascertainment of facts by 
means of evidence if a dispute be on question of fact, and if 
the dispute be on question of law on the presentation of l egal 
argument, and a decision resulting in the disposal of the 
matter on findings based upon those questions of law and 
fact.”  
 
50.  Can the consistent  practice being followed in 
determining the inter se  seniority of Judges be call ed a 
Constitutional conv ention? The question as to what is a 
Constitutional convention has been a subject of judicial debate in 
several jurisdiction s. In a case  decided by the Supreme Court of 
Canada reported at [1981] 2 S.C.R. 753, the Court while Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  38
elaborating the concept of conv ention observed that re quirements 
for establishing a convention are: - 
“2. Requirements for establishing a convention  
 
The requirements for establishing a convention 
bear some resemblance with those which apply 
to customary law. Precedents and usage are 
necessary but do not suffice. They must be 
normative. We adopt the following passage of 
Sir W. Ivor Jennings, The Law and the 
Constitution (5th ed., 1959) at p.136:  
 
We have to ask ourselves three 
questions: first, what are the 
precedents; secondly, did the 
actors in the precedents believe 
that they were bound by a rule; 
and thirdly, is there a reason for 
the rule? A single precedent with a 
good reason may be enough to 
establish the rule. A whole string of 
precedents without such a reason 
will be of no avail, unless it is 
perfectly certain that the persons 
concerned regarded them as bound 
by it.”  
 
51.  The Court referred to Professor W. Hogg 
(Constitutional Law of Canada, 1977) , who while explaining the 
concept of Constitutional convention, said: - 
“Conventions  are rules of the constitution which are 
not enforced by the law courts. Because they are not 
enforced by the law courts they are best regarded as 
non-legal rules, but because they do in fact regulate 
the working of the constitution they are an important 
concern of the constitutional lawyer. What conventions 
do is to prescribe the way in which legal powers shall 
be exercised. Some conventions have the effect of 
transferring effective power from the legal holder to 
another official or institution. Other conv entions limit 
an apparently broad legal power, or even prescribe 
that a legal power shall not be exercised at all.  
If a convention is disobeyed by an official, then it is 
common, especially in the United Kingdom, to describe 
the official’s act or omission as “unconstitutional”. But 
this use of the term unconstitutional must be carefully 
distinguished from the case where a legal rule of the 
constitution has been disobeyed. Where 
unconstitutionally springs from a breach of law, the 
purported act is normally a  nullity and there is a 
remedy available in the courts. But where 
“unconstitutionality” springs merely from a breach of 
convention, no breach of he law has occurred and no 
legal remedy will be available. If a  court did give a 
remedy for a breach of convent ion, for example, by Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  39
declaring invalid a statute enacted for Canada by the 
United Kingdom Parliament without Canada’s request 
or consent, or by ordering an unwilling Governor 
General to give his assent to a bill enacted by both 
houses of Parliament, then w e would have to change 
our language and describe the rule which used to be 
thought of as a convention as a rule of the common 
law. In other words a judicial decision could have the 
effect of transforming a conventional rule into a legal 
rule. A convention may also be transformed into law 
by being enacted as a statute.”  
 
52.  In a book edited by Dawn Oliver and Carlo Fusaro 
titled as ‘How Constitutions Change’, the authors have adverted to 
the conventions in Constitutional law in Canada and said as 
under: - 
 “The Constitution of Canada also includes informal 
principles. These are Constitutional conventions that inform 
the way in which the formal Constitutional powers are to be 
exercises. A well established institution in the UK, 
conventions guide most governme nt behaviour and detail the 
aspects of governance that the written Constitution does not 
address. They are not legally binding and hence, by 
definition, cannot form part of the formal Constitution. That 
said, they enjoy de facto Constitutional supremacy be cause 
the political culture in Canada has rendered them binding. 
Moreover, while a court will not enforce conventions, it also 
will not shy away from considering them in interpreting 
formal principles. Finally, the court may transform a 
convention into a c ommon law rule.  
 It is difficult to account for the creation of 
Constitutional conventions. Indeed, by virtue of their 
informality, they require no set procedure to be followed prior 
to their recognition. Generally, conventions come into 
existence in two different ways; through practice over time or 
through an explicit agreement between all the relevant 
actors. For conventions that come about through practice, 
there is no established period of time that must pass before 
the practice obtains ‘convention’ st atus. Some scholars have 
argued that a reliable indicator of convention status is the 
moral obligation that attaches itself to the practice over time. 
For example, the fact that members of Parliament feel bound 
to follow the practice because they believe i t is a principle of 
higher law, is evidence that the practice has in fact obtained 
that higher law status.”  
 
53. The Canadian Supreme Court adopted the definition of 
constitutional convention propounded by the Chief Justice of 
Manitoba, Freedman C.J.M. in the Manitoba Reference, supra , and 
at pp. 13 -14, held as under: - Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  40
“What is a constitutional convention? There is a 
fairly lengthy literature on the subject. Although 
there may be shades of difference among the 
constitutional lawyers, political scientists, a nd 
Judges who have contributed to that literature, 
the essential features of a convention may be set 
forth with some degree of confidence. Thus there 
is general agreement that a convention occupies 
a position somewhere in between a usage or 
custom on the o ne hand and a constitutional law 
on the other. There is general agreement that if 
one sought to fix that position with greater 
precision he would place convention nearer to 
law than to usage or custom. There is also 
general agreement that “a convention is a rule 
which is regarded as obligatory by the officials to 
whom it applies”. Hogg, Constitutional Law of 
Canada (1977), p.9. There is, if not general 
agreement, at least weighty authority, that the 
sanction for breach of a convention will be 
political rath er than legal.  
It should be borne in mind however that, while 
they are not laws, some conventions may be 
more important than some laws. Their 
importance depends on that of the value or 
principle which they are meant to safeguard. 
Also they form an integral  part of the constitution 
and of the constitutional system. They come 
within the meaning of the word “Constitution” in 
the preamble of the British North America Act, 
1867.”  
 
54. The mode of determining inter se  seniority of High 
Court Judges has been consi stent in all the four Provinces, barring 
one time deviation when the Administration Committee of Sindh 
High Court followed a different course. It is normative because it  
has been found by us to be more in accord with equity and 
Constitutional intent reflec ted in various provisions of the 
Constitution. Thus it has assumed the character of a 
Constitutional convention.  
55.  For what  has been discussed above, this petition is 
dismissed. These are the detailed reasons of our short order dated 
6.5.2014 , which re ads as follows:  
“For reasons to be recorded later in the detailed 
judgment, we hold and declare as under: - 
 
i) that the inter se seniority of Judges of a High 
Court shall reckon from the order and date of Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  41
their appointment as Additional Judges of that 
Cour t;  
 
ii) that the inter se seniority of Additional Judges 
of a High Court appointed vide the same order 
and date shall reckon from their seniority in 
age. If appointment of two or more service 
candidates is simultaneously made with that of 
the candidates f rom the Bar, the service Judges 
shall retain their existing seniority in the 
department regardless of their age, though that 
would be the determining factor in respect of 
their seniority viz a viz the candidates from the 
Bar. This principle has consistentl y been 
followed without exception ever -since the 
establishment of the High Courts in Pakistan 
and is even otherwise in accord with the 
equitable dispensation of justice.  
 
2. With the above observations and declaration, this 
petition is dismissed.”  
 
 
 
CHIE F JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE (HJ-1)   JUDGE (HJ-3) 
 
 
 
 
JUDGE (HJ-5)   JUDGE (HJ-8) 
 
Islamabad, the  
6th of May, 2014  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  
 Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  42
Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, J. :   I have had the privilege of 
perusing the proposed judgment authored by the Honourable Chi ef 
Justice and I am in respectful agreement with the conclusions 
drawn and the declarations made therein. I may, however, very 
briefly record some supplemental reasons for reaching such 
conclusions and making such declarations.  
 
2. It is proverbial and uni versally acknowledged that the 
Constitution of a country is a living organism and the case in hand 
is a case in point. It demonstrates how the original words of a 
Constitution assume different meanings, the initial concepts 
envisaged therein undergo metamo rphosis and the earlier schemes 
contained in the same evolve and transform into different 
mechanisms with passage of time, changed circumstances and 
sprouting requirements.  
 
3. There is no denying the fact that over the last century and a 
half since 1861 the concept and utility of the office of an Additional 
Judge of a High Court in the Indo -Pak subcontinent have 
undergone a significant transformation and the same is manifestly 
evident from the changing and varying provisions of section 7 of 
the East India  (High Courts of Judicature) Act, 1861, section 3 of 
Act No. 18 of 1911 amending the Indian High Courts Act, 1861, 
section 222 of the Government of India Act, 1935, Articles 217 and 
224 of the Constitution of India, 1950, Articles 166 and 168(2) of 
the Con stitution of Pakistan, 1956, Article 2 of the Courts 
(Additional Judges) Order, 1958,  Article 96 of the Constitution of 
Pakistan, 1962 and Articles 193, 197 and 175A of the Constitution 
of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. A Judge who was 
initially required only to “act” as a Judge of a High Court and was 
meant to be only a temporary Judge appointed by way of a stop -
gap arrangement for a period of a few days, weeks or months in 
order to cater for a temporary exigency in a High Court later on 
came to be known as an “Additional Judge”, his services became 
time bound rather than being exigency based and all and sundry 
started accepting that his appointment was not by way of a stop -
gap arrangement but he was passing through different stages of Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  43
appointment  as a Judge which stages could span over a period of 
one year, two years or sometimes even three years. Over time some 
changes introduced through different Constitutions or 
constitutional instruments themselves started indicating that 
instead of an exigenc y based appointment an appointment of an 
Additional Judge of a High Court could be made for a period to be 
fixed by a law and later on in the case of Al-Jehad Trust through 
Raeesul Mujahideen Habib -ul-Wahab -ul-Khairi and others  v. 
Federation of Pakistan an d others  [PLD 1996 SC 324]  this Court 
had declared that “a practice/convention had developed in 
Pakistan that in the High Courts Judges are first appointed as 
Additional Judges -------  and then they are appointed as 
permanent Judges” and that upon satisfac tory completion of his 
term as an Additional Judge of a High Court a person could 
entertain a legitimate expectation of being appointed as a Judge of 
that Court on a permanent basis. This metamorphosis in the 
concept attached to an Additional Judge of a Hi gh Court has 
gradually led to a conceptual readjustment vis-à-vis the initial  
constitutional scheme pertaining to the said office and the practice 
developed in this field over the last many decades has been so 
consistent that it can be said to have matured  into a convention 
which has been accepted by all concerned without any demur or 
departure.  
 
4. It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner 
that at the time of his appointment to the office of an Additional 
Judge of a High Court a person enters upon that office upon 
making of an oath and then upon his appointment as a Judge 
such Additional Judge makes another oath before entering upon 
that office and, thus, the two offices are different and by virtue of 
the provisions of Article 194 read w ith clause (3) of Article 255 of 
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 a term 
of office of a Judge starts from the day he makes oath of the office 
of a Judge and, therefore, his seniority in that office cannot be 
reckoned with referenc e to the earlier date of his appointment as 
an Additional Judge. Such an argument may appear to be quite 
appealing at its surface but the same cannot withstand deeper Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  44
judicial scrutiny, particularly in the backdrop of the transformed 
concept and utility of  an Additional Judge as observed above. Such 
an argument conveniently overlooks the fact that the qualifications 
now prescribed by the Constitution for an Additional Judge of a 
High Court are the same as those stipulated for a Judge of such 
Court, the proc ess of appointment of an Additional Judge is the 
same as that of appointment of a Judge, the Constitution does not 
provide for a separate and different oath of office for an Additional 
Judge and before entering upon the said office an Additional Judge 
has to make the same oath which is prescribed by the Constitution 
for a Judge of a High Court. Apart from that the said oath of office 
is prescribed by the Constitution itself and by virtue of the 
provisions of clause (1) of Article 260 of the Constitution a “ Judge” 
in relation to a High Court includes an “Additional Judge” of that 
Court. In this view of the matter on the basis of the changed and 
altered concept and utility of an Additional Judge of a High Court 
and also on account of an evolved understanding o f the 
constitutional scheme in this regard besides the practice vis-à-vis 
such appointments developed over the last many decades I feel no 
hesitation in holding that now a Judge of a High Court is 
appointed in many stages and that his appointment as an 
Additional Judge marks the first and initial stage and his final and 
formal appointment as a Judge is the culminating stage of such 
appointment. Under the present dispensation and understanding 
an Additional Judge’s subsequent appointment as a Judge is not 
an appointment to a new office but through such appointment his 
initial appointment as an Additional Judge matures and merges 
into the office of a Judge. Looked at from this angle and 
perspective the subsequent oath made by such Judge is nothing 
but in conti nuation of his earlier oath, particularly when the 
subsequent oath is the selfsame oath which he had already made 
before entering upon the office of an Additional Judge. By making 
the said oath as an Additional Judge he had already entered the 
office of a Judge and his subsequent oath as a Judge only 
reinforces and confirms his position in that office. It is, thus, with 
reference to making of the first oath as an Additional Judge that Constitution Petition No. 9 of 2014  45
seniority of a Judge is to be reckoned and such is the spirit of the 
transformed scheme of the Constitution as we understand it today.  
 
5. Apart from what has been observed above I consider such 
mode of determination of seniority of a Judge of a High Court to be 
a safer mode for the purpose as it obviates the chances of tinkeri ng 
or fiddling with the seniority of a Judge by the Judicial 
Commission of Pakistan or the Parliamentary Committee by 
delaying the matter of his nomination and confirmation as such or 
by the Government of Pakistan by delaying issuance of the 
notification o f appointment of an Additional Judge as a Judge for 
reasons which may be manufactured or contrived. Considered from 
this angle the mode of determination of seniority of a Judge of a 
High Court being declared through the judgment in the present 
case is like ly to foster and advance the constitutional mandate 
regarding “fully” securing the independence of the judiciary.   
 
 
(Asif Saeed Khan Khosa)  
Judge  
 
 