IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Original Jurisdiction)  
      
    P R E S E N T :   
 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali Mr. Justice Sarmad Jalal Osmany Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
  SUO MOTU CASE NO. 16 OF 2011  
  
[Suo Motu Action regarding law and order 
situation in Karachi] 
 
AND  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 61 OF 2011 
  Watan Party & another      … PETITIONERS   
VERSUS  
 Federation of Pakistan & others   … RESPONDENTS   Petitioner:    Barrister Zafarullah Khan, ASC   
(Const. P. 61/2011)   
 
On Court notice:  Maulvi Anwar-ul-H aq, Attorney General for Pakistan 
Syed Ashiq Raza, DAG  Mr. M. Shoaib Shaheen, DAG Raja Aleem Abbasi, DAG  
    Ms. Asma Jehangir, ASC/President SCBA     Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC/President, SHCBA  
 Mr. Abdul Fattah Malik, AG Sindh 
Mr. Shahadat Awan, P.G. Sindh 
Mr. Wajid Ali Durrani, I.G.P, Sindh Mr. Saud Ahmad Mirza, Addl. I.G. Sindh Mr. Anwar Subhani, Legal Consultant  
For Province of Sindh:  Mr. Ab dul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
[assisted by Mr. Abdul Sattar Pirzada, Adv.]  
For the Federation:  Dr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC      Mr. A.S.K. Ghouri, AOR SMC 16/2011 ETC.  2
 
For M/o Interior:  Mr. Arif Chaudhry, ASC     Mr. A.S.K. Ghouri, AOR  For the applicant:  Syed Ifti khar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC  
(CMA 4108/2011)   
 
For the applicant:  Mr. Abdu l Mujeeb Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
(CMA 531-K/2011)    Mr. Mazhar Ali B. Chohan, AOR  
 Applicants:    Mr. Muhammad Aqil, Advocate, President KBA   
(CMA 532-K/2011)    Syed Haider Imam Rizv i, Advocate, Gen. Secy.   
    Mr. Iftikhar Javed Qazi, ASC, Vice Chairman     Sindh Bar Council    For the applicant:  Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, ASC/AOR 
(CMA 533-K/2011)     
 
For the applicant:  Khaw aja Naveed Ahmad, ASC 
(CMA 535-K/2011)  Mr. Mazhar Ali B. Chohan, AOR 
 For the applicant:  Mr. Irfanullah Marwat in person 
(in CMA 541-K/2011) 
 
For the applicant:  Syed Iqbal Haider, Sr. ASC 
(in CMA 544-K/2011)  Mr. K.A. Wahab, AOR 
 For the applicant:  Mr. Faisal Kamal Aalam, ASC 
(in CMA 546-K/2011)  Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, AOR 
 For the applicant:  Mr. Rasool Bux Palijo, ASC 
(in CMA 552-K/2011)  Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, AOR 
 For the applicant:  Mr. Jamil Ahmad Virk, ASC 
(in CMA 555-K/2011)  Mr. Mazhar Ali B. Chohan, AOR 
 For the applicant:  Mr. Javed Ahmad Chhattari, Adv. In person 
(in CMA 558-K/2011)   
 
For the applicant:  Mr. Ashraf Samoo, Advocate/ President 
(in CMA 560-K/2011)  Malir Bar Association  
 For the applicant:  Mst. Surriya in person 
(in CMA 561-K/2011)   
 
For the applicant:  Dr. Farogh Naseem, ASC 
(in CMA 565-K/2011)  Dr. Kazi Khalid Ali, ASC 
    M r .  I z h a r  A l a m  F a r o o q i ,  A O R  
 For the applicant:  Afaq Ahmed (through Jail) 
(in CMA 569-K/2011)   
 
Dates of hearing:  26 & 29-30 Au gust, 5-9 & 13-16 September, 2011  
… SMC 16/2011 ETC.  3
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ . – Islam 
is a religion of peace and tolerance and it stands for safety, security 
and sanctity of human life. Islam abhors unlawful killing of innocent 
people and strictly prohibits it in a number of Quranic  verses and 
Ahadith . In Surah  Al-Maidah  verse 32, Allah says:- 
“Because of that, We ordained  for the Children of Israel 
that if anyone killed a person not in retaliation of murder, 
or to spread mischief in the la nd – it would be as if he 
killed all mankind, and if anyo ne saved a life, it would be 
as if he saved the life of all mankind. And indeed, there 
came to them Our Messeng ers with clear proofs, 
evidences, and signs, even th en after that many of them 
continued to exceed the limit s (e.g. by doing oppression 
unjustly and exceeding beyond the limits set by Allah by 
committing the major sins) in the land.”  
 
Some of the other verses of the Holy Quran are as under:-  
“And (remember) when We took your covenant (saying): 
Shed not the blood of your (p eople), nor turn out your own 
people from their dwellings. Th en, (this) you ratified and 
(to this) you bear witness.” [Sura Al-Baqarah verse 84]  
 
“And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his recompense 
is Hell to abide therein; and the Wrath and the Curse of 
Allah are upon him, and a gr eat punishment is prepared 
for him.” [Sura An-Nisa verse 93]  
 
The Holy Prophet [SAW] said –     
“O People, just as you regard th is month, this day, this city 
as Sacred, so regard the life and property of every Muslim 
as a sacred trust. Return th e goods entrusted to you to 
their rightful owners. Hurt no one so that no one may hurt 
you. Remember that you will indeed meet your Lord, and SMC 16/2011 ETC.  4
that He will indeed reckon your  deeds. … …”  [The Farewell 
Sermon ( Khuṭbatul-Wad ā)]  
   
“The biggest sins are: To join others in worship with Allah; 
to be undutiful to one’s pa rents; to kill somebody 
unlawfully; and to take an oath Al-Ghamus.” [Sahih 
Bukhari, Vol VIII, P.434, Number 667]   
“Narrated Abdullah bin Umar: One of the evil deeds with 
bad consequence from which th ere is no escape for the 
one who is involved in it is  to kill someone unlawfully.” 
[Sahih Bukhari, Vol IX, P.2, Number 3]  
 
2.  This aspect of the Islamic teachings, as well finds its 
reflection in the Constitution of th e Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973. 
The Constitution, in its very Preamble , postulates that the principles of 
democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance and social justice, as enunciated by Islam, shall be fu lly observed and the fundamental 
rights, including equality of status, of opportunity and before the law, 
social, economic and political ju stice, and freedom of thought, 
expression, belief, faith, worship an d association, subject to law and 
public morality; shall be fully guar anteed. These very principles have 
been made a substantive part of the Constitution under Article 2A.  Thus, it is the duty of the State to protect and safeguard all these 
Fundamental Rights including the righ t to life and liberty as envisaged 
by Article 9 of the Constitution, wh ich has been interpreted by this 
Court in Shehla Zia’s case  (PLD 1994 SC 693) as under: -  
“Article 9 of the Constitution provides that no person shall 
be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law. 
The word "life" is very signific ant as it covers all facts of 
human existence. The word "life" has not been defined in 
the Constitution but it does not mean nor can it be restricted only to the vegeta tive or animal life or mere SMC 16/2011 ETC.  5
existence from conception to de ath. Life includes all such 
amenities and facilities which a person born in a free 
country is entitled to enjoy with dignity, legally and 
constitutionally. For the purp oses of present controversy 
suffice to say that a person is entitled to protection of law 
from being exposed to hazards of electromagnetic fields or 
any other such hazards which may be due to installation 
and construction of any grid station, any factory, power 
station or such like installations. Under the common law a 
person whose right of easement, property or health is 
adversely affected by any act of omission or commission of 
a third person in the neighbou rhood or at a far off place, 
he is entitled to seek an injunction and also claim 
damages, but the Constitutional  rights are higher than the 
legal rights conferred by law be it municipal law or the 
common law. Such a danger as  depicted, the possibility of 
which cannot be excluded, is  bound to affect a large 
number of people who may suffer from it unknowingly 
because of lack of awarene ss, information and education 
and also because such sufferance is silent and fatal and 
most of the people who would be residing near, under or at a dangerous distance of the grid station or such 
installation do not know that they are facing any risk or 
are likely to suffer by such ri sk. Therefore, Article 184 can 
be invoked because a large num ber of citizens throughout 
the country cannot make such representation and may not like to make it due to ignorance, poverty and disability. 
Only some conscientious citize ns aware of their rights and 
the possibility of danger come forward.” 
 
3.   In case of Arshad Mehmood v. Government of Punjab  (PLD 
2005 SC 193) also, the Court observed that the word ‘life’ used in 
Article 9 of the Constitution includ es all such amenities and facilities 
which a person born in a free country is entitled to enjoy with dignity, legally and constitutionally. The word ‘life’ in the Constitution has not 
been used in a limited manner; a wide meaning should be given to SMC 16/2011 ETC.  6
enable a man not only to sustain life but to enjoy it. The State is duty 
bound to protect the life an d property of its citizens in accordance with 
law against all the atrocities, target  killings, homicide, etc. The basic 
human rights of life, liberty and enjoyment of one’s property have 
been recognized nationally as well as internationally. Article 3 of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights  provides that ‘everyone has the 
right to life, liberty and security of  person’, no one shall be subjected 
to torture or to cruel, inhuman or  degrading treatment or punishment; 
everyone has the right to recognitio n everywhere as a person before 
the law; and all are equal before th e law and are entitled without any 
discrimination to equal protec tion of the law. Article 17 ibid lays down 
that  ‘every one has the right to own property alone as well as in 
association with others. It is worth mentioning here that no society can 
make any progress in a state of chao s and disorder. It is manifest to 
hypothesize that the law and order condition prevailing in a country 
has a direct and significant bear ing on the pace and pattern of 
economic development of that count ry. The existence of basic socio-
economic framework of the country and the contin uation of economic 
growth without any hindrance or interruption depends upon 
subsistence of better law and order si tuation. In case of break-down of 
peace on account of any factors negative effect is exerted on the economic growth. Better law and orde r as a determinan t of economic 
development was spelled out in explicit  terms in the theories of growth 
advanced by economists such as J.J Spangler and W. W. Rostow. In 
his Theories of Socio-economic Grow th, Problems in the Study of 
Economic Growth, 1949, J.J. Spangler has mentioned that the 
structure of the prevalent valu e system of a community can 
reasonably be considered as an im portant condition of law and order, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  7
because the value system defines th e basic norms and ethos of human 
conduct. For example, if the value sy stem of a society is predominated 
by sectarian or ethnic dispensation s, then such a society would be 
continuously ridden by law and orde r problems, thus putting frequent 
twists and turns to the process of  economic growth. W.W. Rostow, in 
Politics and the Stages of Growth, 1971, has extended the theme of 
stage , ‘propensities’  and their linkages to the role of political factors, 
institutions and the law and orde r framework in determining the 
pattern of economic growth. Th e primary tasks of any legal 
government are defined as the pr ovision of security, welfare and 
growth, and constitutional orde r. Thus there is a clear cut 
interconnection between law and or der and economic development.  
4.   Article 14 of the Constituti on of Pakistan ensures dignity of 
every individual. In the case of ‘ Commissioner of Income Tax v. Eli 
Lilly Pakistan ’ reported as 2009 SCMR 1279, this Court observed that: 
“It is the duty and obligation of  the State on account of the 
various provisions of the Co nstitution to provide the 
atmosphere based on hone sty by providing equal 
protection of law. Every citi zen must be treated equally, 
dignity of human being life should be maintained, and 
liberty of life and honour must be guaranteed as envisaged in the Articles 9, 14 an d 25 of the Constitution.” 
 
5.   Articles 15 and 18 of the Constitution, respectively relate 
to freedom of movement etc. an d freedom of trade, business or 
profession and have been interpreted by this Court in the case titled 
“Government of Pakistan v. Zamir Ahmad ” reported as PLD 1975 SC 
667, in the following words: -  
“Article 18 of the Constitution of Pakistan, which relates to 
the freedom of trade, busi ness or profession, which 
corresponds to Article 15 of the interim Constitution, and SMC 16/2011 ETC.  8
which incidentally held the field at the relevant time, 
assures the citizens the righ t to enter upon any “lawful 
profession of occupation” and “to conduct any lawful trade 
or business”. It is important to point out that the word 
“lawful” qualifies the right of the citizen in the relevant 
field. This clearly envisages that the State can by law ban 
a profession, occupation, trade or business by declaring it 
to be unlawful which in common parlance means anything 
forbidden by law. Prostitution, trafficking in women, 
gambling, trade in narcotics or dangerous drugs are 
common place instances of unlaw ful profession or trade. 
These are inherently dangerous to  public health or welfare. 
Therefore, on the wording of Ar ticle 18 of the Constitution, 
the right to enter up on a profession or occupation or to 
conduct trade or business can hardly be described to be a 
Constitutional or Fundamenta l Right when such right may 
be denied by law. In this resp ect our Constitution stands in 
sharp contrast with the corresponding provision of the 
Indian Constitution which omits the use of word “lawful” in 
the relevant Provision.” 
 
The same principle was enunciated by this Court in the case of Arshad 
Mehmood (supra). This Court observed that the Government has the 
authority to regulate a lawful busine ss or trade. Reasonable restriction, 
however, does not mean prohibition or prevention completely. Article 
24(1) of the Constitution envisages th at no person shall be deprived of 
his property save in accordance with law.  6.   Any democratic set up consisting of citizens and functionaries in the country under the Constitution is bound to show its 
loyalty to the State, for to be loyal and faithful to the State is the basic 
duty of every citizen under Article 5 of the Constitution. This Court in 
the case of Shahid Orakzai v. Pakistan through Secretary Law  (PLD 
2011 SC 365) held that Article 5(2) of the Constitution has mandated 
that obedience to the Constitution and law is the inviolable obligation SMC 16/2011 ETC.  9
of every citizen wherever he may be  and for every othe r person for the 
time being within Pakistan. The chosen representatives, who have acquired authority on behalf of their electors as members of the 
National Assembly, Senate or Provin cial Assemblies as per mandate of 
their oath, which they take before entering upon office, are bound to 
bear true faith and allegiance to Pa kistan. The oath of the office of 
members of the National Assembly an d Senate as set out in the Third 
Schedule provides that the memb ers will perform their functions 
honestly, to the best of their  ability, faithfully and in accordance with 
the Constitution and law; that they will act in the  interest of the 
sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, we ll-being and prosperity of Pakistan 
and they will preserve, protect and de fend the Constitution. Therefore, 
while holding a constitutional office , the chosen representatives of the 
people have to remain true to thei r oath and to obse rve constitutional 
limits in all circumstances.  7.   As per the scheme of the Constitution, all the federating units, namely, Balochistan , Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa , Punjab  and Sindh  
are the essential components of th e Federation by virtue of the 
parliamentary system of governme nt prevalent in the country. The 
Federal Government is being run th rough Prime Minister and Federal 
Ministers and their executive author ity extends to the matters with 
respect to which Parliament has powe r to make laws, etc.  Similarly 
the Provincial set-up is being run through Chief Minister and the Provincial Ministers.  The Governor of  a Province is to be appointed as 
per Article 101 by the President on th e advice of the Prime Minister. It 
is to be noted that the Governor who is holder of a constitutional post 
and acts as the agent of the President, has to keep the Federation SMC 16/2011 ETC.  10
informed of the affairs of the Provin ce, although as per Article 105, the 
Governor shall act on the advice of the Cabinet or the Chief Minister.  
8.   Under Article 130 of the Co nstitution the Chief Minister of 
the Province has to be elected by th e votes of the majo rity of the total 
membership of the Provincial Assembly. The member who gets 
majority votes of the total member ship shall be called upon by the 
Governor to assume the office of the Chief Minister and holds office 
during the pleasure of the Govern or, however, at any time, if the 
Governor is of the opinion that th e Chief Minister is not commanding 
majority in the House, he shall su mmon the Provincial Assembly and 
require the Chief Minister to obtain  a vote of confidence from the 
Assembly. The Chief Minister shall ceas e to hold office if a resolution 
for vote of no-confidence is pass ed by a majority of the total 
membership of the Provincial Assembly as per Article 136. The President can suspend the functions of  the Provincial Assembly subject 
to availability of the circumstance s under Article 234. The Governor 
shall not exercise his powers under this clause unless he is satisfied 
that the Chief Minister does no t command the confidence of the 
majority of the members of the Provincial Assembly.  In case the 
Governor intends to act against the Ch ief Minister, then it is incumbent 
upon him to summon the Provincial  Assembly and require the Chief 
Minister to obtain a vote of confid ence from the Assembly as referred 
t o  a b o v e .  R e f e r e n c e  m a y  a l s o  b e  m a d e  t o  t h e  c a s e  o f  Muhammad 
Anwar Durrani v. Province of Baluchistan  reported as PLD 1989 Quetta 
25 wherein the Court while interpreting Articles 107 and 112 of the 
Constitution observed as under: -  
“Under Article 107 of the Constitution, duration of Provincial 
Assembly is five years.  Therefore, dissolution of Provincial Assembly before its constitutional period must be justified SMC 16/2011 ETC.  11
on the definite reasons prov ided by the Constitution…... 
extraordinary powers of dissolution of Assembly, must be 
exercised carefully, faithfully and in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution. According to their admissions, 
the Chief Minister had no clea r majority except with the 
casting vote of the Speaker.  In such circumstances, 
C o n s t i t u t i o n  p r o p e r l y  d e m a n d e d  t h a t  a d v i c e  o f  s u c h  C h i e f  
Minister should have been weighed with caution and sanctity 
of basic charter should have been maintained. An Assembly 
is an important organ of the State and every effort should 
have been explored which is possible under the law to save the Assembly from dissolution. … … Governor, before taking 
extreme action of dissolution of Assembly under the advice 
of Chief Minister, ought to have  advised him to seek vote of 
confidence before his advice was accepted.  We have come 
to the conclusion that a Chief Minister who had not obtained vote of confidence from majority members of an Assembly 
could not advise the Governor to dissolve the Assembly 
under Art. 112(1) of the Constitution.”  
 
However, a Provincial Assembly cann ot be dissolved by the Governor 
except under circumstances warrantin g such dissolution as per Article 
112. 9.   A Proclamation of Emergency may be issued by the President of Pakistan providing fo r imposition of emergency due to 
internal disturbance beyond the po wer of Provincial Government to 
control, a resolution from Provincial  Assembly of the Province shall be 
required, however, if the President acts on his own, the Proclamation 
shall be placed before both houses of parliament for approval of each 
house within 10 days. As per Ar ticle 232(7), a Proclamation of 
Emergency is to be laid before a joint sitting and shall cease to be in force at the expiration of two months, unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by  resolution of the joint sitting. A SMC 16/2011 ETC.  12
proclamation issued under Article 234 may, by like resolution, be 
extended for a further period not ex ceeding two months at a time, but 
no such Proclamation shall in any ca se remain in force for more than 
six months. It is competent for the Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament), in 
terms of Article 234(5) of the Co nstitution, in joint sitting to, inter alia, 
confer on the President the power to  make laws with respect to any 
matter within the legislative compet ence of the Provincial Assembly. 
Under Article 245 of the Constituti on, the Federal Government also 
intervenes in the affairs of the Provinces and may call upon the 
military to act in aid of civil administration.  10.   The Federation and Provin ces are equally responsible to 
adhere to the provisions of the Cons titution, particularly for ensuring 
the enforcement of Fundamental Rights as guaranteed by the 
Constitution. The Federal and the Pr ovincial Governments, though not 
directly, but indirectly share their responsibility in running the affairs of the Province in accordance with  the relevant provisions of the 
Constitution.  11.   The National as well as Provincial Assemblies have to 
uphold constitutional norms but unfor tunately, in the past, the political 
parties were blamed for having failed to assert their role in bringing 
true democratic rule based on the norms of social justice, peace and 
tranquility and on account of non-adherence to the constitutional provisions, which, resulted in dissolu tion of these bodies. In the years 
1958, 1977 and 1999, when the Army  Generals, in their wisdom, 
dismissed the Governments, dissolved the Assemblies and imposed martial law in the country. Each time , the matter came up before this 
Court, but legality was accorded to the acts of the Generals. It was, 
however, for the first time in No vember, 2007 when like action taken SMC 16/2011 ETC.  13
by the then Chief of Army Staff was not accepted by the Superior 
Judiciary, which ultimately led to th e ouster of the retired General and 
restoration of the democratic  set up in the country.  
12.    Primarily, it is the responsibility of the Provincial 
Government to maintain law and order in the territories of the 
respective Provinces for the purpos e of smooth running of economic 
and social life and without disturbanc e in the daily affairs because if 
the life and liberty of the citizens is, in any part of a Province at stake, 
highhandedness continues to remain  unabated; atrocious acts like 
target killings, torture, extortion, etc., become the order of the day 
and then neither the Provincial Go vernment can discharge its duties 
nor the people consider themselves safe and protected. Virtually, in 
that case, discomfort painfully enve lops the whole Province and decay 
soon creeps in breaking the very fabr ic of human life of the citizens.  
13.   The city of Karachi is the Capital of the Province of Sindh, 
and undoubtedly the hub of great ec onomic and financial activities. 
Karachi continues to be an important financial and industrial centre for 
Sindh and the whole country and hand les most of the overseas trade 
of Pakistan and the Central Asian countries. It accounts for a large 
portion of the GDP of Pakistan. Kara chi’s population has continued to 
grow and is estimated to have exceeded 18 million people. According to a legend, this city started as a fishing settlement, where a fisherwoman, Mai Kolachi , settled and started a family. The village that 
grew out of this settlement was known as Kolachi-jo-Goth  (The Village 
of Kolachi  in Sindhi). When Sindh started trading across the sea with 
Muscat and the Persian Gulf in the late 18th century, Karachi gained in importance; a small fort was construc ted for its protection with a few 
cannons imported from Muscat. The fort had two main gateways: one SMC 16/2011 ETC.  14
facing the sea, known as Khara Dar  (Brackish Gate) and the other 
facing the adjoining Lyari river, known as the Meetha Dar  (Sweet 
Gate). The location of these gates corresponds to the present-day city 
localities of Khaaradar  (Khārā Dar ) and Meethadar  (Mīṭhā Dar ) 
respectively. By passage of time, it grew into a bigger city. The 
foundations of a city municipal government were laid down and 
infrastructure development was und ertaken. New businesses started 
opening up and the population of th e town began growing rapidly. In 
1878, the city was connected to the rest  of British India by rail. Public 
building projects such as Frere Hall (1865) and the Empress Market 
(1890) were undertaken. In 1876, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the 
founder of Pakistan , was born in the city, which by now had become 
a bustling city with mosques, chur ches, courthouses, markets, paved 
streets and a magnificent harbour.  By 1899 Karachi had become the 
largest wheat exporting port in the ea st. The population of the city was 
about 105,000 inhabitants by the en d of the 19th century, with a 
cosmopolitan mix of Muslims, Hi ndus, Europeans, Jews, Parsis, 
Iranians, Lebanese, and Goans. By th e turn of the century, the city 
faced street congestion, which le d to South Asia's first tramway 
system being laid down in 1900. In later years, so Karachi prospered 
as a major centre of commerce and industry during the Raj, attracting communities of: Africans, Arabs, Armenians, Catholics from Goa, 
Jewish, Lebanese, Malays, and Zoroas trians (also known as Parsees) - 
in addition to a large number of businessmen.  As the movement for 
independence almost reached its conclusion, the city suffered widespread outbreaks of communal violence between the majority 
Muslims and the minority Hindus, wh o were often targeted by the 
incoming Muslim refugees. In respon se to the perceived threat of SMC 16/2011 ETC.  15
Hindu domination, self preservation of identity, language and culture 
in combination with Sindhi Muslim resentment towards wealthy Sindhi 
Hindus, the province of Sindh became the first province of India 
to pass the Pakistan Resolution , in favour of the creation of the 
Pakistani state. The ensuing turm oil of independence led to the 
expulsion of most of Karachi's Hi ndu community. While many poor low 
caste Hindus, Christians, and wealthy Zoroastrians (Parsees) remained in the city, Karachi's native Sindhi Hindu community fled to India and was replaced by Muslim refugees who, in turn, had been uprooted from regions belonging to India. Di strict Karachi was chosen as the 
capital city of Pakistan and it accommodated a huge influx of migrants and refugees from India to th e newly formed country. As a 
consequence, the demographics of  the city changed drastically. 
However, it still maintained a grea t cultural diversity as its new 
inhabitants arrived from different part s of India. In 1958, the capital of 
Pakistan was shifted from Karach i to Islamabad and Karachi thus 
became the capital of Sindh. During the 1960s, Karachi was seen as an economic role model around the world. Many countries sought to 
emulate Pakistan's economic planning  strategy and one of them, South 
Korea, copied the city's second "F ive-Year Plan" and World Financial 
Centre in Seoul is designed and modeled after Karachi. With economic growth and prosperity, peace and tranquility reigned in the city, 
business places were full of activity till late night with a lot of hustle 
and bustle seen all around and it came to be known as the city of 
lights. Being a big port city, it cont ributed, roughly stating, about 60–
70 per cent of the total revenue of the country.  14.   The 1980s and 90’s saw an influx of illegal Afghan 
refugees from the Afghan  war into Karachi. Political tensions erupted SMC 16/2011 ETC.  16
and the city was wracked, at differe nt points of time, with violence 
among groups widely speculated to be aligned with various political 
parties. In this behalf, a referenc e is made to the report of the 
Commission of Enquiry into Karachi A ffairs filed by Syed Iqbal Haider, 
ASC, which reflects, inter alia, the figures relating to population, 
geographical area, roads, vehicles, housing, police, number of riot 
cases of the years from 1985 to 1989, number of persons killed/injured, number of police officers/men martyred/injured, 
damage to private and public prop erty including vehicles, petrol 
pumps, houses, shops, factories, cinemas, offices, schools, banks, 
police stations, railway stations, telephone exchanges, hospitals, imposition of curfews on account of  clashes between religious groups 
(Shias  & Sunnis ), clashes between police and residents, ethnic riots, 
drug mafia, firing and looting, etc.   15.   The law and order worsened  during the period from 1992 
to 1994 when Operation Clean up wa s, allegedly, launched against 
Mohajir  Qaumi  Movement (MQM). Constituti on Petition No.46 of 1994 
was filed before this Court by  MQM (Mohajir Qaumi Movement) 
through Senator Ishtiaq Azhar, Convener Central Coordination 
Committee.  It was submitted in the said petition, inter alia, that the 
law and order situation in Karachi was deteriorating day by day, the 
workers of MQM were abducted, arre sted and murdered and their dead 
bodies were not handed over to their relatives. It was further 
submitted that thousands of members of MQM were denied protection from illegal arrest without any warrant , extra-judicial detention, death 
in custody, etc. It was asserted  that Fundamental Rights of the 
petitioner contained in Articles 9,  10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 22, 25 
and 25 were violated, therefore, a declaration was sought that the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  17
petitioner be allowed to function in  accordance with the scheme of the 
Constitution. A voluminous reply was filed on behalf of the Federation 
and the Province denying the alle gations attempting to present, 
allegedly, their side of the case ci ting horrifying instances holding MQM 
responsible for the worsening situatio n.  The case was fixed on various 
dates, but ultimately it was not pursued and vide order dated 
26.10.1999, the above petition was dismissed for non-prosecution.  16.   It appears that on account  of the worsening law and order 
situation, another operation was co nducted during the year 1996 and 
similar action continued thereafter also. In this context, Constitution Petitions Nos. 6 & 13 of 1999 were filed by the MQM wherein complaints of physical torture of the MQM workers and activists by the 
law enforcement agencies were agit ated and directions to the law 
enforcement agencies for pre- and post-interrogation medical examination of all persons taken into custody by them by an 
independent medical practitioner of their choice to enable them to 
obtain certificate about their physic al condition, were sought. It was 
pleaded that no suspect be subjecte d to any kind of interrogation until 
such a certificate is handed over to the next of his kin and in the event 
of evidence of physical torture,  the respondent Governments be 
directed to register appropriate cr iminal cases against the members of 
the law enforcement agencies in  whose custody the suspect was 
entrusted for interrogation. Protecti on was also sought against arrest 
of elected representatives of MQM unless any incriminating material 
was available to justify such an ac tion. The case came up for hearing 
on 14.01.1999, but the representative of  the petitioner stated that the 
case was to be argued by anothe r counsel, therefore, request for SMC 16/2011 ETC.  18
adjournment was made. Thereafter, the petitioners never approached 
this Court for fixation  of the petitions. 
17.   Critical/serious and dismal condition of law and order, once 
again emerged on account of variou s factors for the past few months, 
particularly in the months of July and August 2011 as widely reported 
in the print and electronic media, e.g. Al-Akhbar , The Daily Express, 
The News, The Daily Nawa-e-Waqt , The Daily Jang, The Daily Times, 
The Frontier Post, The Daily Nation, The Daily Sahafat , Aaj Ki Awaz 
and various News Channels, e.g., Express, GEO, SANA, PTV, AAJ, 
Dunya , Dawn, etc., that the lives and properties of the people of 
Karachi are not safe, frequent killings  of innocent citizens have made 
their lives miserable; citizens are being abducted for ransom; 
beheaded dead bodies of innocent pe ople with arms and legs tied and 
wrapped in sacs, are being recovere d in large numbers; street crimes 
are in abundance and different groups are involved in target killings.  
Recovery of a large number of dead bodies almost everyday; brutality 
and heinousness of the offences ; passivity of the Government 
functionaries; involvement of gangs  in money extortion, nefarious and 
bloody activities of land mafia and drug mafia; damage to valuable 
properties of the citizens; shifting of  capital from Pakistan to Malaysia 
and Bangladesh (as reported in some  clippings) and transfer of dead 
bodies from Karachi to the places of  their origins in different parts of 
the country causing discomforting st ir, harassment and fear in the 
minds of people, provide substantial evidence that Karachi has reached 
the verge of destruction posing a threat to the very stability of 
Pakistan. Recently, on this issue, different views were being expressed 
by the observers, analysts and anch or persons about causes of the 
catastrophe.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  19
18.   In that scenario, on a note put up by the Registrar of this 
Court, based on press clippings, CD s and DVDs provided  by private TV 
Channels showing a dismal situation within the jurisdiction of several 
police stations of Karachi, the inst ant proceedings were initiated under 
Article 184 (3) of the Constitution  vide order passed on 24.08.2011 in 
the following terms: -  
“I have gone through above noted facts reported in the 
print/flashed in the electronic media, perusal whereof 
presents a bleak/dismal picture of bloodshed, arson, kidnapping/abduction for ransom, widespread violence, 
illegal collection of money ( Bhatta ) from traders, which 
prima  facie are violative of Articles 9, 14, 15, 18 and 24 of 
the Constitution. Prima facie,  the Executive has failed to 
protect the life, liberty, dign ity, property and freedom of 
the general public as is manifested in the above 
note/reported. Therefore, let this note be converted into 
petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Notice be 
issued to learned Attorney Ge neral for Pakistan to appear 
and submit a comprehensive report about the above incident, which have been taki ng place in Karachi for the 
last more than one month. Th e report should be based on 
the material to substantiate the same, which should be 
collected from the Federal an d Provincial law enforcement 
and intelligence agencies.    The Chief Secretary and PPO of the Province of Sindh 
are directed through Advocate general to submit details of 
the incidents in view of the fact noted herein above in the 
office note. They should also provide the number of 
persons who have been killed/i njured in these incidents for 
the last one month. They sh ould also place on record 
copies of the daily situation reports duly prepared by the 
concerned police officers for the perusal of PPO and the 
Chief Secretary.  
 The FIRs and other material be also filed in order to assess violation of the fundam ental rights of the citizens SMC 16/2011 ETC.  20
noted herein above. Notices be  also issued to President, 
Supreme Court Bar Association as well as President, Sindh 
High Court Bar Association to appear and assist the Court. 
 Put up in Court on 26th August, 2011.”  
 
19.   On 26.08.2011, this Court, after a preliminary hearing, in 
view of ongoing bloodshed, k illing, arson, collection of bhatta , etc., 
being committed in Karachi, passed the following order: -  
 “2. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan has stated 
that due to paucity of time he could not prepare a report 
as per the directions of the Court, therefore, he needs some time. It has been explained to him that on account 
of non-adherence to the co nstitutional provisions, 
reference to which has been made herein-above, incidents 
of brutal murders and commissi on of heinous crimes have 
occurred in which, according to  the information laid before 
the Court by the media, gangs are involved in extortion of 
money, nefarious/bloody activities of land mafia and drugs 
mafia and damage to the valuable properties of the 
citizens have taken place, therefore, relevant material 
need to be collected for ascertaining the extent of the violation of the constitutional  provisions as such he may 
convey to all the law enforcing agencies at Federal and 
Provincial level that they sh ould provide all the necessary 
material highlighting the incidents with reference to the 
jurisdiction of various police stations, involvement of the 
accused persons, their identity , if possible, and failure of 
the police functionaries to proceed with them in 
accordance with law. To achi eve this object, he should 
convene a meeting with the concerned functionaries and 
place a report on the next date of hearing, as is directed in 
order dated 24.08.2011.  
3. Mr. Abdul Fattah Malik, learned Advocate General 
Sindh, has submitted copies of DSRs for the period 
commencing from 24.07.2001 to 23.08.2011 and has also 
filed brief of more than 232 FI Rs which, according to him, 
could be collected by him so far, therefore, he is required SMC 16/2011 ETC.  21
to do the needful before the ne xt date of hearing. Orally, 
he has pointed out that during the past one month 306 
people have been killed and their particulars shall also be 
furnished. He is required to furnish the same indicating the 
police stations where people were killed; FIRs, if any, were 
registered; how many dead bo dies of the killed person 
were found; how many of them were found beheaded 
and/or their arms and limbs were chopped and whether 
the investigation commenced an d evidence collected or not 
against the accused involved. We have pointed out to him 
that he should convey to the Chief Secretary and IGP 
Sindh who are primarily responsible to ensure law and 
order in the Province that th ey should proceed against all 
types of accused persons across  the board and on the next 
date of hearing he would arrange a presentation in the 
Court room with reference to de tails of the police stations 
where the incidents have taken place and the manner in 
which the victims were killed, the FIRs registered and the 
names of persons posted in the police station who are 
responsible etc. so we may understand that the police is 
serious in conducting the in vestigation and to report 
to/challan the accused; so also in prosecuting them in 
Courts on solid material so that they may not go scot free 
on the basis of said informatio n .  H e  i s  a l s o  d i r e c t e d  t o  
submit in the same manner the details of the injured 
persons  and the properties de stroyed in rowdyism by the 
culprits and whether in re spect of such occurrences 
evidence has so far been collec ted or not. The report must 
be comprehensive one and there should be a presentation 
on the Power Point by the polic e. It is to be noted that 
further proceedings shall, as well, take pace in respect of violation of the constitutional position.  
4. Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, learned Sr. ASC, has 
stated that he would appear on behalf of the Province of 
Sindh through Chief Executiv e and shall place important 
documents on record on or before the next date of 
hearing.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  22
5. Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, learned Sr. ASC, stated 
that he intends to file an application on behalf of Awami 
National Party (ANP) to become a party in the instant case. 
He may do so and even othe rwise being a Senior Counsel 
of this Court he can address the argument on the basis of 
material if he has in his possession to assist the Court. 6. Mr. Babar Awan, learned Sr. ASC, has stated that he 
will represent the Federation and he has filed nomination 
on behalf of Secretary, Mi nistry of Law and Justice, 
Islamabad.  
7. Ms. Asma Jehangir, President Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan, has st ated that there are certain 
preliminaries which need to be  completed by the executive 
in respect of registration of cases, investigation and arrest 
of nominated accused persons. According to her, the 
names of all the accused persons have not been disclosed; no action has been taken against those accused persons 
whose names have appeared in the FIRs and they have not 
been arrested. On this, learned Advocate General Sindh 
has replied that few arrests have taken place. Be that as it 
may, he is required to submit on the next date of hearing, the details of the same because, unless sufficient evidence 
is collected, no useful purpose will be served by sending 
them to face trial.  
8. Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, President Sindh High Court 
Bar Association, has filed copi es of resolutions of the Bar 
Association as well as press clippings and has pointed out 
that during recent incidents starting from January, 2011, 
nineteen Advocates have b een murdered. He has also 
pointed out that even yest erday i.e. 25.08.2011, one of 
brilliant Advocates of Sind h High Court namely Mr. 
Muhammad Murtaza Chinnoy has been brutally yet 
according to his information the investigation has not been 
conducted property. The IGP Sindh is directed to look into 
the matter personally and communicate the report in this 
behalf through Advocate Genera l Sindh on the next date of 
hearing. Learned Advocate Gene ral Sindh is also required SMC 16/2011 ETC.  23
to submit report mentioning the names of the culprits 
involved in the killings of the Advocates and showing 
whether they have been  arrested or not.  
9. The Chief Secretary and the IGP Sindh have 
submitted reports which may be  kept on record. Let the 
case be adjourned to 29.08.2011 to be fixed at Branch Registry of this Court at Karachi.”   
 
20.   It is important to note that in response to order dated 
24.08.2011, the Chief Secretary in his re port on the affairs of Karachi, 
stated as under: -  
 After 9/11, the Phenomenon of international terrorism 
emerged in which bomb blasts and beheading of foreigners 
attracted world attention. The terrorist groups targeted US 
diplomats and carried out suic ide attacks at US consulate 
thrice. The French engineers were killed outside the Sheraton Hotel, even Muharram processions and shrines 
were not spared, besides suic ide attack at CID building. 
 During the briefing sessions, it was pointed out to me that 
army operation in the north an d insurgency in Balochistan 
had caused internal displacement, in the garb of which certain criminal/hostile elements have moved into Karachi 
and have also smuggled arms. The hostile foreign agencies 
are backing up to cause chaos in the economic capital of 
Pakistan under a clandestine was against the state. Citing 
various reasons the emerging situation, I was told that 
Karachi population is approaching 18 million with diverse 
ethnic communities competing for resources. This mega 
city has been allowed to expand and grown in an 
unplanned way by the city managers in the past. 
Resultantly, the city lacks basic infrastructure to support such a large human settlement and provide basic civic 
amenities to all the growing urban jungle of Katchi  
Abadies.  
 The Police have its own short coming and weaknesses both 
in terms of man-power and other resources, and have SMC 16/2011 ETC.  24
further drained due to security  challenged in the post 9/11 
scenario. 
 In early July, 2011 violent incidents took place in which 16 
people were killed in Karachi. This was followed by an 
armed clash on 22nd July, 2011 between militant of two 
g r o u p s  i n  t h e  a r e a  o f  D i s t r i c t  E a s t  ( M a l i r  a n d  L a n d h i ) ,  resultantly, 14 people lost th eir lives. The fragile peace in 
Orangi Town was disturbed again due to clash between 
two ethnic communities in the last week of July, 2011 
taking a death toll of 37 lives.  
 On 17
th August, 2011, Five (05) dead bodies were found in 
PS Garden area. On the same day, Ex-MNA was shot dead. 
These incidents triggered violence in other area i.e. 
Kharadar, Lyari, Sher Shah, Baldia and Chakra Goth . 
Resultantly, 62 persons were killed and 95 got injured 
from 17 to 20 August, 2011 , which include 03 policemen, 
who embraced Shahadat in line of duty.  
 During the past one month th ere has been incidents of 
killing. 
  Cases Registered    Persons Killed 
  Murder Killing 232    306 
  Gun shot injury 98    159 
 
STEPS TAKEN BY THE CHIEF SECRETARY, SINDH 
 
 On 8th July, 2011, the government of Sindh entrusted 
powers u/s 5 of ATA, 1997 to  Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) 
enabling and making Rangers responsible to apprehend 
the criminal elements involv ed in firing and killing of 
innocent citizens.  
 The Government of Sindh furt her authorized Rangers to 
cordon, search and use force to  control the situation in the 
effected areas of Karachi. Copy of the Notification bearing 
No.SO(LE-I)/HD/6-66/11, dated 8th July, 2011 (copy 
submitted as Annex A). 
 On 25th July, 2011, the President of Pakistan, while 
reviewing the Karachi situation, directed to enhance the 
operational capability of Polic e (Annex-B). Accordingly, the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  25
Government of Sindh immediately made available and 
released Rs.450 million for proc urement of APCs from HIT. 
These 15 APCs will be deliver ed by end of August, 2011 to 
Sindh Police.  
 The policy directive on the subject was issued by the Home 
Department vide No.SO(LE-II)/HD/3-1/2011 dated 23 August, 2011, wherein the lead implementing agency i.e. 
Police was reminded of legal re sponsibility to ensure safety 
of people’s life and establis h public order as per law, 
irrespective of any considerat ion of political linkage of 
anyone involved in this cycle of violence. Copy of the letter 
spelling out the policy of the subject is attached as Annex 
‘C’. 
 
21.   The IGP Sindh also filed a re port to the following effect: -  
 Karachi is the 7
th largest city of the world having 
peculiar/ethnic nature comprising of Punjab, 
Pakhtoon, Balochi, Sindhi and Urdu speaking 
communities. It has a population of approximately 
18th million and spread over area on 3527 sq. kms. 
 The ethnic divide became pronounced during last few 
years as a result of influx of people from other parts 
of the country. With this  change in demography, 
there are over 150 area s where two or more 
communities are facing each other. 
 It has long history of terrorism/violence as is 
indicated of the cases mentioned below:  
HIGH PROFILE CASES 
(2004-2007)  
S# Police Station Incidents No. of 
Deceased No. of 
Injured 
1. Mithadar 
2004 Bomb Blast in Haidery 
Masjid situated inside the compound of Sindh Madrasat-ul-
Islam  23 98 
2. Brigade 2004 Bomb Blast in Imam 
Bargah Ali Raza 22 29 
3. Boat Basin 
2004 Corps Commander 
Motor Cade Firing incident at Clifton Bridge 10 13 
4. Site 2004 Bomb Blast at Binoria 10 44 SMC 16/2011 ETC.  26
restaurant 
5. Soldier Bazar 
2006 Bomb Blast at Nishtar 
Park 55 125 
6. Various PSs 
2007 12 May, 2007, arrival 
of Chief Justice in Karachi 40 127 
7. Bahadurabad 
2007 Bomb Blast in the 
welcome procession of Ms Benazir Bhutto at Karsaz, Main 
Shahrah-e-Faisal 119 353 
8. Preedy 2009 IED explosion in 
Ashoora Procession 
near Light House Traffic Signal, M.A. Jinnah Road, Karachi 17 39 
9. Saddar 2010 IED explosion Parking 
Area in front of emergency JPMC 
Karachi 16 19 
10. Ferozabad 
2010 IED explosion Ramp 
Shahrah-e-Quaideen 
Nursery Bridge 11 24 
 
 During past one month there has been incidents of killing:   
   
Cases Registered    Persons Killed 
   
Murder/Killing 232    306 
  Gun shot injury 98    159 
 In response Karachi Police has arrested 26 accused in 
target killings in the last month. To date 117 target killings have been arrested and 179 cases have been deterred and 
challenged.  
 In the last one month 3075 raids have been conducted 
wherein 495 Pos/absconders an d 1162 criminals have been 
arrested. 03 K.Koves, 508 Pist ols/Revolvers, 02 Rifles, 13 
Repeaters and 03 Hand grenades have been recovered 
from criminals.  
 The prolonged power and water shortage in Karachi city 
have also resulted in frequent public disorder on daily 
basis, which engages the police in fire fighting duties. In the previous months police has arrested 1142 miscreants 
involves in arson and breach of peace.  
 Action is also being taken against extortionists/Bhatta 
collectors. 70 Bhatta collectors have been arrested and 43 
cases have been detected. In the previous month 13 extortionists were arrested. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  27
 In spite of the limited resources the Police and Law 
Enforcing Agencies have made hectic efforts to combat the 
terrorist activities in the city and have been able to control 
the terrorism and target killing.  The law enforcing agencies 
are now in full control of the situation and are prepared to 
met any challenging situation for ensuring the safety of life 
and property of the citizens.  
 
22.   On 29.08.2011, the IGP ga ve a power point presentation 
in the Courtroom, relevant exce rpts whereof are as under: -  
Causes of Violence 
 
 Recent demographic changes 
 Ethnicity, Sectarianism and factional in-fighting 
 Clashes between land and bhatta mafias 
 Deep mistrust among the ethnic groups 
 Easy access to illicit weapons and misuse of Arms 
Licenses 
 
Types of Killings  
 
 Killings due to personal enmity 
 Political motivated killings 
 Sectarian killings 
 Ethnic killings 
 Gang war killings 
 Target killing of Police Officials 
 Victims of stray/cross fire 
  
ETHNIC INTERFACES/FLASH POINTS IN KARACHI 
 
Katti Pahari Urdu speaking vs. Pathan 
Qasba Colony Urdu speaking vs Pathan 
Sharafi Goth Urdu speaking vs Baloch 
Banaras Chowk Urdu speaking vs Pathan 
Quaidabad  Urdu speaking vs Sunni Tehreek 
New Karachi Sunni Tehreek vs Sipah-e-Sahaba 
Sachal Urdu speaking vs Afghanis 
Surjani Town Pathan vs Seraiki speaking 
Malir City Urdu speaking vs Baloch 
Landhi Urdu speaking vs Pathan 
Al-Falah Urdu speaking vs Baloch 
Korangi 2 ½ 
(Chakra Goth) Urdu speaking vs Sindhi 
Khokharpar/ 
Saudabad Urdu Speaking vs. Sindhi 
 
 
DEAD BODIES FOUND BEHEADED/TORTURED SMC 16/2011 ETC.  28
FROM 24-07-2011 TO 24-08-2011 
 
POLICE STATION NO. OF DEAD BODIES  
N.K.I Area 4 
Kalri 2 
SITE-B 1 
Docks 1 
Total 8 
 
 
DEAD BODIES FOUND IN GUNNY BAGS 
FROM 24-07-2011 TO 24-08-2011 
 
S.No. POLICE STATION NO. OF DEAD BODIES  
1 Baghdadi 6 
2 Nazimabad 2 
3 Darakhshan 1 
4 Risala 1 
5 Nabi Bux 1 
6 Kharadar 1 
7 Bin 1 
8 Sharafi Goth 1 
9 Rizvia  1 
10 Iqbal Market  1 
11 Mominabad 1 
Total 17 
 
 
PATTERN OF VIOLENCE 
FROM 24.07-2011 TO 24-08-2011 
 
s.
# DATE AREAS OF 
VIOLENCE DISPURTED 
PARTIES PERSONS 
KILLED PERSONS 
INJURED 
1 24 July 
to 31 
July  Baldia 
Taimoria 
Kalakot i. Urdu 
Speaking v/s 
Pashtoon ii. Urdu 
Speaking v/s 
Baloch 91 47 
2 1st to 
3rd Aug 
2011 Surjani Town Urdu 
Speaking & 
Seraiki v/s 
Pashtoon 38 53 
3 6th 
August 
2011 Peerabad 
SITE, Orangi Urdu 
Speaking v/s 
Pashtoon 13 16 
4 17th to 
24th 
August 
2011 Kharadar, 
Mithadar, 
Lyari, Chakra 
Goth Gang war 
converting 
into ethnic 
violence 
(Urdu 
Speaking v/s 
Baloch & 
Sindhi) 111 146 
 
New Phenomena of abduction and killings 
Starting from 17th August 2011 
 SMC 16/2011 ETC.  29
 Triggered by the kidnapping and killing of five Baloch 
residents of Singo Lane, Lyari (4 of them footballers) 
 
Date Death Toll Injured 
17.08.2011 17 30 
18.08.2011 29 23 
19.08.2011 22 39 
20.08.2011 07 15 
21.08.2011 13 09 
22.08.2011 13 10 
23.08.2011 08 09 
24.08.2011 02 11 
25.08.2011 04 02 
26.08.2011 02 03 
27.08.2011 01 06 
28.08.2011 02 04 
 
POLICE SHAHEE/INJURED 
From 24-07-2011 to 24-08-2011 
 
S# Police Station  No of Police 
Shaheed No of Police Injured 
1 SITE-B 1  
2 Zaman Town 4 29 
3 Rizvia 1  
4 Sharafi Goth 1  
5 Awami Colony  1  
6 Pak Colony 1  
 TOTAL 9 29 
 
 23.   It has been pointed herein above that the peace of Karachi 
city had been disturbed by crimin als by committing both heinous as 
well as petty crimes. Some of the ma jor killings have been highlighted 
in the presentation given by the IGP, which has been reproduced 
hereinabove, including 232 incident s of murder wherein 306 persons 
were killed and 98 incidents of g unshots causing injuries to 159 
persons also took place. According to  available figures, approximately, 
more than 50 dead bodies in gunny bags have been recovered from several localities including areas wh ere dominant majority of people 
speaking Urdu, Pashto , Balochi  etc. are living. In this behalf, the IGP 
Sindh furnished details along with FIR numbers and the areas where such dead bodies were found, brief of which is as under:- SMC 16/2011 ETC.  30
Sl.No. Police Station Number of Dead 
bodies 
1. Baghdadi 06 
2. Nazimabad 02 
3. Darakshan 01 
4. Risala 01 
5. Nabi Bux 01 
6. Kharadar 01 
7. Bin Qasim 01 
8. Sharafi Goth 01 
9. Rizvia 01 
10. Iqbal Market 01 
11. Mominabad 01 
 
24.  Some torsos i.e. human bodies without heads and limbs, 
rendering it difficult to identify the same, have also been found. 
Besides, buses with passengers have  b e e n  s e t  o n  f i r e  a s  a  r e s u l t  
whereof several passengers were burnt alive while others died inside the bus due to fear and shock. In th is behalf, reference is made to FIR 
No. 460/2011 Police Station Jackson, We st Karachi. Similarly, perusal 
of FIR No. 314/2011 under sections  302/324 PPC r/w section 7 ATA, 
dated 05.09.2011 registered at Police Station Pakistan Bazar, reveals 
how brutally people were killed by the criminals. Besides, so many 
persons were abducted and later thei r dead bodies were thrown in the 
streets. During the months of Ju ly and August 2011 the streets of 
Karachi, sorrowfully, saw a large nu mber of such like dead bodies. 
Some of abducted persons were, however,  recovered by the intervention of the law enforcing agen cies and on our direction, their 
statements were recorded. Out of them, only four persons, namely, Muhammad Junaid s/o Muhammad Hussain, Muhammad Rafiq s/o Muhammad Hussain, Mehtab s/o Shakeel  and Sarfaraz s/o M. Ahmed  
agreed to lodge the FIR whereas re st of them, on account of fear, 
were not agreeable to do it. Refere nce may be made to the following 
two statements: -  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  31
 
 
    
25.  When the hearing of this ca se was in progress, about four 
dead bodies were recovered and on our direction, the IGP submitted a 
report on 09.09.2011 to th e following effect: -  
“(1) An unknown dead body  was found (on 5.9.2011) in 
Red Color gunny Bag at Katc hara Kundi, Grahaib Nawaz 
Dispensary, previous UC-8, O ffice Sector-14, B Orangi 
Town without head, hands and legs inquest u/s 174 Cr.P.C. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  32
has been conducted. The dead body is still un-identified. 
The dead body is kept in the Edhi Center.  A case vide FIR 
No: 314/2011 u/s 302/324 PPC r/w 7-ATA has been 
registered through state at Pa kistan Bazar Police Station 
against unknown accused pe rsons, on 5.9.2011.  The 
investigation is under way.  Th e detail report is enclosed at 
Annex “A” 
(2) Another dead body was foun d in a Bag (Bori) on road 
between Country Heights & Yasir view Gulzar-e-Hijri 
Scheme No: 33, Karachi.  A case vide FIR No. 580/2011 
u/s 302/365/34 PPC, at Police Station Sachal on the complaint of one Zabih Khan s/o Haji Sardar Muhammad 
was registered against the nominated accused namely 
Sikandar Javed (APMSO), (2) Ahmed Shah, (3) Umair 
Siddiki, (4) Zohaib, (5) Liaquat Ali Qureshi s/o Ghazi 
Uddin, (6) Khurram, (7) Zeeshan.  The incident was witnessed by one Muhammad Hassan Saleem s/o 
Muhammad Saleem Hussain, (2) Syed Obaid-ur-Rehman, 
along with other PWS Naseeb Ullah s/o badshah Gul.  The 
I.O arrested one accused person namely Ahmed Khan s/o 
Khan Muhammad on the pointati on of the complainant.  
Later on, after the satisfaction  of the complainant he was 
released being not involved in this offence.  Hectic efforts 
are underway to arrest the nominated accused person, 
copy of the compressive report is enclosed at Annex-“B”. 
(3) The third dead body was found in Garage behind Car 
Parking of JPMC Hospital, Ka rachi.  Proceeding u/s 174 
Cr.P.C. was conducted by police. (7.9.2011). No mark of 
torture was found on the dead body.  Postmortem was 
held at Jinnah Hospital Karachi by MLO vide TM No: 
741/2011, dated: 07.09.2011, in which MLO opined that 
his death was occurred due to asphyxia/strangulation.  In 
this connection FIR No: 281/2011 u/s 302 PPC was lodged 
on behalf of state at Saddar Police Station.  During 
investigation no any eye witness has appeared/traced as 
yet.  Efforts are underway and NADRA head office was 
contacted to provide assistance, who cooperated and SMC 16/2011 ETC.  33
identify the deceased as Muhammad Farukh Nawaz having 
CNIC No: 56302-2990221-9, his temporary address was 
provided as CB-58/4, Kakool road Abbottabad.  The family 
of the deceased was traced out by the District Police 
Officer Abbottabad Mr. Muha mmad Kareem Khan.  The 
brother of the deceased namely Javed (Cell #. 0334-8963217) was contacted who disclosed that his brother 
deceased was a chartered accountant and was doing his 
internship in some organizati on in Karachi and leaving in 
D e f e n c e  G a r d e n .   H e  a l s o  d i s c l o s e d  t h a t  h i s  b r o t h e r  
returned to Karachi on 07.09.2011, after celebrating Eid with his family in Abbottabad.   Further investigation is 
underway.  The copy of the repo rt as enclosed herewith at 
Annex-“C”.  
(4) On 7.9.2011, Police Constable No.18609 namely 
Javed Iqbal s/0 Abdul Ghafoor was going on his Motor Cycle.  Two unknown Motor Cy clist stopped him at Bakra 
Peri Road, near Evergreen School, Malir City Karachi and 
opened fire upon him who sustained bullet injures and 
expired on the spot.  A ca se FIR No.248/2011 u/s 302/34 
PPC on 07.09.2011 at Police Station Malir City on behalf of state is registered.  During investigation two persons from 
the locality disclosed involvement of two criminals namely 
Kaloo Baloch s/o Mawali Baloch & Akbar Punjabi s/o Baloch 
Khan in this offence.  Hectic  efforts are underway to arrest 
them.  Copy of the report is attached herewith at Annex-“D”. 
The forth death body was found of one Faheem-ul-
Kareem Advocate alongwith two other persons namely 
Wajid & Mst. Quratul ain from a Flat No.7/C, 14
th 
Commercial Street, DHA, Ph-II, Karachi.  A case vide FIR No: 340/2011 u/s 302/34 PPC at Police Station Defence is 
registered.  A detailed report of Mr. Tariq Razzaq Dharejo, 
SP Saddar Division Sought, Ka rachi regarding efforts made 
to trace and arrest the accuse d is attached herewith at 
Annex-“E”. (It has been taken back) SMC 16/2011 ETC.  34
(6) One young man name ly Sahreef s/o Muhammad 
Anwar Baloch has been kidnapped from near NADRA 
Office, near Bahadurabad Police Station.  In this regard 
FIR No.114/2011 u/s 365 PPC has been registered at 
Police Station Kalakot by one Muhammad Akram s/o 
Muhammad Anwar.  Detail progress report is attached herewith as Annex-“F”. 
The list of 17 kidnappees  supplied by Advocate 
Mr. Jameel Ahmed Virk on behalf  of the applicants in CMA 
No.555/2011 who have returned to their homes in injured 
condition. In this regard the concerned quarters have 
submitted their report and in all 16 cases the FIRs have 
been registered the same is enclosed herewith as Annex 
“G”.  The investigation is under way.   
Further 34 dead bodies have found in Bags.  In this 
regard a comprehensive report has already been submitted before this Honorable Court on 26.8.2011. …… 
 
26.   It is noteworthy that the law enforcing agencies have 
detected a torture cell during hearing of the case at Karachi and 
succeeded in getting video clips of the most heinous, gruesome, 
brutal, horrible and inhuman acts of the criminals,  who are found 
cutting throats of men an d drilling their bodies. But, now it is informed 
that more such cells have been detect ed in different parts of Karachi.  
27.   As far as the injured or  wounded persons are concerned, 
they are countless in number in a ll the disturbed areas of Karachi 
where different political parties have  got dominant population on the 
basis of the language being spoken by them. It may be noted that the 
objective of above-noted brutal and gruesome incidents is to terrorize 
the citizens of Karachi and keep the entire society a hostage. 28.   An impression has been  created that on account of 
demographical reasons, the above issue has its origin on ethnic 
divides, but Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC appearing for the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  35
Province of Sindh, and Syed Iftikh ar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC for ANP 
vehemently dispelled such an impre ssion and we also tend to agree 
with them because we feel that it is a turf war between various groups on account of their financial and economic interests in the huge 
economic, industrial and commercial activities, etc. of the city of 
Karachi highlighted in the presenta tion given by the IGP, relevant 
aspects whereof have been noted here in above. However, there is, and 
has for some time in the past, been a visible element of ethnic strife in Karachi and some elements and pa rties benefited from keeping the 
tension alive. There are not only Urdu Speaking , (When the Court uses 
the term ‘Urdu Speaking’ it is for a specific purpose. As it is the 
language common to all and even those who proudly speak Pashto, 
Punjabi, Sindhi or Baluchi, can and do speak Urdu ), Pashtun , Sindhis , 
and Balochis , Punjabis , Saraikis,  but foreigners and others also live in 
Karachi and all of them are the vict ims of violence, crime, fear and 
insecurity, as is evident from FIRs, reports, etc. submitted from time 
to time by the police department. Some of the hardened criminals, 
who associate themselves with the po litical parties do take support of 
the powerful groups/political parties as is evident from the reports of 
the joint investigation team of va rious intelligence agencies 
including ISI and others . These reports have been filed by Syed 
Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, throwing sufficient light on the criminal 
activities of these heartless crimin als such as Ajmal Pahari, Kamran 
Madhuri and many others. It is to be noted that the aforementioned 
JIT reports were prepared after ca using arrests of various accused 
persons involved in the commission of  offences this year in the month 
of March.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  36
29.  It goes without saying th at if the involvement of above 
accused persons allegedly aligned with  a political party is established, 
it may entail serious consequences for said political party as well, 
because a political party cannot be formed or cannot operate in a 
manner prejudicial to the sovereignty or integrity of Pakistan.    
30.   It is important to note that the learned counsel representing various political part ies have though not categorically 
denied affiliation of above noted pe rsons with their parties, but have 
taken exception to the JIT report; on  the ground that the same are not 
admissible in evidence. It is also important to note that during the discussion, it has been informed th at two notorious accused persons, 
namely, Kamran Madhuri and Sohail Commander involved in criminal 
activities were not nominated in the FIRs, yet on arrest of one of them 
he has been found in injured condition. Investigation is being conducted to collect relevant material against them.  It is also astonishing that most of the accu sed persons nominated in crimes 
have got their acquittal on the plea of alibi and false involvement. We 
are surprised to know that the law enforcement agencies, who are 
supposed to conduct investigation honestly, had allegedly involved 
persons falsely or half-heartedly in the commission of offences in 
which their fellow policemen were murdered. Indeed, they have not 
shown any professionalism and have fa iled to bring the real culprits to 
book.  31.   It seems that the police primarily being responsible to 
enforce law and order ha s no intention to deliv er.  Either they are 
scared or they are dishonest or abso lutely lack the requisite skills. It 
could be that in the year 1992 operation clean up was launched 
against MQM wherein statedly, the po lice had played an active role, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  37
but subsequently, 92 police officers /officials disappeared and up till 
now there is no clue of their whereabouts nor is it known that by whom, and under whose patronage,  such persons were abducted 
and/or killed. Another reason appears to be that police force has been 
highly politicized, recruitments have been made on political 
considerations.  It came to light du ring hearing of the case that in 
police force many police officers ha ve been recruited on political 
considerations who have managed to occupy such posts for extraneous 
considerations and senior officers in  the rank of SSP, SP and DSP etc. 
have been inducted into the forc e from other organizations without 
following any rules and even they ha ve not undergone training for the 
purpose of policing. To highlight th is aspect, following information has 
been obtained from the Advo cate General, Sindh: -  
1. Mr. Dost Ali Baloch from In telligence Bureau, absorbed 
in Sindh Police with effect from 14.10.1998, presently working as Director General Finance, CPO Sindh Karachi (BS-20).  
2. Mr. Muhammad Malik from FI A, absorbed in Sindh 
Police with effect from 31.10.2007, presently working as Director General Traffic, Planning & Regulation, Sindh Karachi (BS-20). 
3. Mr. Muhammad Riaz Soomro from Anti-Narcotic Force, 
absorbed in Sindh Police with effect from 26.2.2008, presently working as SSP, Di strict Mirpurkhas (BS-19). 
4. Mr. Muhammad Ali Baloch appointed as Assistant 
Director (Computer) in Sindh Police on 6.4.1999, 
presently working as SSP, District Tando Muhammad Khan (BS-19). 
5. Mr. Abdul Hadi Bullo from OMG, absorbed in Sindh 
Police with effect from 16. 7.2003, presently working as 
SSP District Matiari (BS-19). 
6. Mr. Attaullah K. Chandio, from Solicitor Department, 
absorbed in Sindh Police wi th effect from 1.6.1995, 
presently working as SP, Special Branch, Mirpurkhas (BS-18). 
7. Mr. Shahid Hussain Mahesa r on deputation from 
Intelligence Bureau, with effect from 26.7.2009, presently working as SSP Political (SB) Karachi (BS-18). SMC 16/2011 ETC.  38
8. Mr. Zameer Ahmed Abbasi on deputation from National 
Accountability Bureau with effect from 31.12.2008, presently working as SDPO/Frere, District South, Karachi Range (BS-17). 
9. Mr. Shiraz Asghar Shaikh, on deputation from PEMRA 
with effect from 23.8.20 08, presently working as 
SDPO/Darakhshan, District South, Karachi Range (BS-17). 
10. Mr. Faisal Mukhtar Vakaasi on  deputation from National 
Accountability Bureau with effect from 31.3.2009, presently working as Principal, Training & Recruitment, Karachi Range (BS-17).   
11. Mr. I. D. Mangi, on deputation from ACE, Sindh with 
effect from 10.4.2009, presen tly working as DSP/ACLC, 
Karachi Range (BS-17). 
12. Major (R) Khurram Gulzar, re-employed on contract 
basis as DIGP (BS-20) for a period of one year with 
effect from 27.12.2010. 
13. Col.(R) M. A. Wahid Khan, re-employed as Principal, 
S.B.B. EPT Razzakabad, Karach i (BS-19) for a period of 
one year with effect from 1.9.2008. Extension granted for two years with effect from 1.9.2009.  
14. Major Col. (R) Muhammad Ah san Umar, re-employed as 
SSP, District East, Karachi Range (BS-19) for a period 
of two years with effe ct from 24.9.2010.  
 
32.   The IGP stated that presen tly, the total strength of police 
force is 32524, out of which a pproximately 12000 are performing 
security duties, including 8000 de ployed with VIPs and only 20000 
personnel of police force were left  for the purpose of policing of 18 
million people in Karachi.  He st ated that by means of the Sindh 
(Repeal of the Police Order, 2002 and Revival of the Police Act, 1861) 
Act, 2011 passed by the Provincial Assembly, the Police Order, 2002 
has been repealed in the Sindh Pr ovince, as a result of which the 
Police Act, 1861 has been revived and the IGP is helpless in transferring even a DSP from one place to another.   33.   The majority of the police force performing duty in Karachi comprises brave and devoted officers  and men. They risk their lives SMC 16/2011 ETC.  39
often targeted by unidentifiable enemies enjoying mobility in action. 
They deserve the respect of the nati on. However, as The IGP conceded 
that 30-40 percent of police force ar e non-cooperative either for the 
reasons that they have secured their appointments on political 
considerations or they have asso ciated themselves with different 
groups including political parties, ha ving vested interests in the affairs 
of Karachi, therefore, at times it  becomes very difficult for him to 
effectively take action against the real culprits. When called upon to 
explain as to how two accused pe rsons involved in case FIR No. 
434/2011, Police Station Zaman Town, have been released by the 
Administrative Judge, ATC, accepting their plea of alibi, where a 
concerted attack was launched upon police officers/officials who were 
being transported in a private bus towards the disturbed areas for 
controlling riots and bringing peac e, resulting in death of 6-7 
policemen, causing injuries to ot hers, the IGP disclosed that the 
investigating officer has been su spended and the then SHO of the 
relevant Police Station has alread y been moved out and disciplinary 
proceedings are in hand against him. This categorical statement in 
respect of only one incide nt is sufficient to infer  that the 
statement so made by the IPG carri es sufficient weight. If the police 
official/officers are not sincere with  the victims belonging to their own 
rank and file, what expectation could one have from such force, which, 
admittedly, stands politicized, for init iating forceful action against the 
culprits involved in causing target killing, brutal murders, cutting limbs 
of human bodies and putting the dead bodies and torsos into bags with 
a view to terrorizing the societ y as a whole in general and the 
inhabitants of Karachi city in part icular. During the period of one 
month, i.e. from 24 July to 24 August, 2011, as per information SMC 16/2011 ETC.  40
submitted before the Court about th e killing of people of 306 persons 
232 FIRs have been registered mostly against unknown persons and on completion of investigation in  many cases, reports have been 
submitted declaring the cases for disposal under A class, which 
according to the relevant Police Rules means that the crime is 
untraceable. Summary of the said  cases is as under:-    
S.No. Police 
Station FIR No. and date Status of 
Investigation
 
1. Aram Bagh 189/2011 dt. 31.7.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
2. Darakshan 265/2011 dt. 
03.08.2011 u/s 302 PPC A-Class 
3. Eidgah 197/2011 dt. 
27.07.2011 u/s 302/324/34 PPC A-Class 
4. Eidgah 200/2011 dt. 30.7.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
5. Eidgah 202/2011 dt. 
01.08.2011 u/s 302/324/34 PPC  A-Class 
6. Eidgah  203/2011 dt.05.08.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
7. Eidgah 206/2011 dt.09.08.2011 
u/s 324/302/34 PPC A-Class 
8. Frere 150/2011 dt.09.08.2011 
u/s 302 PPC A-Class 
9. Garden  144/2011 dt.25.07.2011 
u/s 302 PPC A-Class 
10. Garden 151/2011 dt.02.08.2011 
u/s 364/302 A-Class 
11. Garden 154/2011 dt.05.08.2011 
u/s 364/302 PPC A-Class 
12. Garden 146/2011 dt.27.07.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
13. Kalakot 99/2011 dt.24.07.2011 
u/s 302/324/34 PPC  A-Class 
14. Kalakot 100/2011 dt.25.07.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
15. Kalakot 102/2011 dt.29.07.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
16. Nabi Bux  137/2011 dt.24.07.2011 
u/s 302 PPC A-Class 
17. Napier  119/2011 dt.24.07.2011 
u/s 302/324/34 PPC A-Class 
18. Napier  124/2011 dt.03.08.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
19. Napier 127/2011 dt.09.08.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class  
20. Preedy 473/2011 dt.09.08.2011 A-Class SMC 16/2011 ETC.  41
u/s 302 PPC 
21. Risala 127/2011 dt.10.08.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
22. Boat Basin 319/2011 dt.01.08.2011 
u/s 324/34 PPC A-Class 
23. Boat Basin 323/2011 dt.04.08.2011 
u/s 324/34 PPC A-Class 
24. Boat Basin 324/2011 dt.05.08.2011 
u/s 324/34 PPC A-Class 
25. Defence  276/2011 dt.28.07.2011 
u/s 324/34 PPC A-Class 
26. Garden 149/2011 dt.31.07.2011 
u/s 324/34 A-Class 
27. Eidgah  193/2011 dt.23.07.2011 
u/s 302/34 PPC A-Class 
28. Kalri 176/2011 dt.08.08.2011 
u/s 147/148/149/435 PPC A-Class 
29. Preedy 474/2011 dt.09.08.2011 
u/s 384 PPC A-Class  
 
34.   The IGP has also made before this Court another 
admission while giving his presentation, summary of which has been reproduced hereinabove, that there are no go  areas  within the 
jurisdiction of different police statio ns. In this view of the matter, we 
are of the opinion that th e police without having any 
commitment/dedication and other reas ons highlighted hereinabove, is 
not in a position to make any brea k through unless the whole force is 
de-politicized  and their morale is booste d by the senior officers, 
having credible service/ training , commitment, dedication always 
ready to discharge their functions willingly and to the best of their 
ability. In the briefing, it has also  been pointed out that so many 
members of the police lost their lives  in encounters with the criminals. 
It is a matter of great concern that  the perpetrators do not feel any 
hesitation in killing the police pers onnel for the purpose of creating 
atmosphere of fear, harassment to  terrorize the wh ole society. The 
number of such police officers has been noted herein above. In addition to it, in recent incidents on 5
th or 6th September, 2011, a dead SMC 16/2011 ETC.  42
body of a policeman, namely, Javed Iqbal was found in the area of 
Bakra Peri Road, near Evergreen School, Malir City Karachi, regarding which FIR No.248/2011 was registered at Police Station Malir City. The killing of the innocent persons has al so not stopped even now, as has 
been pointed out that a dead body  of an unknown person, who was 
badly tortured, was found lying in the car parking of a hospital, reference of which has already been made herein above. There are series of such incidents, which are taking place, one after the other. 
Statedly, one policeman succeeded in  causing arrest of one alleged 
accused person, namely, Shah Zore on  stated allegation that he was 
responsible for killing innocent pers ons and after his arrest, on his 
pointation, a dead body packed in a carton was recovered, reference of 
which has been made in the or der dated 09.09.2011. In the case, 
where Rangers had succeeded in identi fying a torture cell in Liyari area 
and a DVD was prepared in respect of  an incident, reference of which 
has been made hereinabove, on watching it, one cannot explain in words the degree of shamelessness,  cruelty, barbarity and brutality 
except summarizing that the heinou s acts of committing sodomy upon 
the victims and butchering them with blunt knives/ churris  were 
committed brazenly. This is just one instance of the brutality and 
barbarity, taking place in a torture cell which has been pointed out to 
us, and it is not known that how ma ny other such like torture cells are 
being maintained by the criminals in  their dens here and there in the 
vastness of the city to satisfy their self as a vengeance. As a matter of tit for tat, gruesome and cruel me thodologies have been adopted for 
the purpose.  35.   On 07.09.2011, Director General Rangers Sindh, Major 
General Aijaz Ahmed Chaudhry appear ed in Court and stated that the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  43
problem in Karachi is very serious, rather more serious than that of 
South Waziristan . However, he submitted th at if there was a will to 
do it and once the State decides to bring peace to the city of Karachi, 
no criminal could stand before the State and escape prosecution. He 
further stated that the factors which contributed to the problem of the 
city of Karachi happened to be that it is a huge city, it is based on community system, a lot of deve lopment work has been done, but 
there is unjust development of in frastructure on the basis of 
communities residing in variou s parts of the city. There is 
polarization to an unprecedented level on the political, ethnic, and/or 
religious divides. According to him one day ethnic problem occurs and next day religious problem starts. The situation has reached such a 
stage where even the health sector is divided on ethnic and parochial 
basis. A patient or injured pers on of one community is refused 
admission or medical treatment by a hospital under influence of 
another community. The problem can only be solved through 
application of special means as well as requesting political 
leadership to eliminate militancy from their wings . The political 
face of the city has been taken host age by militant groups of political 
parties. Political parties are penetrat ed by the criminals under the garb 
of political groups who use party fl ags. The militants and criminals are 
taking refuge in the lap of politic al and ethnic parties which use the 
flags of these parties to commit ille gal activities with impunity. The 
paramilitary force is, otherwise, fully  capable of controlling the law and 
order situation, the deployment of Rangers be further extended to 
allow them to bring permanent peac e in the city. There are religious 
gatherings, problems like KESC issue, ethnic violence, protests/riots 
over issues like Watan  card distribution, Namoos-e-Risalat , as a result SMC 16/2011 ETC.  44
whereof law enforcement agenci es are over stretched. The 
Government machinery has realized the seriousness of the situation 
and assured that Rangers would brin g the city back to normalcy and 
ensure that people feel safe. He al so suggested the constitution of a 
high-level body comprising the Chie f Minister and other stakeholders 
to monitor progress in maintaining law and order as well as ensuring 
good governance and social justic e. The committee may be bound to 
send progress reports to the Chief Justices of the High Court and 
Supreme Court for perusal.  
36.   The DG Rangers further st ated that he had requested in 
security conferences that there shou ld be no bar for the Rangers to 
operate anywhere in the city, inasmuch as to go to the offices of 
political parties , which housed ammunition, weapons and criminals, 
and now by this notification this power has been given. According to 
him, in a recent briefing on the law and order situation, restrictions on 
the operations of the Rangers, were relaxed, directing that the police, 
Rangers and other law enforcement agencies should not be stopped 
from conducting raids in any area, in cluding on the offices of political 
parties, if the criminals take refuge  there. He said that Rangers had 
conducted successful raids and arrested culprits involved in target 
killings whose details would be shared  with the Court. He said that 
Karachi is a mega city but unfortuna tely an unjust infrastructure had 
divided it on ethnic and political basis.  
37.   In conclusion, the DG stated that no amount of application of kinetic means, be it Rangers, or  Army can fix the problem on long 
term, rather it is the political pr ocess, which finally prevails and 
provides hope to the nation. Sugg esting the way forward, the DG 
Rangers submitted that there is a n eed to train prosecutors, improve SMC 16/2011 ETC.  45
forensic evidence, etc. According to  him, the recent issuance of the 
notification indicates that there is a realization at the political and Government level, forcing them to come up with solution. He 
expressed the desire that the notifi cation should continue until peace 
returns and so should the drive to round up the criminals and 
terrorists.   38.   Besides, the DG Rang ers candidly conceded that bhatta  
[extortion money] is a normal pr actice and criminals are collecting 
bhatta , which, every day, runs into at least 10 million rupees and it is 
being charged from an ordinary shopkeeper, rehriwala  (push-cart 
peddler) up to the top businessman  by criminals who have got the 
backing of the political parties  who are the stakeholders. In this 
behalf, Special Branch of the Polic e Department had filed a report 
confidentiality of the same has not be en claimed. In this report, a list 
of chanda /bhatta  collectors is available, a perusal whereof indicates 
that bhatta  is being collected invariably by the persons who claim their 
association with ANP, MQM, PPP, Jamat-e-Islami , Sunni Tehrik , etc. 
Besides, activists of the organizati ons banned under the Anti-Terrorism 
Act, 1997 are also indulging in these activities. It is an admitted fact 
that street crime like snatching ce ll phones, purses, etc. from the 
citizens is rampant in the city an d there cannot be two opinions that 
the citizens, by and large, are sufferi ng filled with fear and confusion. 
They are so frightened that none of  them comes forward even to lodge 
the report, rather they prefer to pay bhatta  or unhesitatingly agree to 
hand over their valuables during th e commission of street crimes. The 
whole city seems to be in the grip of fear.  
39.   The learned Attorney General has also submitted a report 
of Intelligence Bureau without cl aiming confidentiality and also SMC 16/2011 ETC.  46
arranged briefing of ISI only fo r the Members of the Bench. The 
Provincial Government also produced  on record report of CID and it 
too has not claimed confidentiality in respect of the same. Here it will 
be pertinent to note that although, a notice was issued to the learned 
Attorney General but the Federation  chose to be represented through 
a private counsel Dr. Babar Awan , learned Sr. ASC, who remained 
associated with the case throug hout the proceedings. As far as 
Province of Sindh through Chief Minist er is concerned, it is represented 
by Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, learned Sr. ASC and the learned Advocate General who represented the Chief Secretary and IGP. The 
names of the interveners are availabl e in the title of the case, which 
includes MQM through Dr. Farogh Na seem, ANP through Syed Iftikhar 
Hussain Gillani, Sindh Bachayo Co mmittee through Mr. Abdul Mujeeb 
Pirzada Sr.ASC, PML (N) through Faisal Kamal Alam ASC, Awami Tehrik Party through its President Mr . Rasool Bux Palijo ASC, etc. They 
have also put forward their respecti ve pleas containing allegations and 
counter allegations. Except the learned counsel appearing for the 
official respondents i.e. Federation  and the Province of Sindh, all 
others including the interveners, unequivocally affirmed violation 
of fundamental righ ts of the public  enshrined in Articles 9, 14, 15, 
18 and 24 of the Constitution.   40.   How important has been th e Suo Moto intervention of this 
court and how vital is the “depoliticization of the administration”, particularly police, is indicated in the instant case it self. Although the 
notification ostensibly empowering the Rangers was issued on July 8, 
2011, but the killing spree did not stop because, obviously, a depoliticized administration was not available. Thus, in July alone as 
many as 306 people were murdered as mentioned above, and a SMC 16/2011 ETC.  47
greater number were injured. A number of dead bodies were 
discovered in gunny bags, many mu tilated and disfigured. The killing 
spree continued at this pace and in ju st one week before this Court, on 
24.08.2011, took Suo Moto notice of  the situation as many as 109 
citizens had been killed as per the power point presentation given by 
the IGP on 29.08.2011. Out of 25 dead bodies found in gunny bags, 9 were found beheaded and tortured. These, and other related figures, mentioned in para 22 above eminentl y justified interference by the 
Court under Article 184(3). In fact the situation was so grave that the Court decided immediately to shif t the venue of the hearings to 
Karachi. All concerned were put on notice. Although a few more tragic 
incidents did take place during the hearing of the case and these have 
been mentioned in detail herein, but there was a dramatic drop in the 
number of crimes of the variety pres ently under consideration after the 
court had intervened.    The lesson to be learned from this is simple. Initiation of Suo Moto proceedings by the Court sent one straight and simple message to an administration working  under political pressures: “Take 
no political pressure from any qu arter whatsoever”. This was an 
unstated message, but it was loud and clear. The administration 
remained, and remains, under the polit ical Government of the Province 
of Sindh but the administrators immediately understood that they would not be called upon to obey an y illegal orders nor to discriminate 
between adversaries. They would be fair and impartial and the results 
have been dramatic so far. A depoliticized administration suddenly came to life in fighting crimes, criminals and Mafias, political and 
otherwise. That is what the interve ntion of the Court achieved. We the 
Judges have no guns to fight the terrorists, but we have the authority SMC 16/2011 ETC.  48
to ensure and strengthen the hand s of those who actually apply the 
law. In many cases the Suo Moto  intervention of the Court has 
produced such results, stopping corruption and mal-administration, 
and Karachi demonstrates this. All ov er the democratic world  judicial 
review only strengthens democrac y and should be welcomed by 
democratic governments, not resented and resisted. It is now only hoped that this restraint on political  and partisan interference will also 
continue after the Court winds up th ese proceedings so as to enable 
the Police, the administration, and the Rangers to do their jobs in 
accordance with the law. 41.   Too often representative s of the Government are seen 
castigating the Courts for the re lease of alleged terrorists and 
criminals. This Court itself is ofte n subjected to blistering criticism, 
especially by members or allies of the ruling party on talk shows and 
television programmes. The Court has shown restraint and has no ill-
will. Even otherwise the Judges canno t enter upon a public or private 
debate about their performance or judgments even though the criticism is highly politic ized and unjustified as it often is these days. 
But the burden that rests upon the executive and the legislature 
cannot be passed on to the Courts. Co urts can only act upon evidence 
and material presented before them. This has to be collected by the 
executive. The Courts cannot be blam ed if the executive/police fail in 
their duty. Moreover the evidence thus collected must be evaluated according to the laws and rules prescr ibed by the legislature. In these 
especial circumstances it is for the Government to ensure that cogent 
evidence to support prosecution is  collected and presented in the 
Court. It is for the legislature to pr ovide processes for the protection of 
witnesses, Policemen and Judges and for the executive/government to SMC 16/2011 ETC.  49
fully implement these reforms. In telligence sharing and action on 
intelligence that is uncorrupted by political or extraneous influence 
must also be ensured by the executive. The Court expects that a new culture of independent, depoliticiz ed, and non-partisan prosecution 
comprising efficient, capable prosecutors will be established by the 
government to aid and assist the Courts. The Government must also 
depoliticize the administration/prose cution. This will be for its own 
good and for that of th e nation. The Courts w ill keep a watchful eye 
and strike down all illegal pressure s and orders that are brought to 
their notice.  42.   Adversarial proceedings are defined as proceedings relating to, or characteristic of an  adversary or adversary procedures. 
The term “adversarial” has been defi ned in the Concise Oxford English 
Dictionary, Eleventh Edition, Revised, as under: -   
“1. Involving or characterized by conflict or opposition. 2. 
Law (of legal proceedings) in which the parties involved have the responsibilities for finding and presenting evidence.” 
 
In “Advanced Law Lexicon” the term “Adversarial Process” has been 
defined as under: -  
“A process in which each part y to a dispute puts forward 
its case to the other and before a neutral judge, soliciting to prove the fairness of their cases.” 
 
In the American Heritage Dictionary  of the English Language, Fourth 
Edition: Published by Houghton Miff lin Company, the term is defined 
as under:-  
“Relating to or characteristic  of an adversary; involving 
antagonistic elements: "the chasm between management 
and labor in this country, an  often needlessly adversarial 
…… atmosphere" (Steve Lohr).” SMC 16/2011 ETC.  50
In Collins English Dictionary – Comple te and Unabridged, it is defined 
as under: -  
“1.  Pertaining to or char acterized by antagonism and 
conflict 
 2.  (Law) Brit having or involving opposing parties or 
interests in a legal contest US term adversary” 
 
The adversarial system (or adversar y system) is a legal system where 
two advocates represent their partie s’ positions before an impartial 
person or group of people, usually  a jury or judge, who attempt to 
determine the truth of the case, wher eas, the inquisitorial system has 
a judge (or a group of judges who work together) whose task is to investigate the case.  43.   The adversarial system is a two-sided structure under 
which criminal trial courts operate th at pits the prosecution against the 
defense. Justice is done when the mo st effective and rightful adversary 
is able to convince the judge or jury that his or her perspective on the 
case is the correct one.  44.   As against the above, the term “inquisitorial” is defined in “Concise Oxford English Dictionary,  Eleventh Edition, Revised as 
under: -  
“1.  Of or like an inquisitor.  
 2.  Law (of performing an examining role)” 
In “Advanced Law Lexicon” 3
rd Edition, 2005, it is defined in the 
following words:- 
“The system of criminal justice in most civil law nations, 
where judges serve as prosecutors and have broad powers of discovery.” 
Webster's New World College Dictionary Copyright 2010, by Wiley 
Publishing, Inc., Cleveland, Ohio defines it as under:- 
“1. of or like an inqu isitor or inquisition 
    2. inquisitive; prying” 
 
Collins World English Dictionary defines it as under:-  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  51
“1.  of or pertaining to an inquisitor or inquisition.  
 2.  exercising the offi ce of an inquisitor.  
 3.  law.  
a. pertaining to a trial with one person or group 
inquiring into the facts and acting as both prosecutor and judge.  
b.  pertaining to secret criminal prosecutions.  
4.  resembling an inquisitor in harshness or 
intrusiveness.  
 5.  inquisitive; prying.  
 45.   The Free Dictionary describes  it in part, as “a method of 
legal practice in which the judge endeavours to discover facts whilst simultaneously representing the intere sts of the state in a trial”. Under 
the inquisitorial model, the obligatio ns of a Judge are far greater and 
he is no longer a passive arbiter of  proceedings but an active member 
of the fact finding process.  
46.   An inquisitorial system is a legal system where the court or 
a part of the court is actively involv ed in investigating the facts of the 
case, as opposed to an adversarial system where the role of the court 
is primarily that of an impartial referee between the prosecution and 
the defense. Inquisitorial systems are used in some countries with civil 
legal systems as opposed to commo n law systems. Also countries 
using common law, including the United States, may use an inquisitorial system for summa ry hearings in the case of 
misdemeanors such as minor traffic violations. In fact, the distinction 
between an adversarial and inquis itorial system is theoretically 
unrelated to the distinction betw een a civil legal and common law 
system. Some legal scholars cons ider the term “inquisitorial” 
misleading, and prefer the word “non-adversarial”.  47.   The inquisitorial system a pplies to questions of criminal 
procedure as opposed to questions of substantive law; that is, it 
determines how criminal enquiries and trials are conducted, not the 
kind of crimes for which one can be  prosecuted, nor the sentences that SMC 16/2011 ETC.  52
they carry. It is most readily us ed in some civil legal systems. 
However, some jurists do not recognize this dichotomy and see procedure and substantive legal rela tionships as being interconnected 
and part of a theory of justice as applied differently in various legal 
cultures.  
48.   In some jurisdictions, the trial judge may participate in the fact-finding inquiry by questionin g witnesses even in adversarial 
proceedings. The rules of admissibilit y of evidence may also allow the 
judge to act more like an inquisit or than an arbiter of justice.  
49.   The proceedings, which are initiated as public interest litigation in civil or criminal matte rs cannot be treate d as adversarial 
because of the definition of nature  of the proceedings where without 
contest between the parties a final find ing has to be recorded, as it has 
so been held in the case of Tobacco Board v. Tahir Raza  
(2007 SCMR 97). In this judgment, matter relating to maintainability 
of writ of quo warranto  was considered and it was held that such writ 
is to inquire from a person the authority of law under which he 
purports to hold public office and it is primarily in quisitorial and not 
adversarial, for the reason that a relater need not be a person 
aggrieved; such exercise can be do ne suo motu, even if attention of 
High Court is not drawn by the part ies concerned. The same principle 
has been followed by the Court in Ch. Muneer Ahmad v. Malik Nawab 
Sher (PLD 2010 Lahore 625). 
50.   In the case of Philips Electrical Industri es of Pakistan Ltd. 
v. Pakistan  (2000 YLR 2724) it has been observed that public interest 
litigation is inquisitorial in nature where the Court may even delve into 
fact finding so as to pr omote public interest.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  53
51.   In the case of Muhammad Munawar v. Deputy Settlement 
Commissioner  (2001 YLR 2350) the Lahore  High Court has observed 
that concept of adversarial proceedin gs under which it is the duty of 
the parties to produce all relevant evidence, has been departed from 
i n a s m u c h  a s  t h e  C o u r t s  h a v e  a l s o  b e e n  c a l l e d  u p o n  t o  s h a r e  t h i s  
burden either on the application of the parties or suo motu to summon 
and record all the relevant eviden ce in order to decide the case 
effectively and finally; such rule is one of wisdom, for if a party to the 
litigation fails in its duty, the Cour t is not denuded of its power to 
summon the relevant evidence so th at the dispute between the parties 
is decided fairly and finally. 52.   The Indian Supreme Court had the occasion to define 
these expressions in various ca ses, including the cases of Peoples' 
Union for Democratic Rights v, Union of India  [AIR 1982 SC 1473] = 
[(1982)3 SCC 235], Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union Of India  [AIR 
1984 SC 802], Peoples' Union for Liberties v. Union Of India  [AIR 1996 
Cal 89] and State of Uttaranchal v.  Balwant Singh Chaufal  [(2010) 3 
SCC 402]. In Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights’ case (supra) the 
Indian Supreme Court has observed as follows:- 
“2. ……… We wish to point out with all the emphasis at 
our command that public interest litigation which is a 
strategic arm of the legal aid movement and which is 
intended to bring justice wi thin the reach of the poor 
masses, who constitute the low visibility area of humanity, 
is a totally different kind of litigation from the ordinary 
traditional litigation which is essentially of an adversary 
character where there is a di spute between two litigating 
parties, one making claim or seeking relief against the 
other and that other opposing such claim or resisting such 
relief. Public interest litigation is brought before the court SMC 16/2011 ETC.  54
not for the purpose of enforcing the right of one individual 
against another as happens in the case of ordinary 
litigation, but it is intended to promote and vindicate public 
interest which demands that viol ations of constitutional or 
legal rights of large numbers of people who are poor, 
ignorant or in a socially or  economically disadvantaged 
position should not go unnoticed and unredressed. That 
would be destructive of the Ru le of Law which forms one of 
the essential elements of public  interest in any democratic 
form of government. The Rule of Law does not mean that 
the protection of the law mu st be available only to a 
fortunate few or that the la w should be allowed to be 
prostituted by the vested interests for protecting and 
upholding the status quo under  the guise of enforcement 
of their civil and political rights. The poor too have civil and 
political rights and the Rule of  Law is meant for them also, 
though today it exists only on  paper and not in reality. If 
the sugar barons and the alcohol kings have the 
Fundamental Right to carry on  their business and to fatten 
their purses by exploiting the consuming public, have the 
'chamars' belonging to the lo west strata of society no 
Fundamental Right to earn an honest living through their 
sweat and toil ? The former can approach the courts with a 
formidable army of distinguis hed lawyers paid in four or 
five figures per day and if their right to exploit is upheld 
against the government under the label of Fundamental Right, the courts are prai sed for their boldness and 
courage and their independ ence and fearlessness are 
applauded and acclaimed. But, if the Fundamental Right of 
the poor and helpless victims of injustice is sought to be 
enforced by public interest  litigation, the so called 
champions of human rights frown upon it as waste of time 
of the highest court in the land, which, according to them, 
should not engage itself in such small and trifling matters. 
Moreover, these self-styled human rights activists forget 
that civil and political rights, priceless and invaluable as they are for freedom and demo cracy simply do not exist SMC 16/2011 ETC.  55
for the vast masses of our people. Large numbers of men, 
women and children who constitute the bulk of our 
population are today living a sub-human existence in 
conditions of abject poverty, utter grinding poverty has 
broken their back and sapped th eir moral fibre. They have 
no faith in the existing social and economic system. What civil and political rights ar e these poor and deprived 
sections of humanity going to  enforce? This was brought 
out forcibly by W. Paul Gorm seley at the Silver Jubilee 
Celebrations of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
at the Banaras Hindu Universi ty: “Since India is one of 
those countries which has given a pride of place to the 
basic human rights and freedoms in its Constitution in its 
chapter on Fundamental Righ ts and on the Directive 
Principles of State Policy and has already completed 
twenty-five years of independence, the question may be raised whether or not the Fundamental Rights enshrined in 
our Constitution have any meaning to the millions of our 
people to whom food, drinking water, timely medical 
facilities and relief from disease and disaster, education 
and job opportunities still re main unavoidable. We, in 
India, should on this occa sion study the Human Rights 
declared and defined by the United Nations and compare 
them with the rights available in practice and secured by 
the law of our country.” 
The only solution for making civil and political rights 
meaningful to these large sect ions of society would be to 
remake the material conditions and restructure the social 
and economic order so that they  may be able to realise the 
economic, social and cultural rights. There is indeed close 
relationship between civil and political rights on the one 
hand and economic, social and cultural rights on the other 
and this relationship is so obvious that the International 
Human Rights Conference in Tehran called by the General 
Assembly in 1968 declared in a final proclamation:  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  56
“Since human rights and fundamental freedoms are 
indivisible, the full realisation of civil and political rights without the enjoymen t of economic, social and 
cultural rights is impossible.” 
Of course, the task of re structuring the social and 
economic order so that the social and economic rights 
become a meaningful reality for the poor and lowly 
sections of the community is one which legitimately 
belongs to the legislature and the executive, but mere initiation of social and ec onomic rescue programmes by 
the executive and the legislat ure would not be enough and 
it is only through multidimen sional strategies including 
public interest litigation that  these social and economic 
rescue programmes can be made effective. Public interest litigation, as we conceive it, is  essentially a co-operative or 
collaborative effort on the part  of the petitioner, the State 
or public authority and the co urt to secure observance of 
the constitutional or legal ri ghts, benefits and privileges 
conferred upon the vulnerable sections of the community and to reach social justice to  them. The State or public 
authority against whom public interest litigation is brought 
should be as much interest ed in ensuring basic human 
rights, constitutional as well as legal, to those who are in a 
socially and economically disadvantaged position, as the petitioner who brings the pub lic interest litigation before 
the Court. The state or public authority which is arrayed as 
a respondent in public intere st litigation should, in fact, 
welcome it, as it would give it an opportunity to right a 
wrong or to redress an inju stice done to the poor and 
weaker sections of the comm unity whose welfare is and 
must be the prime concern of the State or the public 
authority.  
3. There is a misconception  in the minds of some 
lawyers, journalists and men in public life that public 
interest litigation is unnecessarily cluttering up the files of 
the court and adding to the already staggering arrears of 
cases which are pending for lo ng years and it should not 
therefore be encouraged by the court. This is, to our mind, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  57
a totally perverse view smacking of elitist and status quoist 
approach. Those who are decrying public interest litigation 
do not seem to realise that courts are not meant only for 
the rich and the well-to-do, for the landlord and the 
gentry, for the business ma gnate and the industrial 
tycoon, but they exist also for the poor and the down-
trodden the have-nots and the handicapped and the half-
hungry millions of our countrymen. So far the courts have 
been used only for the purpose of vindicating the rights of 
the wealthy and the affluent. It is only these privileged 
classes which have been able to approach the courts for protecting their vested interests. It is only the moneyed 
who have so far had the golden key to unlock the doors of 
justice. But, now for the first time the portals of the court 
are being thrown open to the poor and the down- trodden, 
the ignorant and the illiterate,  and their cases are coming 
before the courts through pub lic interest litigation which 
has been made possible by th e recent judgment delivered 
by this Court in Judges Appo intment and Transfer cases.” 
 
In Bandhua Mukti Morcha’s case  (supra) after referring to the cases of 
Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights , the Court has observed as 
under: -  
“9. ……………… We have on more occasions than one said 
that public interest litigatio n is not in the nature of 
adversary litigation but it is a challenge and an opportunity 
to the Government and its officers to make basic human 
rights meaningful to the depr ived and vulnerable sections 
of the community and to assure  them social and economic 
justice which is the signature tune of our Constitution. The 
Government and its officers mu st welcome public interest 
litigation, because it would pr ovide them an occasion to 
examine whether the poor and the down-trodden are 
getting their social and econom ic entitlements or whether 
they are continuing to remain victims of deception and 
exploitation at the hands of strong and powerful sections of the community and whether social and economic justice SMC 16/2011 ETC.  58
has become a meaningful reality for them or it has 
remained merely a teasing illusion and a promise of 
unreality, so that in case the complaint in the public 
interest litigation is found to be true, they can in discharge 
of their constitutional obligat ion root out exploitation and 
injustice and ensure to the weak er sections their rights and 
entitlements. When the Court entertains public interest 
litigation, it does not do so in a caviling spirit or in a 
confrontational mood or with a view to tilting at executive 
authority or seeking to usurp it , but its attempt is only to 
ensure observance of social and economic rescue programmes, legislative as we ll as executive, framed for 
the benefit of the have-nots and the handicapped and to 
protect them against violation of their basic human rights, 
which is also the constitutional  obligation of the executive. 
The Court is thus merely assisting in the realisation of the constitutional objectives." 
In Peoples' Union for Liberties’s case  (supra) after referring to the 
cases of Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights  and Bandhua Mukti 
Morcha’s case  (supra), the Calcutta High Court has observed as 
under:- 
“122. It is quite obvious that in a public interest litigation 
the petitioner and the State are not supposed to he pitted 
against each other, there is  no question of one party 
claiming or asking for relie f against the other and the 
Court deciding between them. Public interest litigation is a 
co-operative litigation in which the petitioner, the State or 
public authority and the Court arc to co-operate with one 
another in ensuring that th e constitutional obligation 
towards those who cannot resort  to the Courts to protect 
their constitu-tional or legal rights is fulfilled. In such a 
situation the concept of cause of action evolved in the 
background of private law an d adversary procedure is out 
of place. The only question that can arise is whether the 
prayers in the petition, if granted, will ensure such 
constitutional or legal rights.” SMC 16/2011 ETC.  59
53.   We have observed during the hearing that instant 
proceedings are not adversarial, bu t inquisitorial. The information/ 
material laid/produced before this Court by the State functionaries in 
pursuance of the order dated 24.08.2011, followed by the order of the 
Full Bench dated 26.08.2011 and the material produced by the 
interveners, reference of which has been made in the order referred hereinabove is sufficient for maki ng right conclusions. We were 
informed that besides figures of crimes committed during one month 
commencing from 24
th July to 24th August, 2011 noted hereinabove; 
about 1300 persons were killed during this year, whereas about 1800 persons similarly lost their lives in the year 2010. Thus, having gone through the material, we have no hesitation in our mind that at large 
scale the residents of Karachi ha ve been subjected to bloodshed, 
arson, kidnapping/abduction for ra nsom, widespread violence, illegal 
collection of money ( bhatta ) from traders, etc. and that their 
inalienable Fundamental Rights, such as, security of person; 
inviolability of dignity of man; freedom of movement; freedom of 
trade, business or profession and pr otection of property have been 
violated.  
54.  The fact that deadliest cr iminals having affiliation with 
various groups are responsible for bl oodshed, arson, looting, recovery 
of money ( bhatta ) from common citizens an d traders causing terror in 
the city of Karachi is not denied. Fe arful as they are, the people of 
Karachi have been spending sleeple ss nights particularly during the 
past months of July and August is also not denied. The accused 
persons belonging to any political or  specific group are so powerful 
that the police for the reason stated h a v e  f a i l e d  t o  a r r e s t  o r  c o l l e c t  
evidence for proving the guilt agains t them before a Court of Law as SMC 16/2011 ETC.  60
we have noted hereinabove and acco rding to summary of disposal of 
cases, most of the cases have alread y been disposed of as “A” Class, 
details of which have been mentione d hereinabove. M/S Syed Iftikhar 
Hussain Gillani, Abdul Mujeeb Pirzad a, Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, Rasool 
Bakhsh Palijo and Syed Iqbal Haider representing various 
applicants/interveners have blamed  MQM to have let their activists 
loose who, according to them, are largely responsible for creating 
dismal situation of law and order perpetrating the alleged wrongful 
acts and causing terrorism in the city. Whereas, Dr. Farogh Naseem, 
learned ASC, appearing on behalf of  MQM voiced in his submissions 
that in actual fact the Urdu spea king inhabitants of Karachi are the 
victims of atrocious acts of criminal s aligned with various other groups, 
particularly having influence in Baloch area of Lyari and Kati 
Pahari/Qasba Colony area largely i nhabited by Pashtuns. According to 
him, hundreds of MQM workers have  been tortured and killed at the 
hands of such groups. Thus, it is quite evident that uncontrollable law 
and order situation prevails, which ha s wrapped the city of Karachi in 
terror to the utmost discomfort of common citizens including traders, 
remains undisputed, the details of whic h are stated more specifically in 
the foregoing paragraphs. The DG Ra ngers, in his submissions, has 
been so vocal to say th at the law and order situation in Karachi is 
worse than it happens to be in Wa ziristan. The IG Police has also not 
lagged behind in admitting the brazen facts. This situation has not only 
heavily affected the common citizens of Karachi, it has virtually paralyzed the industrial and commercia l activities ultimately affecting 
the whole country as Karachi being a port city and commercial hub of 
country, it contributes 60 – 70 % of  revenue. Thus, there cannot be 
two opinions that the worsening la w and order situation in Karachi SMC 16/2011 ETC.  61
badly affecting the inviolable dignity,  life and liberty of multitudes of 
people; so also their property , movable and immovable involve 
violation of Fundamental Rights cons tituting it a matter of public 
importance.    
55.  It is to be noted that, pr imarily it is the duty of the 
Province through its executive author ities to control the law and order 
situation and ensure implementation of Fundamental Rights of citizens. 
But prima-facie it seems that the Provinci al Authorities have not 
fulfilled their constitutional duty. Un der the Constitution, equally it is 
the obligation of the Federation to protect every Province against internal disturbances as well as exte rnal aggression and to ensure that 
the Government of every Province is carried on in accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution.  
56.   It has been pointed out by learned counsel for the interveners representing different parties and groups including MQM, 
ANP, Baloch Ittehad Tehrik  and others that their supporters/party men 
have been butchered and are kidnapped and their whereabouts as yet are not known.  57.   According to the opinion expressed before us, the 
Provincial as well as Federal Govern ment cannot be cons idered to have 
been oblivious of their duties wh en right under their nose, a large 
number of persons were being brut ally butchered everyday on the 
streets of Karachi, which are littered with dead bodies and torsos (human bodies without head and limbs); sometimes also found in 
abandoned places and the injured wr ithing in pain; so also when 
innocent citizens were being burnt inside vehicles and torture cells 
were being detected by the law enforcing agencies. The state of 
helplessness prevailed, througho ut, in the city of Karachi – the face SMC 16/2011 ETC.  62
of Pakistan  being its economic hub – accommodating persons 
belonging to different communiti es, including Urdu speaking, Pashtuns , 
Saraiki’is , and others. The dead bodies of  the persons belonging to all 
walks of life i.e. Urdu speaking  (word used for the purpose of 
identifying in this case), Pashtuns , Balochis  and Punjabis  are being 
sent to their homes, within Karachi and outside Karachi i.e. to Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Baluchistan and Punjab , which is causing 
insurmountable fear and harassm ent throughout the country badly 
affecting economic activities on account of disturbances taking place in Karachi. Many people have wound up their business and have shifted 
from Karachi to other places insi de the country and outside causing 
colossal loss not only to the residents of Karachi individually, but to 
overall economy of the country. Th e whole nation is crying hoarse, 
media highlighting the tragic incide nts day and night in such a state 
also cannot be considered to have  not come to the knowledge of 
Provincial and Federal functionaries.  Unfortunately, no appropriate and 
timely action has been taken by the Provincial as well as Federal 
Governments to stop these atrociou s acts. Material has been brought 
on record, such as, reports of JIT, CID, IB, etc. (copies of which have 
been provided to us) bearing horri fying stories of heinous crimes 
committed by dangerous criminals alig ned with various political parties 
and groups; besides very critical situ ation of law and order reflected in 
the classified briefing of ISI canno t be considered that the same are 
not within the knowledge of th e Provincial and the Federal 
Governments. This sensitive material is, prima-facie , sufficient to hold 
that the Provincial Government has failed to perform its constitutional 
obligations and duties. Therefore, for the purpose of enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights denied to the people as highlighted hereinabove, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  63
this Court in exercise of its jurisdic tion under Article 184(3), which is in 
the nature of inquisitorial proceed ings, has the same powers as are 
available to the High Court under Ar ticle 199 of the Constitution in 
view of the judgments passed in the cases of  Muhammad Nawaz Sharif 
v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473), Syed Wasey Zafar v. 
Government of Pakistan  (PLD 1994 SC 621), Bank of Punjab v. Haris 
Steel Industries (pvt.) Ltd.  (PLD 2010 SC 1109) and Federation of 
Pakistan v.  Munir Hussain Bhatti  (PLD 2011 SC 752).  
58.   There is no denial of the fact that ensuring good 
governance, maintaining law and orde r situation and providing security 
to the persons is a primary duty of the Government. Our religion has 
also emphasized upon the significance  and sanctity of ‘life’ as it has  
been noted in the opening Para of th e judgment, according to which, if 
anyone killed a person, it would be as if he killed the whole humanity, 
and similarly if anyone saved a life,  i t  w o u l d  b e  a s  i f  h e  s a v e d  t h e  
whole humanity. Similarly, it is  the responsibility of the ruler 
(government) to ensure security of a ll its citizens, high or low, without 
any discrimination. It would be approp riate to refer here to the saying 
of the Second Caliph Umar ibn al-Khattab (R.A) that if a dog dies of 
hunger on the banks of the River Euphrates, Umar will be held 
responsible for dereliction of duty . [Mohtsham, Saeed M., Vision and 
Visionary Leadership – An Islamic Perspective ]. Mr. Abdul Hafeez 
Pirzada, Sr. ASC appearing on beha lf of the Chief Executive of the 
Province suggested in his argument s that a wake up call should be 
given to the Provincial Government by this Court, so that it may 
enforce the constitutional provisio ns. The suggestion of the learned 
counsel, however, does not sound well as this is the duty of the ruler 
to maintain the law and order without any interference of the Court. It SMC 16/2011 ETC.  64
is the history of this country th at on account of law and order 
situation, disturbance, absence of  peace, etc., many governments 
were dismissed in the past. In this behalf, reference may be made to the instruments of dissolution of  Parliaments issued by civilian 
constitutionally elected Presidents which were upheld by the Supreme 
Court from time to time:- 
 
 Order dated 29.5.1988 whereby the President of Pakistan 
dissolved the National Assemb ly under Article 58(2)(b): 
  “And whereas the law and order in the country have 
broken down to an alarming ex tent resulting in tragic loss 
of innumerable valuable lives as well as loss of property: 
  And whereas the life, property, honour and security 
of the citizens of Pakistan have been rendered totally 
unsafe and the integrity and ideology of Pakistan have been seriously endangered. [ Federation of Pakistan v. 
Haji  Muhammad Saifullah Khan  (PLD 1989 SC 166)] 
 
 Order under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution on 6th of 
August, 1990 dissolved the National Assembly  
 (d) The Federal Government has failed in its duty under 
Article 148(3) of the Constitution  to protect the Province of 
Sindh against internal disturbances and to ensure that the 
Government of that Province is carried on in accordance with the provisions of Consti tution, despite the heavy loss 
of life and property, the rule of terror in urban and rural 
areas, riots, arson, dacoities, kidnapping for ransom, 
politics of violence among ci tizens and widely condemned 
failure of the Provincial Gove rnment and its law enforcing 
agencies, and also, in this behalf, failed to act under 
appropriate provisions of the Constitution. [ Khawaja 
Ahmad Tariq Rahim v. the Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
1992 SC 646)]  
 
 Order dated 5.11.1996 whereby the President dissolved 
the National Assembly under Article 58(2)(b) SMC 16/2011 ETC.  65
  "Whereas during the last three years thousands of 
persons in Karachi and other parts of Pakistan have been 
deprived of their right to life in  violation of Article 9 of the 
Constitution. They have been  killed in Police encounters 
and Police custody. 
 
59.   In Ahmad Tariq Rahim’s case  (supra ), the dismissal of 
government was maintained by this  Court because of failure of the 
Federal Government to protect the Provincial Government of Sindh 
from internal disturbances, relevant Para therefrom is reproduced 
herein below: -  
“28. Ground (d) in the order of dissolution is that the 
Federal Government had failed in its duty under Article 
148(3) of the Constitution to  protect Province of Sindh 
against internal disturbances despite heavy loss of life and 
property. In this respect, stand taken on behalf of the 
petitioner is that matter relating to law and order situation 
in the Province was responsi bility of the Province as 
enshrined in the Constitution. It  is stated in the rejoinder 
riled in the High Court that  Government of PPP entered 
into accord with MOM accommodating its members in the 
Sindh Cabinet. Due to certain reasons there was unilateral 
break-up of the accord by  MQM which had withdrawn 
support from the Government. The Provincial Government was doing its level best to deal with law and order situation 
as required under the Consti tution and provisions of 
relevant laws. On this subject, there were several 
meetings between the Federal Government and the 
Provincial Government of Si ndh and exchange of letters. 
took place between President, Prime Minister and the 
Governor of Sindh. In fact  joint efforts were made 
sincerely to deal with the situation of law and order in 
Sindh to find a permanent solution. It is submitted on 
behalf of the petitioner that Federal Government and Government of Sindh wanted assistance of the army to the 
limited extent of aiding the civilian government as SMC 16/2011 ETC.  66
contemplated under the provis ions of Criminal Procedure 
Code but for some reason could not succeed in carrying 
out amendment in section 138- A of Criminal Procedure 
Code. One suggestion from the Provincial Government was 
that unlicensed arms should be recovered from people 
without any discrimination. Th en unpleasant incident took 
place in Hyderabad on 26th and 27th May, 1990 in Pacca 
Qila. There were so many casual ties in the firing. President 
wrote a letter on 28th May, 1990 addressed to the Prime 
Minister, asking hor to appoint judicial enquiry Commission 
to fix the responsibility for th e events that took place in 
Hyderabad expressing his opin ion in favour of use of 
armed forces in aid of civil power as contemplated under 
Article 245 of the Constitution.”  
 
Relevant Para from the judgment of this Court in Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416) is also reproduced 
hereinbelow: -  
“54. The law and order situation in Karachi and other parts 
of Sindh should not have been  allowed to deteriorate and 
get out of control. The custodial killings are to be explained satisfactorily as is required under the law. The killings in 
encounters with police are to be explained in proper manner and the Court has to give finding whether they 
were justified or not. There is absolutely no explanation 
available or produced on the record as to how the persons 
taken in custody and some of  them in handcuffs while 
leading the Police party/Law En forcing Agencies for making 
recoveries, were allowed to be killed by some unknown 
persons who did not want reco veries to be made. If a 
person is taken  into custody then he is bound to be dealt with strictly according to law and is to be punished only 
when the case is proved agai nst him. He cannot be allowed 
to be killed by any person while he is in custody. If this is 
done then it clearly shows that there is no writ of law but law of jungle. This shows ine fficiency which tantamounts to 
total failure of the Constituti o n a l  m a c h i n e r y .  I f  b o t h  t h e  
Provincial Government and the Federal Government jointly dealing with such situation fail then it can be said that the 
ground is available to the President to come to the 
conclusion that a situatio n has arisen in which the 
Government of the Federation cannot be run in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the Constitutional machinery has failed. 
 SMC 16/2011 ETC.  67
60.   It would not be out of context to note that Mr. Pirzada 
learned ASC had submitted that the Chief Executive was ready to take 
the following measures in future to maintain law and order situation in 
Karachi. The statement so filed is reproduced hereinbelow in 
verbatim:- 
STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF COUNSEL FOR THE PROVINCE OF SINDH 
 
In pursuance of the proceedin gs before, and the order of 
this Hon’ble Court in the above matter dated 30.08.2011, the undersigned counsel for the Provin ce of Sindh has met the Chief 
Minister, Sindh and as a result thereof, he has been instructed and requested to make the following/submissions.  
 
1. The Chief Minister, Sindh has expressed his resolve and 
determination to deal with an d handle the present criminal 
and crime situation in the ci ty of Karachi (the subject 
matter of the above proc eedings) without any 
discrimination whatsoever, i rrespective of any party 
affiliations, that the criminals may or claim to have and that every effort will be made to deal with and control the 
situation by all necessary action within the framework and letter and spirit of the Constitution the law. 
2. The Chief Minister firmly believes that his Government and 
the law enforcement agencies and instrumentalities available to him are competent in this behalf and that there shall be no lack of will to act on their part.  
3. Without prejudice to the generality of the above 
submission, the Chief Minist er, respectfully wants to 
convey to this Hon’ble Court, the specific actions that he 
proposes to take in this behalf: 
a. For the purpose of preventi on and control of crime, 
steps are underway to increa se the strength of the 
police force and supplement and buttress the same by the Rangers. It may be pointed that deployment of Rangers (which are absolutely necessary and vital to work in coordination and cooperation with the 
Police and are 10,000 in numbers in the city of 
Karachi) impose a bearable burden of less than 
Rs.400,000,000/- (Rupees Four Hundred Million) per year, in juxtaposition to the benefits flowing from their proper utilization. The burden of their salaries 
and emoluments is and continues to be borne by the Federal Government and not the Provincial Government.  
b. 1000 additional Police force has been transferred 
from the interior of Sindh to perform duties in the city of Karachi. The large number of the Police force available in Karachi, which has not been allocated to crime control will be reduced beginning immediately so as to provide sufficient numbers to crime control. 
It may be pointed that at least a half of the number SMC 16/2011 ETC.  68
reserved for special duti es as disclosed by the 
Inspector General Police, Sindh, is either assigned to traffic control or security  to VIP’s and also non-
governmental private parties and institutions. Notices have already been issued to these non-governmental 
and private organizations, that the force allocated to them is to be withdrawn and they have been advised to make private arrangements for their security. In 
the next immediate step, the force assigned to VIP’s 
will be reduced, wherever  possible in consonance 
with and without jeopardi zing the requirement of 
their security.  
c. Lastly, a 5000 strong contingent Police force, is being 
recruited, which will be trained and fully capable of performing their duties within the next 12 months. These recruits will receive special and sophisticated training at 9 Police training centers in the Province.  
d. Closed Circuit Televisions (CCTV’s) and cameras are 
being installed at 900 different locations in the city, which shall monitor, record and report commission of crimes. As stated in the power point presentation (from pages 48 onwards), new and effective APC’s 
have been ordered, which will augment and enable 
easier penetration by the law enforcement agencies 
into the crime areas. As stated on page 48, a new motorcycle force named ‘Eagle Force’ has already been introduced and is functional. 
e. 20 mobile forensic laborato ries are being acquired, 
which shall be manned by extensively trained personnel, with the assistan ce of friendly countries 
with advanced technology and expertise.  
f. The next important aspect in the maintenance of law 
and order is an effective, meaningful and productive 
investigation for the purpose of apprehension of real culprits, sophisticated and proper collection of evidence, l witnesses and compilation of record, so as to enable the Prosecutors to go with confidence and secure convictions of the guilty. The Police Act 1861 
has already been brought into force and solid 
investigation can be achieved through suitable amendments in the law. In this behalf, desired 
results can be achieved  by strengthening the 
prosecution agencies and institutions. It may be necessary to bring suitab le amendments in the 
existing laws, which may inter alia, provide for safety 
and security of witnesses and maintenance of full record and date of habitual offenders, so as to make 
it difficult for them to be release on bail as a matter of course.    
g. As far as the question of aliens/noncitizens living in 
Karachi and estimated to e 2,500,000, this matter relates to a considerable  extent to the Federal 
Government and the Counse l representing it shall 
have better locus standi  to address this Hon’ble 
Court. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  69
4. That these proceedings have  been initiated Suo Motu by 
this Hon’ble Court, pro bono publico and are not 
adversarial and therefore, the submissions on behalf of the Province of Sindh have b een made in that context. 
This Hon’ble Court has also ma de observation to the same 
effect. Therefore, the right of rebuttal, of the Province of 
Sindh, is not waived if others  parties, who have brought in 
their petitions or have joined  these proceedings make any 
submissions, which are required to be answered rebutted 
and controverted.”  
 But subsequently, he waived his right of rebuttal.   
61.   Some of the above co mmitments have already been 
reiterated by the IGP Sindh in hi s presentation, summary whereof has 
been reproduced hereinabove. Similarl y, as it has been pointed out in 
the report submitted by the Chie f Secretary Sindh dated 26.08.2011 
that after large scale bloodshed in Karachi, now the Administration has 
realized the gravity of the situatio n and has conferred powers upon the 
Pakistan Rangers vide notification dated 08.07.2011, which reads as 
under:-  
“No.SO(LE-I)/HD/6-66 
GOVERNMENT OF SINDH 
HOME DEPARTMENT 
Karachi dated July 08, 2011 
  
NOTIFICATION 
 
SUBJECT: PAKISTAN RANGERS (SINDH) EMPLOYMENT IN THE 
MAINTENANCE OF LAW AND ORDER IN KARACHI 
 
In the wake of recent incident s of terrorism/target killings 
in certain parts of Karachi,  Government of Sindh, in 
exercise of the powers inve sted under section 10 of the 
Pakistan Rangers Ordinance, 1959, read with section 5 of the |Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997, hereby make responsible Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) for the maintenance of law and order and to apprehend the criminal elements involved in 
firing and killing of innocent citizens in various areas and 
zones of the city (where situ ation warrants employment of 
Sindh Rangers). Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) are hereby authorized by the Government of Sindh to cordon, search 
and use force in controlling firing by the criminals in effected areas.   CCPO Karachi will extend all po ssible support to Pakistan 
Rangers (Sindh) in restoring la w and order situation in any 
part of the city. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  70
 
ADDITIONAL CHIEF SECRETARY 
HOME DEPARTMENT” 
 
The contents of the report of the Ch ief Secretary, particularly Paras 7 
& 8 thereof, being an eye-opener , have already been reproduced 
hereinabove.  62.  Similarly, IG Police in addition to other explanations, referred to the demography of th e city and admitted extortion of 
money ( bhatta ) being collected from the traders.  
63.   Mr. Farogh Naseem, learne d ASC appearing on behalf of 
MQM in CMA 565-K/2011, pointed out that to prevent extortion of money ( bhatta ) the Provincial Assembly had already promulgated the 
Eradication and Curbing the Menace of  Involuntary Donation or Forced 
Chanda Act, 2004 [hereinafter referred to as “the Act, 2004”]. However, it seems that this lega l instrument has not been applied 
strictly whereas other learned co unsel for interveners are of the 
opinion that criminals involved in collection of bhatta  are so desperate 
that no one – be a trader or anyone  else – being fearful is interested 
to expose himself to the wrath of the criminals, rather they feel safety 
in paying bhatta ; besides they are equally hesitant to come forward 
because of problems and difficulties in perusing cases and also have 
no trust and faith in the police. As far as the law which has been 
referred to by the learned counsel, cognizance of an offence under the 
said Act is to be taken on submi ssion of complaint in writing by a 
donor within 30 days of the commi ssion of the offence before the 
Judicial Magistrate having territorial  jurisdiction. The victims, instead 
of going by the letter of the law whereunder they have to become 
complainants and challenge the crim inals, reportedly always armed 
with lethal weapons, prefer to make payment of bhatta . This thing can SMC 16/2011 ETC.  71
only be reversed if the trust of the citizens is restored, which of course 
is not possible until and unless a neutral and a depoliticized administration as well as honest an d dedicated law enforcing agencies, 
especially police are there to protec t the victims of crimes. It seems 
that this law was promulgated for eradication and curbing the menace 
of extortion of money in the shape of forced donations ( chanda ). The 
word “ chanda ” has not been defined, but the definition clause of 
section 2 contains the word “Fund ” which includes donation or 
contribution in the shap e of money or kind. Thus, taking advantage of 
this provision, it was argued be fore us that there have been 
complaints that in the name of payment of fitrana , which is to be paid 
as sadqa  by all the Muslims at the end of Ramadan  on the eve of Eid-
ul-fitr , exorbitant amounts have been forcibly recovered instead of 
allowing Muslims to pay the same vo luntarily to the deserving people 
as per Injunctions of Islam. The culprits in an organized manner 
receive fitrana  and in some of the cases ten times of the original 
amount has been demanded. Although  no documents are available on 
record in this behalf, but these th ings have been pointed out during 
the arguments by the learned coun sel appearing for the interveners 
who have spoken before the Court vocally. Similarly, it has been 
informed that as far as the word ‘k ind’ mentioned in the definition of 
“fund” is concerned, it relates to recovery of hadia (donation), skins of 
animals ( khall) and other body parts of an imals on the occasion of Eid-
ul-Azha , however, the representatives of so called welfare 
organizations working under the flags of their respective political parties used to bind down the people  to hand over the same to them, 
else to face the consequences, but according to the learned counsel for 
the interveners, this law has also  not worked effectively and the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  72
practice of forcible recovery of the above items, i.e. skins, etc., has 
been going on. 64.   It may be noted that as far as offence of extortion of money is concerned, which can also be considered as bhatta,  it is 
covered by sections 386 to 388 of th e Pakistan Penal Code and also 
falls within the definition of terrori sm given in section 6(1)(k) of the 
Anti-terrorism Act, 1997. Undoubtedl y, sufficient legal framework as 
discussed hereinabove is available on  the statute book, but the same 
is lying dormant because of its non-application as people do not have trust in the law enforcing agenci es to counter the deadly and 
influential persons who happen to te rrorize the innocent citizenry and 
due to this reason no one comes forward. It is common knowledge 
that mafias  i.e. groups of criminals in volved in the commission of 
heinous crimes, such as recovery of bhatta , extortion of money, 
business of illegal weapons, narcotics,  drugs, land grabbing, etc., had 
been working in other countries as well in a highly organized manner. Reference in this behalf may be made to the Sicilian and American 
Cosa Nostra , an Italian group also working  in New York, but in those 
countries the crime was controlled by  promulgating and implementing 
stringent laws, which we also have in our jurisdiction, namely, Anti-
terrorism Act, 1997, therefore, we can also control the same by applying such laws strictly. In USA, to control such underworld mafias , 
the State authorized through the cour ts seizure of properties of such 
like persons, if it was establishe d that they had acquired such 
properties out of income from the proceeds of heinous crimes. In this 
behalf, reference may be made to the case of Bracy v. Gramley, 
Warden,  [520 U.S. 899 (1997)], wherein the Supreme Court of United 
States did not show any concession to the culprits. There are so many SMC 16/2011 ETC.  73
other judgments, reference of whic h may not be necessary at this 
stage, where the Governments had succeeded to control the mafias  
after applying stringent measures.  65.   The history of Karachi, which has been narrated 
hereinabove, indicates that from 1985  onwards, the rate of crime as 
well as the situation of law and order have been increasing with the passage of time. Syed Iqbal Haid er, Sr. ASC in CMA No. 544-K/2011, 
has pointed out that General Zia-ul-H aq, with an intension to further 
divide and de-politicize the people , created three militant groups and 
fully armed ethnic parties, i.e. Muhajir Qaumi  Movement (Now 
Mutahida  Qaumi  Movement), Punjabi Pukhtoon Itehad  (PPI) and Jiye 
Sindh (JS), and ethnic warfare started from the tragic road accident 
death of a student named Bushra Zaidi in April, 1985, followed by 
numerous incidents of bloody clashes between the three ethnic parties resulting in innumerable deaths of innocent citizens, destruction of 
public and private property and in juries to thousands of persons, 
particularly in Karachi and Hyderabad. Curfews, hartaals  (strikes) and 
close downs of routine activities of the citizens became a norm in Karachi. He further stated that  from 1980 onwards, six Judicial 
Commissions headed by Judges of  High Court of Sindh were 
constituted, but reports of none  of those Commissions were made 
public nor their recommendations we re ever implemented, perhaps to 
protect the real culprits respon sible for such bloody incidents. 
Inasmuch as, former Prime Minister Mohtarma  Benazir Bhutto  had 
constituted a most powerful indepe ndent Judicial Commission headed 
by the then Chief Justice of Pakistan, Mr. Justice Muhammad Afzal Zullah and comprising the Chief Justices  of all the four High Courts to 
investigate into the unfortunate incident of Pakka  Qila, Hyderabad on SMC 16/2011 ETC.  74
or about 17.05.1990, but according to him, after unconstitutional 
dissolution of the Government of Mohtarma  Benazir  Bhutto , during the 
days of new Caretaker Government with heavy representation of MQM both at Federal and Provincial leve ls, it decided to dissolve the said 
Judicial Commission. He handed over the implementation report of one 
of such Commissions headed by the Chief Secretary, Sindh constituted 
in 1985-86 after the incident of Bush ra Zaidi. We inquired from the 
learned Advocate General as to  whether any other Commission’s 
report was available and whether th e same had been made public or 
not, he stated that as per instructions, no Commission report is available in the relevant department. From the facts and circumstances narrated by the lear ned counsel, it seems that in the 
past as well, the city of Karachi had been facing the same problem 
with which it is confronted toda y in more aggravated form, but 
unfortunately, no plausible solution  to maintain law and order and 
restore peace in Karachi was adopted. Inasmuch as, sometimes, there had been military operations followed by operations by the Task Forces 
constituted by Mohtarma  Benazir  Bhutto  during her regime 
commencing from 1993 onwards, bu t without any final permanent 
solution of the problem. We tried our level best to trace out the 
reasons as to why democratic as well as non-democratic Governments 
failed to bring normalcy in Karachi,  but nobody came forward with a 
convincing answer except that iden tical international solutions, which 
other Governments like in Italy, America, India, etc., had adopted are available to the State machinery in Pakistan, but no one had dared or shown any will to resolve the issue of disturbances in Karachi. Although, Karachi is a city presen tly accommodating about 18 million 
people belonging to different co mmunities, as per the history of SMC 16/2011 ETC.  75
Karachi who had come from India, Afghanistan and all over Pakistan 
and had settled permanently over ther e making it a cosmopolitan city, 
which houses Pakistanis  as well as a large number of foreigners, about 
2.5 million in number, who are also there without any check and their 
involvement in troublemaking can also not be overruled. But the 
question remains as to why law enfo rcing agencies have not, to say 
the least, checked these illegal immi grants and have not managed to 
deport them to the countries of their origin. The DG Rangers, who 
operates in the disturbed areas, appe ared in person and pointed out in 
his briefing to the Court that the po litical forces of the city had been 
made hostage by the militant groups of political parties; Karachi was a 
mega city, but unfortunately an unjus t infrastructure divided it into 
various parts on ethnic and political lines; the city was in the grip of 
polarization on account of which even  the health sector was divided on 
ethnic/parochial basis, so much so th at a patient or an injured person 
belonging to one community is refused admission for medical 
treatment in a hospital under the co ntrol of the rival group; and the 
situation in Karachi was worse than th at prevailing in North Waziristan. 
The statement of DG Rangers ha s undoubtedly made important 
evaluation during his briefing, besi des, in the reports available on 
record and from other credible sour ces, the situation in Karachi seems 
to be terrible and needs urgent attention of the Federal and the Provincial Government to handle  the same through independent 
Administration to save the economic , social and political future of 
Pakistan, which, inter alia , depends upon peaceful life in Karachi.  
66.   Mr. Rasool Baksh Palijo, ASC appearing on behalf of Awami 
Tehrik  Party in CMA No. 552-K/2011, in loud and clear words, held 
MQM responsible alone for the situat ion prevailing in the country. He SMC 16/2011 ETC.  76
stated that over the last about 20 to 30 years thousands of criminals 
were not challaned  and not a single person  was awarded punishment. 
According to him, unless a ban is im posed upon the militant outfits of 
the political parties, peace and no rmalcy would not be brought to 
Karachi. Therefore, he emphasized th at culprits should be brought to 
book and severe punishments should  be awarded to them, which may 
serve deterrence for like minded persons. In this context, Syed Iqbal Haider, Sr. ASC agreeing with him suggested that a powerful truth 
finding commission is required to be constituted to decide, once for all, 
as to who is responsible for destro ying peace in Karachi, whereas, 
Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani Sr. ASC  was of the opinion that instant 
matter may not be disposed of fina lly, and an affective interim order 
may be passed, as this Court had do ne in the Petitions challenging the 
validity of the 18
th Constitutional Amendment,  enabling this Court to 
supervise the affairs relating to la w and order situation in Karachi.  
67.   Mr. Abdul Mujeeb Pirzada, Sr. ASC appearing on behalf of 
Sindh Bachayo Committee in CM A No. 531-K/2011, after having 
narrated the facts and circumstances of the case also insisted for 
directions to the Government of Si ndh to initiate the process of de-
weaponization and for the assistance of Administration the military be 
also allowed to be called in terms of Article 245 of the Constitution 
because in the past as well, the Administration has been calling in aid the Armed Forces in critical situat ions like during the earthquake of 
2005 and floods in different parts of  the country in 2010, and also get 
implemented the orders passed by th is Court by invoking Article 190, 
which according to Syed Iftikhar Hu ssain Gillani, Sr. ASC is an enabling 
provision on the basis of which the Court can issue directions to all 
executive authorities to come fo rward to provide aid to it in SMC 16/2011 ETC.  77
implementation of its orders, and undue objections are being raised to 
invoking of the provisions of Arti cle 190. According to them, Article 
190 is like all other provisions of th e Constitution, e.g., Article 187, 
etc., therefore, adhering to any pr ovision of the Constitution will be 
tantamount to strengthening the institutions for the purpose of 
achieving good governance, welfar e, peace and tranquility in the 
society. They have emphasized that  no provision of the Constitution 
can be made ineffective, rather each  provision has to be applied when 
the need arises. It is to be note d that as per the scheme of the 
Constitution, different institutio ns are required to fulfill their 
commitment because our Constitution  is based on the principle of 
trichotomy of powers i.e. Legislatur e, which is responsible to legislate 
the laws, Executive/Government head ed by the Prime Minister in the 
Federation and the Chief Ministers in the Provinces to fulfill their 
duties, and the Judiciary, which has to interpret the Constitution and the law. Violation of constitutional provisions by any of the organs/functionaries of the State is no t permitted by law as held in the 
case of Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2009 SC 876) wherein all the ac tions of the then  Chief of Army 
Staff General Parvez Musharraf dated 03.11.2007, viz., Proclamation 
of Emergency, PCO No. 1 of 2007, Ju dges Oath Order, 2007, etc. were 
declared to be unconstitutional, illegal, mala fide and void ab initio . As 
a result, whatever was done extra-co nstitutionally was struck down. As 
far as the present democratic Govern ment is concerned, it too cannot 
be allowed to go beyond the Constitu tional provisions or allowed to fail 
in its implementation, particularly  with regard to enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights. There are no two opinions that as far as 
Fundamental Rights/civil rights of th e citizens are concerned, those are SMC 16/2011 ETC.  78
to be enforced by the Executive and if  it fails to do so, they have to 
face the consequences envisaged by  the Constitution. The Executive 
functionaries who have also taken oaths both in the Province and 
Federation to protect and preserve the Constitution cannot be allowed 
to defeat any provision of th e Constitution, whatever the 
circumstances may be. At this juncture, reference to Article 5 of the Constitution is relevant and approp riate, which commands that loyalty 
to State is the basic duty of ev ery citizen and obedience to the 
Constitution and law is the inviol able obligation of every citizen 
wherever he may be, and of every other person for the time being 
within Pakistan. Thus, the Executive/ public functionaries are bound to 
enforce the Constitution while prot ecting the Fundamental Rights of 
the citizens without any fear or fa vour or compromise for subjective 
purpose. Reference in this behalf may be made to the cases of Abdul 
Majeed Zafar v. Governor of Punjab  (2007 SCMR 330) and Ch. Zahur 
Ilahi v. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  (PLD 1975 SC 383). In the last mentioned 
judgment, the question before the Co urt was with regard to initiating 
proceedings of contempt of Court against the then Prime Minister, 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, vis-à-vis the posi tion of such offi ce holder as well 
as the immunity under Article 248 of the Constitution, when this Court 
held that even a Prime Minister is, under clause (2) of Article 5 of the 
Constitution, bound to obey the Cons titution and law as that is the 
basic obligation of every citizen . Whereas, in the instant proceedings 
without claiming any immunity what soever, the Prime Minister as well 
as the Chief Minister both are bound  to follow the Co nstitution under 
Article 5(2) by ensuring security an d safety of persons and property of 
the citizens. An argument could be raised that since the responsibility 
for incidents of violence, commission  of crimes, bloodshed and looting SMC 16/2011 ETC.  79
occurring in the society lies on criminals, who are to be held 
responsible and punished by the Courts  of law, as such, in the instant 
case as well, the law enforcing agen cies are performing their duties 
causing arrests of the accused persons to be put on trial in accordance 
with law. In our considered opinio n, a line of distinction has to be 
drawn in the cases where there is insurgency in any part of the 
country and commission of crimes by the individuals for their personal 
enmities and other motives, and commi ssion of crimes in the shape of 
a turf war by various groups allegedly having support of political parties to secure their vested intere sts, vis-à-vis unlawful gains. Such 
groups represent the organizati ons/gangs of criminals, drug mafias , 
land grabbers, etc., who operate ag ainst each other to have control 
over different areas of the city, co nsidering themselves as warlords 
and obstruct entry of rival gr oups in each other’s area.  
68.   At this stage, reference to the application of Mr. Javed Ahmed Chhatari Advocate, appear ing in person in CMA No. 558-
K/2011 may be made with which he has appended a coloured copy of the map to highlight the respecti ve areas under the control of 
Pashtuns  and Urdu speaking communities, divided by a hill. Allegedly, 
the Pashtuns  are inhabitants on the upper side of the hill whereas the 
Urdu speaking people and other co mmunities are living across and in 
the bottom of the same, and whenever  a dispute arises, according to 
Mr. Chhattari, the Pashtuns  take benefit of their location on the high 
side of the hill and manage to kill Muhajirs (Urdu speaking). He has 
also submitted a list of police st ations, 112 in number, along with 
details of different communities living in their respective jurisdictions. 
For convenience, the same is reproduced herein below: -  
S.No. Name of Police Station Nature of Population SMC 16/2011 ETC.  80
1. 1. Peerabad 
2. Manghopir 3. Mochko 4. Mominabad 5. Site Section A 
6. Site Section B 
7. Baldia Town 8. Saeedabad  9. Sohrab Goth 10. Gulzar-e-Hijri 
11. Qaidabad 
12. Sohrab Goth 13. Bilal Colony     
    
 
Pukhtoon Majority Police Stations 
2. 1. Bahadurabad 
2. Nazimabad 3. Rizvia 
4. Gulbahar 
5. Super Market 6. Liaquatabad 7. Sharifabad 8. Gulberg 9. Yousuf Plaza 
10. Azizabad 
11. Joharabad 12. Samanabad 13. New Karachi 14. Sir Syed Town 
15. Preedy  
16. Orangi Town 17. Pakistan Bazar 18. Landi 19. Korangi 
20. Zaman Town 
21. Saudabad  22. Orangi Ext. 23. Shah Faisal  
  
 
   Mahajir Majority Police 
Stations 
3. 1. Chakiwara 
2. Bagdadi 3. Kala Kot 
4. Eid Gah 
5. TPX 6. Gaddap Town 7. Ibrahim Haidry 8. Malir City  
9. Memon Goth 
10. Bin Qasim 11. Docks 12. Kalri 13. Malir Cantt: 14. Nepare 
15. Sharafi Goth 
  
  
 
   Baloch and Sindhi 
Majority Police Stations 
     
4. 1. Mari Pur 
2. Jackson 3. Surjani Town 4. Gulshan-e-Iqbal 5. Gulistan-e-Johar 
6. Shar-e-Faisal 
7. Shar-e-Noorjehan 8. Sher Shah  
    
 
  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  81
9. Sharfi Goth 
10. Mehmoodabad 11. Baloch Colony 12. Ferozabad 13. Defence 
14. Clifton 
15. Gizri 16. Boat Basin 17. Artillery Maidan 18. Sadar 
19. Air Port 
20. Civil Line 21. Darakshan 22. Frere 23. Gulzar-e-Hijri 
24. Garden 
25. Jamshed Quarter 26. Kharadar 27. Methdar 28. Korangi I. Area 29. Khokra Par 
30. Khawaja A Nagri 
31. Model Colony 32. Nabi Bux 33. New Town 34. New Karachi I Area 
35. Risala 
36. Soldier Bazar 37. Sukhan 38. Steel Town 39. Sachal  
40. Tepu Sultan  
41. Gulshan-e-Maymar    
    
 
  Mix Community Populated Area Police 
Stations 
 
Thus, according to Mr. Chhattari, the dispute is not confined to 
individuals, but mostly extends to three communities i.e. Muhajirs , 
who normally speak Urdu, Pashtuns  and Balochs , all of whom try to 
achieve their nefarious objects by  committing murders by way of 
vengeance and as a matter of tit for tat. The Pakistan People’s Party 
Parliamentarians (PPPP) being the majority party in the Provincial 
Assembly of Sindh is the leading parliamentary party, whereas the MQM is the next majority party in the said Assembly. According to the 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of MQM, out of total 42 seats of 
MQM in the Provincial Assembly of Si ndh, it has 34 seats from Karachi, 
and ANP has only 2 seats, wherea s PPPP alone has 93 seats, which 
even otherwise is sufficient to fo rm government in the Province. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  82
However, according to him, for the reasons best known to the political 
groups or their leaders, a coalit ion government has been formed.  
69.   Dr. Farogh Naseem, ASC has filed an application on behalf 
of MQM, contents whereof are reproduced hereinbelow: -  
“14. The Applicant supports an action against all the 
criminal elements across th e board without any fear, 
favour or affiliation. The A pplicant shuns any form of 
terrorism and intolerance and requests this Hon’ble Court to pass corrective orders an d some suggestions in this 
regard are stated below in th e prayer clause, while some 
will be furnished at the time arguments.   17. The land, arms and drug mafia predominantly thrive 
upon unrest in the city. The failure of law enforcement 
agencies is a safe haven for such mafias, which encroach 
upon state land and their whereabouts are not traceable, and, therefore, it is impera tive that proper survey and 
investigation is carried out so as to discover the areas and pockets of state land which are encroached and the law 
enforcement agencies are empl oyed to evict them from 
such state land, whereafter the perpetrators are prosecuted.” 
 
When we inquired from him as to  why precautionary measures were 
not taken by the party being repres ented by him to control the law 
and order situation, he invited our attention towards Para No.7 of his 
CMA. It is important to note that one of the most important 
s t a t e m e n t s  o f  f a c t  h a s  b e e n  m a d e  o n  b e h a l f  o f  M Q M  i n  P a r a  N o . 1 4  above, and at the same time he has orally stated that in view of the circumstances prevailing in Karachi, he concedes that the 
Government has failed to enforc e Fundamental Rights of the 
citizens . In respect of presen ce of land and drug mafia , an explicit 
offer has been made in Para No. 17 reproduced above. As far as 
jurisdiction of this Court under Ar ticle 184(3) is concerned, he has 
conceded that because the instan t proceedings are inquisitorial, 
therefore, in view of the judgments in the cases of Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416), Darshan Masih v. the State  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  83
(PLD 1990 SC 513), S.P. Gupta v. President of India  (AIR 1982 SC 
149) and People's Union for Democratic Rights  (AIR 1982 SC 1473), 
this Court, in the interest of public , has jurisdiction to adjudicate upon 
such a matter. He further argued that unless de-politicization of the 
law enforcing agencies takes place an d neutral investigation bodies are 
constituted for the purpose of co nducting transparent proceedings 
following the due process of law as contemplated under Article 10A of 
the Constitution and to supervise such independent bodies, unless a Judge of the High Court is appoin ted to monitor the proceedings of 
each case, it would neither be possible to bring the culprits to book involved in the commission of crimes nor justice would be done. In this 
very context, he has also relied upon Vineet Narain v. Union of India
 
[(1996) 2 SCC 199], State of Bihar v. Ranchi Zila Samta Party  [(1996) 
3 SCC 682], Anukul Chandra Pradhan v. Union of India  [(1996) 6 SCC 
354], Union of India v. Sushil Kumar Modi  [(1996) 6 SCC 500], Union 
of India v. Sushil Kumar Modi  [(1997) 4 SCC 770], Dinesh Trivedi, 
M.P. v. Union of India  [(1997) 4 SCC 306], and Khan Asfand Yar Wali 
v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2001 SC 607). Learned counsel, instead 
of defending the situation prevailin g in the city, has made two very 
important admissions on behalf of MQM, which are evident from the 
contents of the application reproduced hereinabove.  
70.   The third most importan t admission from the coalition 
partner of the Government is th at it has failed to enforce the 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens and suggested that it be held that under no political expediency or consideration, the Provincial or 
Federal Government should allow bloodshed, arson, kidnapping/abduction for ransom , widespread violence, illegal 
collection of money ( bhatta ) from traders, etc., to continue in violation SMC 16/2011 ETC.  84
of Articles 9, 14, 15, 18 and 24 of the Constituti on or to encourage the 
land grabbers, drug mafias  and gangs of organi zed criminals who are 
brutally committing murders by cutti ng necks and limbs of innocent 
people and throwing their torsos in the streets. Even if there is any 
expediency, it cannot be allowed to prevail at any cost, whatsoever the 
consideration may be, is the most important admission. Besides, it has been pointed out that except le arned counsel appearing for the 
Government i.e. M/s Abdul Hafeez  Pirzada and Babar Awan, learned 
Sr. ASCs, all the learned counsel for the applicants/interveners, loudly 
and clearly, with logical reason base d on facts, have conceded that the 
Government has failed to combat an d eradicate crimes and to protect 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens. The nature of the crimes and the 
horrible acts being shown on DVDs of a torture cell detected by the 
Rangers in the area of Lyari, as pe r statement of IGP are hair-raising 
wherein the criminals are shown cutti ng throats of persons with blunt 
knives and committing sodomy. Obvi ously, this all shows that the 
Executive/Provincial Government has not dealt with the criminals with 
an iron hand. Had the Government done so, innocent persons would 
not have been deprived of their lives, liberties and properties and their 
dignity would have been saved. It has been mentioned time and again 
that allowing such incidents withou t any resistance for the last so 
many years, and more particularly in the recent months of July and 
August, 2011, relevant details whereof have been obtained, is beyond comprehension. We may observe here that it is not the question who 
succeeds in forming the government  both in the Centre and the 
Province, but here the question is of defending the Fundamental Rights 
of the citizens. The Executive Auth orities cannot be allowed to be 
negligent to an extent where ultimately the sovereignty and integrity SMC 16/2011 ETC.  85
of the country is jeopardized. Availa bility of heavy and light arms and 
ammunition, such as pistols, revo lvers, rocket launchers, MG, LMGs, 
etc., in fact, has turned Karachi into  a volcano, which can erupt at any 
moment, and then it would not be po ssible for the Executive to control 
the same. There are voices from different quarters, including the 
learned counsel appearing for the interveners that the Government should have initiated action for de-weaponization. In this behalf, Mr. Farogh Naseem, ASC has stated that  a private Bill, namely, the De-
weaponization of Pakistan Bill, 2011 has been moved by the MQM in the National Assembly, which is still pending with the Assembly.  
71.  Dr. Babar Awan, learned counsel for the Federation and learned Advocate General, Sindh were  called upon to explain as to how 
many licenses of prohibited and no n-prohibited weapons have been 
issued by the Federal and the Provincial Government of Sindh during the last five years. Both of them  filed the reports indicating that 
180956 licenses of non-prohibited bo re were issued by the Home 
Department, Government of Sindh whereas 46114 licenses of prohibited bore and 1,202,470 license s of non-prohibited bore were 
issued by the Ministry of Interior, Go vernment of Pakistan. It is to be 
noted that usually crimes are not committed with licen ced weapons as 
the criminal perpetrators use un- licenced weapons for the same.  
72.  As it has been pointed out hereinabove that in the past in 
an identical situation, the constituti onally elected President of Pakistan 
had dismissed the Governments and su ch orders were maintained up 
to the Supreme Court, reference of which has already been made 
hereinabove. It is important to ment ion at this stage that whosoever is 
ruling the country under the Constitution, he being the Leader of the 
House, is bound to know the constitutional commitments and SMC 16/2011 ETC.  86
p r o v i s i o n s  o f  l a w  b e c a u s e  o f  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  h e  o r  t h e y  h a v e  t a k e n  
oath(s) to preserve, protect and de fend the Constitution, including 
Fundamental Rights as well as to sh ow obedience to the Constitution 
and law under Article 5(2) notwiths tanding their holding of any high 
office, as held in Zuhor Ilahi’s case  (ibid).  
73.   We may reiterate here that now it is not possible under the 
Constitution and law for the Armed Forces to dismiss the Government 
by adopting extra-constitutional me asures, detailed reference in this 
behalf, if required, can be  made to  the only judgment of this Court in 
Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case  (ibid), but at the same time 
the chosen representatives also owe a duty to the Constitution and if 
they feel that on account of any po litical expediency they can allow the 
continuance of the present position of  law and order in the Province, it 
will be at their own risk and cost, otherwise under the Constitution they are bound to secure lives and properties, ensuring the proprietary 
rights, freedom of movement, etc., and failing which constitutionally 
such government is likely to lose their right of ruling.  
74.   Ms. Asma Jehangir Advocate, in her statement, on the basis of report of Special Branch of Sindh Police, wherein names of 
persons belonging to different polit ical parties including PPPP, MQM, 
etc. involved in the collection of bhatta  have been mentioned showed 
her concern and stated that it is an eye opener for the Government 
and despite such information, no ac tion has been taken by the police. 
We have no reason to differ with he r, and we are constrained to hold 
for this reason as well that unwilling ness of the police force to combat 
crime could be one of the reasons on  account of which criminals are let 
loose in the society and encouraged to commit crimes.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  87
75.   According to the assertion of Ms. Asma Jehangir Advocate, 
the law enforcing agencies have shown slackness in initiating action for extending powers to the Rangers and others, which, according to her, 
is evident from the parawise comme nts filed by the Chief Secretary. 
We have already discussed this aspe ct of the matter; however, we 
would share the concerns expressed by her. Actu ally, as it has been 
pointed out hereinabove, the situ ation could have been controlled 
conveniently, if the police had taken prompt action with full 
commitment, but in view of the stat ement of IGP that 30 to 40 percent 
police officials are not cooperatin g for the reasons already noted 
hereinabove, and no expectation could be made from them, unless the whole police is de-politicized by tran sferring the police officers of the 
rank of DSP and above to their parent departments, and by 
discontinuing the practice of allowing  retired officers to join police on 
contract basis or bringing person s from other departments in the 
police department is discarded. In fa ct, by way of passing remarks, it 
may be observed that apart from the police department, the situation perhaps is worse in other departme nts as well, because appointments 
on the basis of unauthorized absorp tions of different officers in the 
provincial and district Administration were made by the Government 
and a Division Bench of Sindh High  Court in Constitution Petition 
No.932-D/2009 set aside such appointm ents by way of cancelling the 
orders of such appointments. The persons who were aggrieved by the 
decision of the High Court prefer red petitions for leave to appeal, 
which were converted in to Civil Appeals 404-406/2011 etc.  But, in the 
meanwhile, Sindh Assembly pa ssed the Sindh Civil Servants 
(Regularization of Absorp tion) Act, 2011 whereby the 
transfers/absorptions on  permanent basis of such officers against SMC 16/2011 ETC.  88
regular posts were declared regula r notwithstanding any judgment of 
any Court, as a result whereof the appeals so filed were withdrawn and 
stood disposed of vide order dated 16.06.2011.  
76.   Mr. Muhammad Aqil, Presiden t of Karachi Bar Association, 
Mr. Iftikhar Javed Qazi, Vice Ch airman, Sindh Bar Council and Syed 
Haider Imam Rizvi, General Secretary, Karachi Bar Association appeared in CMA No. 532-K/2011 and stated that about 19 Advocates 
have also been brutally murdered by  criminals and so far no action has 
been taken by the law enforcing agencies. Their arguments were 
augmented by Mr. Faisal Kamal,  learned ASC who has filed an 
application on behalf of the PML(N), and according to him, two Advocates who were supporters of PML( N) were also murdered. It is to 
be noted that as per information su pplied, following Advocates so far 
have been killed in different incident s, during the last few years: -  
1. Mr. Sardar Zulfiqar 
2. Mr. Muhammad Hanif Khan  
3. Mr. Altaf Hussain  
4. Mr. Liaqat Qureshi  
5. Mr.Nazar Abbas 
6. Mr. Muhammad Kamal  
7. Mr. S. M. Zia Alam  
8. Syed Mukhtar Abbas Bukhari  
9. Mr. Muhammad Junaid 
10. Mr. Fahim Riaz Siddiqui  
11. Mr. Muhammad Saleem Bhatti 
12. Mr. Muhammad Murtaza Chinnoy 
13. Mr. Nazeer Ahmed Khuhawar  
14. Mr. Ali Muhammad Dahiri 
15. Mr. Muhamma Aslam Burioro  
 
77.   It is pertinent to mention here that in some of the cases, 
FIRs have been registered, but th e accused persons have remained SMC 16/2011 ETC.  89
untraced. We agree with the learne d counsel that if the lives of 
Advocates are not safe at the hands of the culprits, a set back is likely to be caused to the profession of la w, which is an important tool in the 
system of administration of justic e. However, the learned Advocate 
General assured that the matter will be  looked into and all efforts will 
be made to bring the culprits to ju stice. He has also stated that the 
Government of Sindh has agreed to pay compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- and one plot to the families/legal heirs of the deceased Advocates. As far as the payment of compensation is concerned, 
according to him, the claims have already been approved by the Government of Sindh whereas the proc ess of allotment of plots is in 
progress. The learned representatives of the Advocates, however, 
requested for enhancement of comp ensation as according to them, 
such lawyers have also been killed in the course of performance of 
their professional duties and acco rding to the Government Policy, a 
sum of Rs.20,00,000/- is paid to the families of the police 
officers/officials who have sacrificed  their lives while combating crimes. 
We do agree with the learne d counsel for enhancement of 
compensation in view of the two ju dgments, which have been cited by 
Mr. Farogh Naseem, ASC. This Court,  in exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, has also ordered payment of compensation in the case of Saad Mazhar v. Capital Development 
Authority  (2005 SCMR 1973) to the residents of Margalla Towers, 
which collapsed in the earthquake of September, 2005. However, in 
the instant case, this Court perhaps wo uld not be in a position to issue 
any direction except observing th at the cases of the Advocates, 
belonging to legal fraternity and being one of the important 
components of the system of administra tion of justice, if they lay their SMC 16/2011 ETC.  90
lives on account of prevailing la w and order situation in the city, 
without any fault on their part and al so not on account of any personal 
enmity, deserve to be dealt with at  par with the police officials who 
have sacrificed their lives in co mbating crime. The Government of 
Sindh may consider change in the Policy for the payment of 
compensation and grant of a plot  of land to their families.  
78.   It may be pointed out that immediately after the commencement of hearing of the case, one Barrister Murtaza Chinnoy, Advocate was assassinated in his offi ce. The office bearers of the Sindh 
High Court Bar Association and Ka rachi Bar Association pointed out 
this fact to the Bench, therefore, the IGP Sindh was directed to take personal interest in the matter, and later it was informed that accused 
persons have been arrested and prima facie  their involvement in the 
murder case is on account of dacoity, as allegedly he was robbed and looted. Similarly, another Advoca te, namely, Faheem-ul-Karim along 
with a lady and another person wa s killed in a flat and police was 
directed to expedite the investigation. Mr. Tariq Dharejo, SP Clifton submitted a report to the effect that accused persons are likely to be booked soon in this case as we ll. Mr. Faisal Ka mal Alam, ASC who 
appeared on behalf of PML(N) also  expressed his grievance in respect 
of killing of workers of the political  party being represented by him, 
including two Advocates and argued that the Government had failed to enforce the Fundamental Rights of th e citizens under Article 9 of the 
Constitution, which has been elaborat ely interpreted by this Court in 
the cases of Shehla Zia  and Benazir Bhutto (ibid). His grievance is that 
although the FIRs have been registered, but so far accused persons 
have not been arrested. As far as the enjoyment of the protection of 
life and property enshrined in Article 9 of the Constitution is SMC 16/2011 ETC.  91
concerned, there is no cavil with th e proposition as this issue has been 
discussed elaborately hereinabove wi th reference to the case of Shehla 
Zia, but so far as judgme nt in the case of Benazir Bhutto , handed 
down by a 7-Member Bench of this  Court, a Bench larger than the 
present Bench hearing the instant case, wherein dismissal of 
Government of Mohtarama  Benazir Bhutto and dissolution of 
Assemblies was challenged is concerne d, it is to be noted that the 
President of Pakistan, in exercise of powers under Article 58(2)(b) of 
the Constitution, dissolved her Gove rnment and in his speech to the 
Parliament on 29.10.1995 warned that  law enforcing agencies must 
ensure that there would be no hara ssment of innocent people in the 
fight against terrorism and human and legal rights of persons are to be 
duly protected. This advice was no t heeded to and killings continued 
unabated. The Government’s fundam ental duty to maintain law and 
order situation has to be performed by proceeding in accordance with 
law. In consequence of this ju dgment, the Dissolution Order was 
maintained by a 7-Member Bench of this Court. If similar circumstances prevail today, we would be bound by that ruling. We may observe here at the cost of repe tition that under Article 148(3) of 
the Constitution, the Federal Gove rnment is bound to assist the 
Provincial Government during the period of disturbances.  
79.   Ms. Asma Jehangir, President, Supreme Court Bar Association argued that in view of  the acute law and order situation 
prevailing in Karachi, a change in the mindset for improving the 
investigation and introducing the wi tness protection system is called 
for. Her voice has been appreciated by the other representatives of the 
Bar Associations, including Mr. As hraf Samoo, President Malir Bar 
Association who appeared in CMA No.560-K/2011 and pointed out that SMC 16/2011 ETC.  92
the Government functionaries did not perform their duties due to fear 
of death at the hands of the crimin als, inasmuch as, such incidents 
had already occurred and about 92 po lice officials who participated in 
the Operation Clean up of 1992 had been murdered through target 
killing. Therefore, under the circ umstances, now the investigating 
officers are not ready to conduct investigation independently nor the 
witnesses dare to come forward beca use they do not get protection as 
already stated by the President of the Supreme Court Bar Association. 
In absence of any evidence, it is not possible to accept the statement 
that 92 police officers, who particip ated in the 1992 Operation Clean 
up have been murdered. It can only be considered a factor, but at the 
same time we, during hearing of th e cases, looking to the trend of 
investigation of cases as well as th e morale of the police, have no 
reason except to agree with the learned President of the Supreme 
Court Bar Association and other representatives of the lawyers coupled with the statement of IGP Sindh th at about 30 to 40 percent police 
officers/officials ar e non-cooperative.  
80.  In all the civilized countri es where hardened criminals are 
brought before the Court, full protec tion is provided to the witnesses 
so that they may not feel frighten ed while deposing the truth, but 
unfortunately, no such programme is  available throughout the country 
despite the commission of offences, which seem to have taken place 
and the criminals have gone Scot  free because nobody dares to 
depose against them and ultimately the blame is shifted to the Courts 
for acquitting them. In the presen t incidents, we have noted with 
concern that most of the FIRs have  been registered against unknown 
persons and the police officers in  the garb of section 173 Cr.P.C. 
wherein they are required to su bmit the challan within 14 days, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  93
instead of filing interim challan, ma ke request to the court to enlarge 
the period of investigation and afte r seeking permission feel satisfied 
in getting the FIR cancelled after declar ing it as an “A” class case. As it 
has been noted hereinabove, comparat ive table of the FIRs registered 
during one month’s period indicate s that most of the cases have 
already been declared as “A” cl ass. So far remaining cases are 
concerned, no effective progress seems to have been made, may be on account of non-commitment of the investigating officers, or for the 
reasons that no witness is ready to come forward. The situation in the city has gone from bad to worse to the extent that on our direction 18 
persons, who were abducted, were recovered by the police. Prima  
facie, such abductees were not recovere d prior to the di rection of this 
Court because no police official was in  a position to afford enmity with 
the criminals. The statements of tw o of such persons are reproduced 
hereinabove.  81.   Thus, in view of such state of affairs, how could one 
believe that, in presence of the overwhelming material, which has 
been brought before this Court in daily situation reports, reports of 
Special Branch, IB and other sources as well as material discussed 
hereinabove, the criminals will be p unished for the crimes, which they 
have committed. Therefore, under th e circumstances, change in the 
investigation and improvement in  the prosecution system is sine qua 
non, and that too, through de-politicized, honest and competent 
officers. In absence thereof the accu sed persons shall be encouraged if 
they are arrested but not senten ced knowing fully well that they 
though have brutally killed so ma ny persons in violation of the 
Fundamental Rights of the victim s, nothing would come of this 
barbarity.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  94
82.   Learned office bearers of both the Bar Associations noted 
above also pointed out that six Spec ial Courts under the Anti Terrorism 
Act 1997 were lying vacant for the last  several months despite the fact 
that the Chief Justice of High Court of Sindh was continuously pressing 
hard for the appointment of Pres iding Officers in these Courts. 
Inasmuch as, Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal,  former Judge of this Court, who 
was nominated as Judge to monitor th e cases of Anti-Terrorism Courts 
for Karachi, in view of the ob servations made in the case of Liaqat 
Hussain  (supra ), had taken up the ma tter with the concerned 
authorities to ensure early appointm ent of the Presiding Officers, but 
no progress was made. This judg ment, however, also contains 
directions which were incorporated in the judicial order to ensure 
expeditious disposal of cases, but it seems that the concerned 
authorities were not aware of the same. When we asked the learned Advocate General, Mr. Abdul Fattah Ma lik to explain the position of the 
Government, he candidly conceded th at delay has been caused in not 
making the appointment, but as th ere is no difference between the 
Chief Minister and Chief Justice of the High Court on the appointment 
of Judges already recommended, therefore, notification would be 
issued within two days. Consequently, on 07.09.2011, all the six 
Judges were appointed vide notification issued by the Government of 
Sindh. It is to be noted that the Competent Authority of the Province 
had to make the appointments on the basis of recommendations u/s 14 of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 1997. Admittedly, in the instant case 
recommendations were lying with th e Competent Authority since long, 
but it failed to make the appointmen ts and reasons of the same have 
not been disclosed by the learned Advocate General except stating 
that some delay has occurred. In the case of Liaqat Hussain (supra) , SMC 16/2011 ETC.  95
this Court had taken upon itself the exercise of monitoring the 
functioning of Anti-Terrorism Cour ts through a nominee of the Chief 
Justice, therefore, vacancies of such  Presiding Officers  cannot be left 
un-filled for an indefinite period of time and the appointments have to 
be made as early as possible instea d of causing the delay for one or 
the other reason. However, as no w appointments have taken place 
and reportedly these officers have jo ined duty, we are confident that in 
future such appointments, subject to availability of the vacancies, will 
be made promptly.   83.   Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, ASC appeared in CMA No.533-K/2011 and highlighted his grievance that one deceased Junaid Zaidi 
kidnapped in the month of April, 2011 by the terrorists/killers was 
severely tortured and was killed an d his dead body was thrown on 
Katchra Kundi. Case has been registered u/s 302/34 PPC vide FIR No. 
57 of 2011 in Malir Cantt. Police Stat ion. Similarly, one Ayub Ali was 
killed/murdered in the month of July, 2011 by the terrorists after 
entering into his house when he wa s giving Dars-e-Quran, as such FIR 
No.194/2011 was lodged at Brigade Police Station u/s 302/34 PPC. 
This application was followed by another application wherein 
documents were filed to establish allegations against the sovereignty 
of Pakistan attributing to Altaf Hussain, leader of MQM along with two CDs. Yet another application has been  filed for summoning Dr. Zulfiqar 
Mirza, former Home Minister, Government of Sindh, who according to him, had deposed on Holy Quran agai nst MQM. We have pointed out to 
the learned counsel that he should ha ve filed affidavit of Dr. Zulfiqar 
Mirza and also brought to his notice  that instant proceedings are not 
adversarial but inquisitorial, which have been initiated in the public 
interest. However, the issue being rais ed by him is of important nature SMC 16/2011 ETC.  96
and if he too considers it so, he can adopt the proper course for the 
redressal of his grievance in acco r d a n c e  w i t h  l a w .  W e  h a v e  a l s o  
pointed out that by the time it is established that Dr. Zulfiqar Mirza’s 
statement in the newspapers has no t been controverted by anyone, 
therefore, the same will be presumed to have been accepted as it is 
held in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hussan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2010 SC 265). He also emphasized that  murder of a man in view of 
the Islamic injunctions is tantam ount to murder of the entire 
humanity, therefore, murders of a ll those persons, who have been 
killed in Karachi without any reasons being Masoom-ud-Dum  clearly 
indicate failure of the Provincial Government.  As far as Islamic injunctions with regard to killing of an innocent person is concerned, 
there could not be any two opinions. This injunction of Islam has been 
elaborately discussed in the case of Federation of Pakistan v. Gul 
Hassan Khan  (PLD 1989 SC 633). However, a criminal case in 
adversarial proceedings is likely to be decided on merits after 
recording of evidence.  84.   Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, le arned ASC referred to the case 
of Sardar Farooq Ahmad Khan Leghar i v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
1999 SC 57) and contended that the Judges of the Superior Courts 
who have taken oath to protect the Constitution are bound to enforce 
Fundamental Rights conferred by the Constitution and ensure that the 
provisions of the Constitution are fully  alive and operative. It is to be 
noted that in the aforesaid report ed judgment the Proclamation of 
Emergency dated 28.05.1998, promulga ted under Article 233(1) of the 
Constitution, was questioned and the Court concluded that it was 
sufficient to hold that prima  facie there was some material on the basis 
of which the President could issue the impugned Proclamation of SMC 16/2011 ETC.  97
Emergency on account of imminent danger of external aggression. 
However, the same did not warrant passing of an order under clause (2) of Article 233 of the Constituti on suspending the enforcement of 
the Fundamental Rights. To strengthen this argument one of the 
reasons assigned in the later part of  the judgment was that in spite of 
suspension of enforcement of certai n Fundamental Rights under clause 
(2) of Article 233 of the Constituti on, Article 4 thereof remained fully 
operative, which laid down that to enjoy the protection of law and to 
be treated in accordance with law is the inalienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of every other person for the time being within Pakistan and in particular  no action detrimental to the life, 
liberty, body, reputation or proper ty of any person would be taken 
except in accordance with law. Th erefore, according to the learned 
counsel, Fundamental Rights of the citizens of Karachi have to be 
enforced by the Court in the discharge  of judicial functions. We have 
no cavil with the proposition and fully endorse the arguments of the 
learned counsel. He has also relied upon the case of Syed Jalal 
Mehmood Shah v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1999 SC 395). In this 
case, the order dated 30.10.1998 issued by the Federal Government 
under paragraph (c) of clause (2) of  Article 232 of the Constitution, 
pursuant to the declaration of Proclamation of Emergency dated 
28.05.1998 under Article 23 2 of the Constitution was challenged. The 
order referred hereinbefore was followed by another order dated 10.11.1998, issued by the Federal Government, in pursuance whereof the operation of Article 54 read with  Article 127 relating to summoning 
and prorogation of the Provincial Assembly was suspended; however, 
no question with regard to the en forcement of Fundamental Rights was 
involved, therefore, the cited judg ment in view of the facts and SMC 16/2011 ETC.  98
circumstances of the present case  is not applicable. He further 
contended that Jamat-e-Islami  had issued a White Paper according to 
which sufferings of the citizens of Karachi were on account of 
commission of heinous crimes in the city since 1985, which were being 
committed by one party (MQM) and it was admitted and declared by 
the Government, that serious lawful  action was, therefore, taken 
against them by the Government.  85.   Similarly, Awami Tehrik  Party, through its President Mr. 
Rasool Bux Palijo, during the arguments stated that MQM was 
responsible for target killing, attack s on the police, etc., and that MQM 
was a challenge to the country, ther efore, a ban be imposed on this 
party as innocent people were su ffering at their hands and people 
were so overawed that due to fe ar created by th em, no body was 
ready to go before the police. He ma intained that the people of Karachi 
are absolutely insecure, as such, wa ys and means be found out to give 
relief to them otherwise there was ev ery likelihood that in the ultimate 
result there could be uncontrollable anarchy as the people in the town finding themselves without protection to their dignity, life, liberty and 
property might, as a last resort , take the law in their hands.  
86.   Mr. Irfan Ullah Marwat, peti tioner, who appeared in person 
being the President of Pashtun  Punjabi  Ittehad  too, raised similar voice 
against MQM.  87.   From the material so brou ght on record, namely, reports of 
the JIT filed by Syed Iftikhar Hu ssain Gillani, learned ASC, report 
submitted by the Provincial Gove rnment prepared by its Special 
Branch, report of the IB and inform ation collected from other credible 
sources during in camera briefing by  ISI does highlight the role of the 
stakeholders and political part ies, namely, ANP, PPP, MQM, Sunni SMC 16/2011 ETC.  99
Tehrik, Jamat-e-Islami , etc. that in the ranks of these political parties, 
criminals have succeeded in making their way, some of whom are now 
involved in target killing, land grabbing, drug mafia , recovery of bhutta  
as well as forcible recovery of skins of animals during Eid-ul-Azha  and 
due to their vested interests, there is a turf war. In this context the 
following statement of Mr. Rehman Malik Federal Interior Minister 
published in Daily Dawn dated 13. 09.2011 is quite pertinent: -   
“Interior Minister Rehman Ma lik said on Tuesday that 
‘criminals’ arrested in Karach i during the current operation 
belonged to all political parties.  
 The government has evidences (audio and video tapes) against them which will be made  public if permitted by the 
Supreme Court.   “I will consult with the federation’s lawyer, Babar Awan, 
about getting permission from the Supreme Court to make 
the names of criminals public,” he told reporters at the National Press Club.   Although, he said, the people arrested in Karachi belonged 
to all political parties, he was of the view that they had not been recruited by the partie s, but they somehow managed 
to get refuge in them after committing crimes.   He said that police and Rangers had arrested 48 target killers, 90 criminals and 28 extortionists and seized 308 weapons.  The operation, he said, was being carried out without any discrimination, with the sole objective being to restore 
normality and peace in the city. 
 Expressing satisfaction over the way the operation was being carried out, he said ther e were ‘no-go areas’ in the 
city and police and Rangers were  free to take action even 
in such areas where they co uld not enter in the past. 
 Mr. Malik said flags of political  parties had been removed in 
various places and around 14,000 acres of land occupied by the land mafia had been recovered.  Rebuffing allegations leveled by the Leader of Opposition in 
the National Assembly, Mr. Malik said that he had no links with any terrorist. He said he  had good relations with the 
Muttahida Qaumi Movement which was in parliament with 
people’s mandate. 
 SMC 16/2011 ETC.  100
“It will be unjustified to declare any political party 
‘terrorist’ without any evidence,” he said. 
 Commenting on an allegation leveled against him by PPP 
leader Zulfikar Mirza, he said he had not released any criminal in Karachi and if anyone had evidence he could present in the court.  
The minister claimed that no foreign security agency was 
operating in the country, a dding that he had advised 
foreigners to visit only permi tted areas because of security 
concerns.  He said a committee had been fo rmed to probe an incident 
in which journalists of a pr ivate TV channel had been 
tortured by some unidentifie d elements. Action will be 
taken on the basis of findings of this committee.  “A judicial commission was formed on the demand of journalists to probe into the killing of Saleem Shehzad and 
the commission has submitted it s report to the interior 
ministry which I have handed ov er to NPC’s President Afzal 
Butt,” he said. 
 
The minister said that four people had been arrested in the case about murder of journalist Wali Khan Babar.”  
 Inasmuch as, the Prime Minister al so admitted more than once that 
PPP men were also involved in violen ce in Karachi. Reference is made 
to the news item published in  The News International dated 
25.08.2011:-  
“Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani on Wednesday ruled out 
a military operation in Karachi unless all other options were exhausted first but ad mitted before his cabinet 
colleagues that PPP men were al so involved in the Karachi 
killings.  A cabinet minister confided to The News that the prime 
minister told the cabinet meet ing that the law enforcement 
agencies in Karachi were confident to control the deteriorating law and order situation in the city in just a fortnight’s time provided they were given a free hand.  However, the minister did not explain if the much-demanded free hand is being gi ven to the law enforcers to 
apprehend and punish the criminal elements there without any fear and favour.  Prime Minister Gilani despite being chief executive is not 
relevant on key policy and administrative matters including 
Karachi politics as the Presid ency is calling the shots and 
takes decisions on such matters. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  101
 
The prime minister, according to  the source, said that the 
law enforcement agencies are seeking a free hand and demanding that there should be  no political interference 
from any side to ensure early peace and stop target killings. Political interference and the backing of criminals 
and killers by the political pa rties are seen as the major 
hurdles in the way of du rable peace in the city. 
 
Briefing the cabinet about the Karachi situation, the prime 
minister admitted that besides the MQM and ANP, the PPP men whom Gilani described as “our men” are also involved 
in the Karachi killings.  The cabinet ministers were almost unanimous to demand that the law enforcement agencies should be given a free hand to get hold of the cr iminals, target killers and 
gangsters irrespective of  their party affiliation. 
 Some of the ministers even de manded that the information 
regarding such criminals, kille rs and gangsters should be 
made public without any political considerations. The cabinet was told that there are nine troubled areas in 
Karachi which require focus of  the law enforcers to check 
crime and curb target killing.  The prime minister while referring to a demand for the deployment of army in Ka rachi to launch operations 
against the criminal elements  said that the government 
would not deploy the army in Karachi till the time all other options were availed.  The cabinet source disclosed that the Sindh government is also unhappy with the interference from the federal government through interior minister into the Karachi 
situation. The source said that Prime Minister Gilani 
sounded the provincial governme nt’s urge to let it settle 
the problem that falls within the provincial domain. 
 
Only recently provincial minister  Dr Zulfikar Mirza is said to 
have blasted the interior minister during a high-level official meeting in Karachi for the latter’s uncalled for 
interference into the Karachi a ffairs. Later, however, Mirza 
was summoned to Islamabad by President Zardari and put up a media show with Rehman Malik to show that there was no ill will between them.”  
 Similarly, the President of Pakistan is  fully aware of the situation as it 
is evident from various news items appearing in different newspapers.  
88.  As all the stakeholders are desirous of maintaining their 
hold on the economic resources of Ka rachi, therefore, it is imperative 
for all concerned to take necessary  steps and disband the militant SMC 16/2011 ETC.  102
outfits voluntarily for the sake of  Karachi as well as this country 
because on account of their crimin al activities a loss of about 2.5 
billion is being caused daily to th e Government and ultimately this 
burden is passed on to the general public.  All the circumstances which 
are prevailing in Karachi based on credible information seem to be 
very serious and if the situat ion of law and order is not 
controlled/improved, happening of a major debacle in Karachi city cannot be overruled, therefore, it is  high time for the politicians in 
particular to co-operate with each other for making Karachi a peaceful city.  89.   As for as banning of MQM is concerned on the basis of the 
material and the other information placed before us as well as the 
statement of Dr. Zulfiqar Mirza, fo rmer Home Minister, Government of 
Sindh, which is sought to be produc ed by Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, it 
may be observed, subject to all ju st exceptions, that the instant 
probono  publico  proceedings, which are essentially inquisitorial in 
nature, cannot be allowed to assu me an adversarial character.  
90.  Moreover, under Article 17(2) it is the duty of the Federal Government to declare that a politic al party has been formed or is 
operating in a manner prejudicial to  the sovereignty or integrity of 
Pakistan and within fifteen days of  such declaration, refer the matter 
to the Supreme Court whose decision on such reference shall be final, 
therefore, no further comment on this  aspect of the case, lest it may 
cause prejudice to any of the parties, is called for.  91.   According to the available record, land grabbing is one of 
the factors responsible for causing di sturbances in Karachi and there is 
no denial by anyone appearing before  the Court. Same position is in 
respect of drug trafficking, etc. Crimes are also being committed at SMC 16/2011 ETC.  103
large scale by foreign nationals – nearly 2.5 m illion in number – 
belonging to different countries in cluding Bangladesh, Burma, India, 
etc. As far as the question of de-weaponization is concerned, no one amongst the interveners has opposed it, therefore, a methodology has 
to be devised by the Government by  following the law on the subject 
i.e. Surrender of Illicit Arms Act, 1991, and/or if need be, further laws 
on the subject can be enacted/promul gated to achieve this object. In 
this behalf, in Bangladesh following steps were taken.  
(i)  Illegal arms collection programme carried out in 
2002-2003 as part of Bangladesh’s crackdown on criminals, operation Clean Heart. 
(ii) Bangladesh’s biggest illegal arms haul took place in 
Chittagang on 02.04.2004. 
 92.   An identical situation was prevailing in Malaysia and that 
Government with full commitment and sincerity had also collected 
illicit arms from the criminals. Simila rly, this task can be completed in 
our country as well; if there is honest commitment on the part of the law enforcing agencies but in the in stant case without depoliticizing the 
police, positive result apparently se ems to be an uphill task, however, 
to ensure peace in Karachi, certai n steps will have to be taken. The 
law enforcing agencies will have to be de-politicized as well as for 
recovery of illicit arms effective meas ures will have to be taken under 
a proper programme to be launched by the Gove rnment. As far as the 
question of presence of 2.5 million alie ns in Karachi is concerned, it is 
more alarming compared to the activi ties of the criminals involved in 
heinous crimes, like target killing, etc. This aspect of the case would reveal that the presence of such persons is not only a factor for 
increase in crime, but at the same  time without proper registration, 
they are a burden on the nation al economy, inasmuch as their 
presence can give rise to so ma ny other administrative problems, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  104
including obtaining of National Iden tity Cards by them . If they have 
succeeded in this venture and clai m themselves to be citizens of 
Pakistan and have also succeeded in registering their names in the 
electoral list, it would be tantamount  to depriving the actual electorate 
from choosing their representati ves, inasmuch as due to their 
presence, areas have expanded consid erably, which directly affects the 
delimitation of the constituencies meant for holding elections of the 
Provincial Assembly and the Nati onal Assembly, therefore, the 
Government should take immediate ac tion against them in accordance 
with law, namely, the Foreigners  Act. NADRA and the Police must 
undertake a careful cleansing proces s of such people and NADRA must 
have separate records and computer files based on proper and cogent 
evidence. NADRA and police should co -operate in Karachi through an 
intensive drive to identify foreigne rs, block their NIC cards after due 
process of law and special teams sh ould be appointed and dedicated 
for this job by DG NADRA and IGP so that this can be completed in the 
course of next one year or so. Then the law must take it own course in 
each case. This must be given high priority. 93.   The learned Attorney Gene ral, in his submissions, also 
referred to the Quranic verse, viz ., killing of one person is killing the 
entire humanity, therefore, there could not be two opinions that 
killings in Karachi during the last few months are condemnable, but for 
such reason, question for determin ation would be as to whether the 
State can be held responsible for the actions of the criminals, who 
have committed crimes, or the individuals are to be held responsible for their acts under the relevant laws independently. The learned 
Attorney General, as per the directio ns of this Court contained in the 
order dated 24.08.2011, has placed on  record reports of the Special SMC 16/2011 ETC.  105
Branch of Police, Government of  Sindh and the IB, and he also 
arranged a presentation by ISI (h owever, he was not present during 
the presentation). As far as commission  of crimes is concerned, it is 
always done by the accused person s individually or collectively. 
Ordinarily, when any crime is co mmitted by an individual, he is 
considered to be the accused of th e State for violating its laws and 
when crimes individually or collectively are committed by the 
perpetrators challenging the authority of the Government creating anarchy, the State is bound to contro l the crimes and at the same time 
protect its citizens against the crimin als. In the instant case, according 
to the figures submitted by Mr. A bdul Fattah Malik, learned Advocate 
General, Sindh, during the hearin g, in the current year 2011, 1310 
persons have been murdered, whereas,  in one month, figures of which 
have been obtained by the Court vide order dated 24.08.2011, 
admittedly, 306 persons have been  murdered and 159 persons have 
been injured. When murders of i nnocent persons at the hands of 
perpetrators who belong to differe nt communities are being committed 
as a matter for vengeance and as tit for tat without control of the 
executive authorities of the Provinci al Government, it clearly indicates 
that lawlessness has reached a po int where the State through the 
Provincial Government in exercise of  its executive authority is not in a 
position to provide security to its citizens and on account of lack of 
administrative authority of the Go vernment, so many persons have 
been deprived of their right to life and liberty enshrined in Article 9 of 
the Constitution.   94.   As far as the arguments of the learned Attorney General that under the Constitution a procedure has been provided for the 
removal of the Provincial and Fede ral Governments ruling the country SMC 16/2011 ETC.  106
after the election, therefore, it could only be possible when the 
procedure so laid down in the Constitu tion is followed. There is no cavil 
with this proposition; however, in the instant proceedings, this 
argument is not relevant. Learned Attorney General has also stated 
that as far as the suggestions ma de before the Court for imposing 
Emergency under Articles 233 and 2 34 of the Constitution, or calling 
the Army in aid of civilian administration under Article 245 of the Constitution, or the steps to be take n by the Provincial Government in 
this behalf are the actions, wh ich are purely for the Federal 
Government or the Provincial Govern ment to initiate and no direction 
can be given by the Court in this respect. Suffice it to observe that the Federal Government is duty bo und under Article 148(3) of the 
Constitution to protect every Provin ce against internal disturbances 
and to ensure that the Government of  every Province is  carried on in 
accordance with the provisions of  the Constitution, therefore, the 
suggestion put forward during the argu ments on behalf of some of the 
parties does not mean that this Co urt has issued the directions. Only 
attention of the Federal Governme nt has been drawn towards the 
Constitutional provisions which, a ccording to their suggestions, should 
also be invoked for maintaining law and order in the Province of Sindh 
instead of paving way for any unconstitutional action by any 
adventurer as it had been happening in the past. Reference may be made to the cases of Haji  Muhammad Saifullah Khan  (supra ), 
Khawaja Ahmad Tariq Rahim  (supra) and Benazir Bhutto (supra ). 
Similarly, exercise of the authorit y to call Army in aid of civil 
administration to control distur bances under Article 245 of the 
Constitution is only one of the op tions, which lies with the Federal SMC 16/2011 ETC.  107
Government, as such its consequences  are bound to follow strictly in 
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.  95.  Learned Attorney has agreed  that this Court has power to 
pass appropriate orders as called for in view of the facts and 
circumstances, but his opinion was that as now situation is 
manageable and under control, ther efore, in the instant proceedings 
no order is required to be passed. For the reasons which we have 
already mentioned hereinabove, we ar e not in a position to subscribe 
to his viewpoint because overwhelming material is available on record, reference of which has already been  made hereinabove repeatedly, to 
persuade us to form an opinion that bloodshed, arson, kidnapping/abduction for ransom , widespread violence, illegal 
collection of money ( bhatta ) from traders, etc., were being committed 
within the knowledge of the State through Provincial Government/Executive but it remained a silent spectator and prima-facie failed to take appropriate action, may be for some political 
reasons, but the Constitution do es not allow the Executive to 
compromise its position at the cost of innocent citizens who lost their 
lives, property, liberty and dignity because of the expediency of the 
Provincial or Federal Government. It may not be out of context to 
mention here that despite hearing of  this case, during course whereof 
law enforcing agencies have been asked time and again to bring the 
criminals to book without any discr imination, the criminals continued 
to harass the general public/innocent  citizens continuously, as in the 
recent past a trader has been kidn apped for ransom from Sher Shah 
Kabari Market. We have been informed  during the hearing that there is 
a strike in the market and accuse d persons have demanded ransom, 
but so far the matter has not been fi nalized/resolved. On our direction, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  108
concerned SSP of the area appear ed in Court and stated that 
pickets/police check posts have been  established at different places, 
but despite that, there is  no control over the cr imes. We have pointed 
out to the learned Attorney General that this is high time when the 
Executive of the Provincial Govern ment, instead of compromising the 
position, on account of any reas ons known to them, should come 
forward with iron hands to control the crimes. We may point out here 
that the material so brought on re cord and the presentation which has 
been given by the Intelligence Agen cy, must also have been brought 
to the notice of the Executive of th e Province and by the time it has 
become known to everyone about the persons involved in causing 
disturbances because on such a la rge scale internal disturbances 
cannot take place without the support  or passivity of the persons who 
are themselves at the helm of af fairs and the Provincial Executive 
Authorities in such a state of la wlessness ought to have felt no 
hesitation to bring them to book, but here it appears that there are 
certain expediencies which are preven ting them to do so. In such an 
abnormal situation the Federal Government also cannot be considered to be oblivious of the happenings,  which presumably knows all these 
facts obviously prevailing in the economic hub of country, as the 
reports which we have gone throug h must have been brought to the 
notice of the Chief Executive of the Federal Government and other 
authorities as well, therefore, they  should have swiftly moved in to 
take action in order to ensure th at the Provincial Government is 
allowed to work smoothly in accordan ce with the Constitution. Leaned 
Advocate General who has also poin ted out in his arguments that in 
the police department, 1100 appointments have been made illegally. 
At the same time, the IGP Sindh wh o was present in the Court during SMC 16/2011 ETC.  109
the hearing, also conceded that for the last about 10 to  15 years, five 
hundred thousands arms licenses have been issued by the Home 
Department for arms and ammunition  of prohibited bore, however, 
according to him, with the assistance  of NADRA, an exercise is about 
to commence to verify the status of the licences. He added that in the 
past, trucks of arms and ammunition s used to be unloaded before the 
police stations but police did not da re to check them. Mr. Abdul Fattah 
Malik, learned Advocate General made before the Court many 
revelations, but did not disclose the names of the groups who were challenging the writ of the Govern ment and undermining its authority 
through target killings, bhatta  collection, etc., which are committed, 
not for any ethnic reason, but for settling of accounts by groups 
among themselves in an attempt to es tablish their authority in the city 
of Karachi otherwise anyone or al l of them would come forward to 
point out the names of militant outf its involved in the violation of 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens. 96.   From the material so placed on record by the Advocate General it is evident that the dist urbances in the Province are not 
recent ones, but it has been going on  for the last many years, in which 
a large number of innocent persons have been killed by way of tit for 
tat and the authorities, in the past as well have failed to secure their 
lives, liberties, etc. According to  learned Advocate General, the 
Province of Sindh being the land of Shah Abdul Laif Bhitai and Sachal 
Sarmast had been a peaceful plac e where, after Partition highly 
educated people migrated to Pakistan . They were living peacefully with 
original residents of Sindh, but the menace of lawlessness started from 
the period shown in the charts repr oduced hereinabove. He conceded 
that 2.5 million aliens are also  living in Karachi without any SMC 16/2011 ETC.  110
registration, but so far the Gove rnment could not deport them. 
However, we have pointed out to hi m that organized crimes are being 
committed in Karachi and there is vi olation of the Fundamental Rights 
of innocent people and the Government has failed to protect the rights 
of the citizens, however, individual  type of crime or killing of any 
person on account of personal enmity is not unusual, and for that matter the Executive Authorities cannot be held responsible, but it is 
to be noted that in the instant case, as discussed hereinabove in detail, the Executive Authority of th e Province had prima-facie failed to 
exercise its powers to protect the Fu ndamental Rights of the citizens.  
97.   Barrister Zafarullah appeared  in Constitution Petition No. 
61 of 2011 wherein following prayer has been made: -  
(1) It is therefore respectfully  prayed that the judicial 
Commission under the supervi sion of Supreme Court 
of Pakistan may be appointed, any Hon. Judge sitting 
or retired may be appoin ted as its Chairman.  
(2) It is further prayed that under in no circumstances 
Pakistan Army may be summoned to meet the 
situation in Karachi or to restore the law and order, 
since it is trap desired by foreign forces and will be 
breach of Articles 55 & 56 UNO and other resolutions 
of General Assembly.”  
 
The learned counsel has referred to the Charter of United Nations, 
importance of human rights and also stated that had the Court not taken cognizance of the matter, the crime rate would not have 
declined  and if target killings, et c. had continued unabated, it would 
have provided a cause of interferen ce to the United Nation Forces. 
Except for the dramatic drop in cr ime rate, we do not entertain this 
argument because we are of the opin ion that in this country there is a 
written Constitution, which if impl emented through the Federal and the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  111
Provincial Governments by strictly adhering to its provisions without 
any political considerations, the si tuation of law and order can be 
managed. He also opposed the interve ntion of the Army by calling it in 
the aid of Civil Administration. This  issue has already been discussed in 
the preceding paragraphs, therefore,  the same need not be further 
dilated upon. 98.   Mr. Anwar Masoor Khan, Pr esident of Sindh High Court Bar 
Association, at the outset, conten ded that Karachi is faced with 
complex issues of law and order, wh ich had its origin in the politico-
ethnic violence in which different communities speaking different languages like Urdu, Pashto, Balochi, Sindhi, Punjabi , etc. were 
involved. However, he admitted th at members of these communities 
have been involved in such like activities mainly for the socio-
economic reasons. As the resident s of Karachi in different areas, 
particularly where violence is at it s peak, are even deprived of basic 
amenities of life, therefore, thes e poor persons are being used by 
different vested interests including political parties/groups to achieve 
their ulterior objectives and to wa tch their economic interests. These 
persons/groups having so called ve sted interests are themselves well 
off having established businesses and are not suffering from any 
economic problem. The police is so scared of them that they remain 
under the influence of these groups  who use poor persons to achieve 
their illicit objectives. Inasmuch as, if an ordinary person approaches 
the police, his FIR is not registered and if a victim succeeds in getting 
the case registered, prosecution does  not take interest, as a result 
whereof their cases fail. Besides,  according to him, mostly the 
perpetrators belong to an orga nized group having blessings and 
support of political parties, therefor e, the witnesses are so scared that SMC 16/2011 ETC.  112
they avoid to appear in court. Ther efore, without addressing the afore-
noted problems of persons belongin g to different communities who fall 
within category of less resourceful pe rsons, the law and order situation 
prevailing in the city cannot be cont rolled. He referred to a number of 
cases from the Indian Jurisdiction and the reports of the Indian Law 
Commission. However, he conceded  that no witness protection 
program is available. When we invi ted his attention towards sections 
21, 21A, 21B, 21C of the Anti-Ter rorism Act, 1997 which provide 
guidelines for the protection of Judges, he submitted that these 
provisions of law have also not been  made applicable fully, as a result 
whereof even in Anti-Terrorism Co urts, a large number of accused 
have gone scot-free. Learned counsel  stated that there are political 
parties who apparently are acting against the interests of the country 
and are involved in disturbing the la w and order in Karachi, to achieve 
their nefarious objects because th e persons controlling such parties 
have got no stake in Pakistan. In asmuch as, there are persons who 
enjoy dual nationality or who have  vast unexplained and unaccounted 
for assets outside Pakistan or who are not allied with any political party and who are against the sove reignty of the country, all such 
persons are required to be dealt with  according to the Constitution. We 
have pointed out to him that Articl e 17 of the Constitu tion read with 
section 15 of the Political Parties Order, 2002 can be invoked if the 
Government succeeds in establishi ng that any political party is 
operating in a manner prejudicial to  the sovereignty or integrity of 
Pakistan. Learned counsel emphasized that Article 4 of the Constitution is one of the most important Articles , under which a citizen is entitled 
to enjoy the protection of law and to  be treated in accordance with law 
being his inalienable right, ther efore, this Article confers the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  113
Fundamental Rights upon a person to  seek security of life or liberty 
from the State and similarly, Articl es 14, 18 and 24 in respect of 
dignity of man, freedom of trad e, business and profession and 
protection of property. Whereas in Karachi for the last many years the 
State/Provincial Government had failed to implement their 
Fundamental Rights and citizens are not safe and secure. According to 
him, too, there are target killings, murders, bhatta  mafia , land mafia, 
drug mafia, dead bodies in bags ar e found lying in the streets and the 
accused persons on account of their influences or being desperate and 
hardened criminals, could not be arrested. He stated that as per 
reports, which have been placed on record by different agencies 
without claiming confidentiality an d other information which has been 
received by this Court, furnish su fficient evidence to hold that the 
Provincial Government has not been ab le to act in accordance with the 
Constitution to protect the dignity,  freedom of trade, business and 
profession and property . He has referred to Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan v. Abdul Wali Khan  (PLD 1976 SC 57), PLD 2004 SC 363 to 
emphasize that it is the duty of the Government to maintain law and 
order. We have inquired from him as to whether in a situation where 
criminals belonging to all political pa rties are involved in disturbing the 
law and order, whether the Execut ive/Provincial Government can 
maintain the law and order, he st ated that, in fact, the prevailing 
situation indicates that there is no will on the part of the Executive to 
run the government according to th e Constitution otherwise it would 
not be difficult to remove such elements from their rank and file. In 
this behalf, it is to be noted th at in the Daily Dawn dated 14.09.2011, 
the Federal Interior Minister made a statement that criminals arrested 
in Karachi during the targeted oper ation belong to different political SMC 16/2011 ETC.  114
parties and that the Government has evidence (audio and video) 
against them, which will be used ag ainst them if permitted by this 
Court. However, he stated that su ch criminals have not been deputed 
by the political parties, but somehow such elements have managed to 
get refuge behind them after committi ng crimes. During hearing of this 
case, we have observed time and again that the political parties 
represented before us asserted in categorical terms, that 
criminals/militant outfits are not pa rt of their political parties and 
declared that whosoever claims association with any political party, is 
incorrect. It is to be noted that in the situation as the Interior Minister 
has himself explained, it has become admittedly a highly difficult task 
for the Provincial Government to main tain law and order. Be that as it 
may, this all depends upon the po litical considerations in respect 
whereof we would not like to comm ent, but we have to confine 
ourselves only to the extent of the question which has been raised in 
the order dated 24.08.2011, namely, the situation of law and order which has been disturbed on account of bloodshed, arson, 
kidnapping/abduction for ransom , widespread violence, illegal 
collection of money ( bhatta ) from traders, etc.  
99.   Mr. Abdul Fattah Malik, AG Sindh has submitted a synopsis 
of his arguments on behalf of the Government of Sindh. It may be 
noted that in fact he had to a ppear on the Court notice and the 
Province of Sindh put up its appe arance through Mr. Abdul Hafeez 
Pirzada, leanred Sr. ASC who has also filed, under instructions, 
suggestions which have been reproduced hereinabove. However, he reserved his right to further argu e the case after the arguments of 
learned counsel appearing on behalf the interveners, particularly Syed 
Iftikahr Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC wh o placed on record reports of the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  115
JIT. In the meanwhile, Intelligence Agencies also shared classified 
information with the Bench. The DG Rangers also appeared in person 
and made submissions which have been dealt with hereinabove, 
including one that in Karachi the si tuation of law and order is worse 
than that of North Waziristan, but surprisingly on 14.09.2011 the 
learned Advocate General conveyed that Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, 
learned Sr. ASC feels contented with the arguments made earlier and does not want to make any furthe r arguments before the Bench. The 
points he has put up before th e Court have been dealt with 
hereinabove, particularly with regard  to the statement of fact in which 
he has suggested that this Court sh ould give a wake up call to the 
Provincial Government, which accordin g to him means that in the past 
violation of Fundamental Rights of th e citizens particularly those whose 
lives and properties have not been secured, was admitted and for the future he was asking the Court to gi ve a wake up call to the Provincial 
Government.  100.  The learned Advocate General in the written submissions has stated as follows:-  
(1) That the government of Sindh has never failed to deal with 
the law and order situation in the Province of Sindh and Government of Sindh is fully de termined to protect the life, 
liberty, dignity, property and freedom of general public.  
(2) That the government of  Sindh and law enforcement 
agencies along with the rele vant authorities are fully 
competent to control, curb and deal with any internal disturbance and the government of Sindh has proved it in 
the matter of:- 
(a) Control of Law and Order situation in Katcha area 
and other parts of internal Sindh.  
(b) To bring back normal cy in the Law and order 
situation in Karachi. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  116
(3) That the Government of Sindh denounces all forms of 
violence, terrorist activities, subversion and lawlessness in 
the Province and in this regard the government of Sindh 
seeks support from all the political parties.  
(4) That the Government of Sindh has unshaken, irreversible 
commitment and determination to  deal with the criminals 
in city of Karachi in particular  and on the province level at 
large and no party affiliation would deter its will and 
commitment.  
(5) That the government of Sindh has taken concrete steps 
from prevention and contro l of crime including the 
d e p l o y m e n t  o f  R a n g e r s  i n  t h e  c i t y  o f  K a r a c h i ,  a s  w e l l  a s  
deployment of additional forces by transfer from the 
Interior of Sindh of |Karachi.  
(6) That the coalition Government  of the Province of Sindh has 
strong will of continuing action against criminals in Karachi and in order to deal with any uprising in crime rate, 
concrete steps have been ta ken by Government of Sindh 
to enhance the capacity of the police, to raise the moral of 
the police as well as to streng then this institution at the 
provincial level.  
(7) It is categorically made clear that at no stages of these 
proceedings the Government of Sindh as conceded that it 
failed to control this situation or has shown any slackness.  
(8) It is regrettable that on beha lf of political groups appearing 
before this Court, political insinuation and allegations were leveled upon the ruling coalit ion Government of Sindh in 
sheer violation and disregard of the observations made by 
this Court that these proceedings are no-adversarial.  
(9) Present elected Governme nt is mandated by the 
constitution to serve the peop le of Sindh for 05 years, 
therefore, the Government of Sindh has made short term, 
midterm and long term strategi es to eradicate the crime at 
all costs.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  117
(10) It is worth mentioning that the province of Sindh 
unfortunately is his very severe ly this year as well as it 
was hit last year by the natural calamity. The Government 
of Sindh successfully rehabilitat ed millions of affectees of 
last year flood, however due to global changes in the 
climate Government of Sindh is demonstrating full resolve, utmost will and continuous efforts to enhance capacity for 
dealing with such disaster. Ho wever, side by side full 
attention is being given to ot her issues being faced by the 
people of this province.  
 
101.   The reports of JIT, CID, Special Branch of Police and IB 
and other material is available on record including presentation given 
by the IG Police, the submissions made by Major General Aijaz Ahmad 
Chaudhry, DG Rangers and admission of  IG Police to the effect that 30 
to 40 percent police officials ar e non-cooperative because of their 
appointments on political consideratio ns, coupled with the fact that it 
is the basic duty of the police to ma intain the law and order, the police 
has been politicized/demoralized. The learned Advocate General has 
also admitted that 1100 appointments made on political considerations 
have already been set aside. The stand taken by him in his synopsis seems to be inconsistent and not acceptable in view of the above 
facts. It is to be noted that as per his own statement filed in Court, 
following persons have been murdered  during the last three years i.e. 
2008 to 2011:- 
2008:   1142 
2009:  1083 
2010:  1484 
2011:  1311 (up to 31.08.2011)  
 
He emphasized that the law enforc ing agencies have succeeded in 
causing arrest and in this behalf he has filed the statement for the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  118
months of January to September, 2011  prepared by the Karachi police, 
which reads as under:-   
Y
e
a
r Number 
of 
encounter
s Gang 
Busted Dacoit 
Killed Dacoit/ 
criminals 
arrested Arrested 
P.Os Abs MDs 
2
010 704 512 64 5286 354 6427 
0 
 
 However, we have noted that about 80 percent FIRs, which have been 
registered during the last one month,  have been cancelled by declaring 
them as “A” class and whatever pr ogress has been made in causing 
arrests of the accused, it is after instant proceedings by this Court.  
We have also noted as mentio ned hereinabove that the Chief 
Secretary and the IGP Sindh have categorically stated that now 
powers have been given to the Ranger s, so the question arises as to 
why the Rangers were not put into ac tion earlier when this force was 
already deployed in the Province of Sindh from 1994 onward; and why 
the Provincial Government was not interested in securing the life, 
property and dignity of the citize ns. Admissions made by the IGP in 
respect of no-go areas, drug mafia and the statement of the Interior 
Minister referred to above are suffici ent to hold that the Provincial 
Government had no intention to secu re the life and property of the 
people in the true spirit of Article 4 of the Constitution, envisaging that 
all citizens are entitled to enjoy th e protection of la w and are required 
to be treated in accordance with law. What protection was given to 
those persons who have lost their lives and property? While dealing 
with the argument of the learned Attorney General, we have already SMC 16/2011 ETC.  119
emphasized that the alleged cr imes have not been committed 
ordinarily, but these are organized cr imes and it was the duty of the 
Provincial Government to have contro lled the same, but it is only after 
the Court took suo motu  notice that some improvement seems to have 
been made in the law & order situation in Karachi.  
102.  Khawaja Naveed Ahmed, learned ASC stated that he represents the Friends of Lyari Inte rnational, a UK based organization. 
According to his version, since 2009  till date, 65 Balochi speaking 
people have been killed in target killings, but so far no appropriate 
action has been taken to trace the accused persons, therefore, it is not understandable as to whom they shou ld blame for such atrocities. It 
may be observed here that in respec t of all the cases in which human 
beings have been killed irrespective of their ethnic origins, it is the 
duty of the State/Executive to en sure action and bring the accused 
persons to book.   103.   Dr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC commenced his arguments by reciting verses No.22 & 23 from Sura  Almaida. Translation from Arabic 
to English has been reproduced hereinbelow: -  
“[5:22] ‘O my people, enter the Holy Land which Allah has 
ordained for you and do not turn back, for then you will turn losers’. 
 
[5:23] They said, ‘O Moses, th ere is in that land a haughty 
and powerful people, and we shall not enter it until they go 
forth from it. But if they go fo rth from it, then we will enter 
it’.” 
In view of the above Injunction of Islam, as we have already noted in 
the opening Para of the judgment that  if anyone killed a person not in 
retaliation of murder, or to spread mischief in the land, it would be as 
if he killed all mankind, and if anyone  saved a life, it would be as if he SMC 16/2011 ETC.  120
saved all mankind, which is to be accepted by all the Muslims. It is 
clear from the above verses that  life of a human being is very 
precious, therefore, Allah Almighty  has condemned the killing of even 
a single human being and has equate d it with the killing of the whole 
humanity, and vice versa, if a man is saved, the whole humanity will 
be deemed to have been saved.  104.  Leaned counsel candidly stated that he supports the suo 
motu jurisdiction of this Court, as according to him, in terms of Article 
29 of the Constitution, the judicia ry being one of the organs of the 
State can exercise such jurisdiction.  105.  However, he complained th at in respect of incident of 
18.10.2007, which took place in Karachi wherein Mohtarama  Benazir 
Bhutto , former Prime Minister of Pa kistan was attacked by the 
terrorists and so many persons lost  their lives, according to him, 
despite request made by him on 27.10.2007 before a Bench comprising one of us (Mr. Justic e Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry) and 
Mr. Justice (R) Javed Iqbal, no such action was taken by this Court. It 
is to be noted that the statement so made by him was not based on 
correct information, inasmuch as Suo Motu Case No. 25 of 2007 was 
registered wherein, on 01.11.2007, he personally appeared voluntarily 
and comments were called, howeve r, subsequently on 07.01.2007 
Justice (R) Abdul Hameed Dogar (so called Chief Justice) directed the 
office to keep that file pendin g without any further proceeding.  
106.  According to the learned counsel, the executive authority 
of the Federation includes the four  Provinces, Federally Administered 
Tribal Areas administered through th e President, the Islamabad Capital 
Territory, Gilgit and Baltistan, form erly known as FANA, whereas, in 
respect of Province of Sindh, the authority of the Provincial SMC 16/2011 ETC.  121
Government extends to 23 districts of  the Province of Sindh. Out of 
these areas, internal disturbance relating to law and order had allegedly taken place only in the city of Karachi. So, his stance is that 
the Executive Authority has failed ne ither at the federal nor at the 
provincial level. He, however, admitte d that in terms of  Article 232(1) 
read with Article 148(3) of the Constitution, there is internal disturbance in Karachi.  107.   Learned counsel further ar gued that neither the Federal 
Government nor the Provincial Gove rnment has failed to maintain the 
law and order in the Province of Sind h and any declaration, if made by 
this Court, which is the most cred ible institution of the State of 
Pakistan, being the final arbiter of all disputes and where all 
interpretation ends, may invite some  global trouble with very serious 
repercussions, inasmuch as the count ry is in the middle of a war on 
the western and eastern fronts and th e latter front is more hostile and 
sensitive, therefore, an attempt is  being made by someone to obtain 
such a declaration that the executiv e authority has fail ed to deliver. 
According to him, such a declaratio n cannot be made as Pakistan is a 
nuclear State, therefore, how can it fail in maintaining its affairs. 
Argument so raised by the learned counsel has no substance. Perhaps 
he has lost sight of two important legal expressions, namely, the State 
and Executive or the Government. Dr. Babar Awan, learned counsel 
has substituted the term “executive” with the “state”. Hence this requires some elaboration. 108.  The word “executive” has been defined in the American 
Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition as under:-  
n. … The chief officer of a go vernment, state, or political 
division.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  122
3. The branch of government  charged with putting into 
effect a country's laws and the administering of its functions. …  3. Of or relating to the branch of government charged with the execution and administration of the nation's laws. 
 In Collins English Dictionary – Comple te and Unabridged, the term has 
been defined in the following terms:-  
executive  
 n. … the branch of government  responsible for carrying out 
laws, decrees, etc.; administration  … having the function or purpos e of carrying plans, orders, 
laws, etc., into practical effect 
executive branch 
n. … the branch of government charged with the execution 
and enforcement of laws  and policies and the 
administration of public affairs; the executive.”  
 Some of the other definitions are as follows: -  
Cultural Dictionary  
“The branch of federal and state government that is 
broadly responsible for implementing, supporting, and 
enforcing the laws made by the legislative branch and interpreted by the judicial br anch. At the state level, the 
executive includes governors and their staffs. At the federal level, the executive incl udes the president, the vice 
president, staffs of appoin ted advisers (including the 
cabinet), and a variety of de partments and agencies, such 
as the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and the Postal Service ( see 
postmaster general). The execut ive branch also proposes a 
great deal of legislation to Congress and appoints federal 
judges, including justices of the Supreme Court. Although 
the executive branch guides the nation's domestic and 
foreign policies, the system of checks and balances works to limit its power.”   
Oxford Guide to the US Government:  
“The departments and agencies that take political direction 
from the President, including the 14 cabinet-level 
departments, constitute the executive branch of the federal government. “The ex ecutive branch” is not a 
phrase found in the Constitution, but it is favored by Presidents because it assumes that these departments are under their sole direction. The Constitution, however, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  123
provides that officials of the departments are to take 
direction not only from the Pr esident but also from laws 
passed by Congress.  
Top officials in the executive branch, generally referred to 
as “the administration,” are appointed by the President with the advice and consent of  the Senate, and they serve 
at the pleasure of the President. The President uses his Executive Office agencies to supervise their budgets, their 
legislative requests to Congress, and the regulations they make and enforce.  
Independent regulatory agencies (such as the Federal 
Trade Commission), units of government that are insulated by Congress from political di rection (such as the Federal 
Reserve Board), as well as several agencies that perform 
functions for Congress (such as the Congressional Budget Office) are not part of the ex ecutive branch. Presidential 
appointment and removal powers  over officials in these 
agencies may be limited by Congress, and the President may not provide them with political direction. 
In politics, a person or person s constituting the branch of 
government charged with exec uting or carrying out the 
laws and appointing officials,  formulating and instituting 
foreign policy, and providing di plomatic representation. In 
the U.S., a system of checks and balances keeps the 
power of the executive more or  less equal to that of the 
judiciary and the legislature.” 
 109.   On the other hand, the word “state” is defined as under: -  
Advanced Law Lexicon  
 
A body politic, or society of men, united together for the 
purpose of promoting their mu tual safety and advantage, 
by the joint efforts of th eir combined strength …  
 Organization of the body poli tic or one of the constituent 
members of a federation or organized political community 
with government recognized by the people …  
 
The political system of a body of people who are politically organized; the system of rules by which jurisdiction and authority are exercised over such a body of people …  
 A state or political society is an association of human 
beings established for the atta inment of certain ends by 
certain means. … …   A state is an institution, that is to say, it is a system of 
relations which men establis h among themselves as a 
means of securing certain objects, of which the most fundamental is a system of order within which their activities can be carried on. Modern states are territorial; SMC 16/2011 ETC.  124
their governments exercise control over persons and 
things within their frontiers…”  Corpus Juris Secondum 
 n. … it may signify a sovereign political unity as set forth in 
International Law.   
Collins English Dictionary – Complete and Unabridged  
 n. … (Government, Politics & Diplomacy) a sovereign political power or community  … … the territory occupied by such a community  … … the sphere of power in such a community affairs of state   … … (often capital)  one of a number of areas or 
communities having their own governments and forming a federation under a sovereign government, as in the US 
(Government, Politics & Diplomacy)   
… … (often capital)  the body politic of a particular 
sovereign power, esp as contrasted with a rival authority such as the Church  … … The supreme public power within a sovereign political entity.   … … The sphere of supreme civil power within a given polity: matters of state. 
 
… … A body politic, especially  one constituting a nation: 
the states of Eastern Europe. 
 
The concept of the state  
A state is a form of political association  or polity  that is 
distinguished by the fact that it is not itself incorporated 
into any other political a ssociations, though it may 
incorporate other such associ ations. The state is thus a 
supreme corporate  entity because it is not incorporated 
into any other entity, even th ough it might be subordinate 
to other powers (such as anot her state or an empire). One 
state is distinguished from an other by its having its own 
independent structure of political authority, and an attachment to separate physical territories. The state is itself a political community , though not all political 
communities are states . A state is not a nation , or a 
people , though it may contain a single nation, parts of 
different nations, or a number of entire nations. A state 
arises out of society , but it does not contain or subsume 
society. A state will have a government , but the state is 
not simply a government, fo r there exist many more 
governments than there are st ates. The state is a modern 
political construction that emerged in early modern SMC 16/2011 ETC.  125
Europe, but has been replicated in all other parts of the 
world. The most important aspe ct of the state that makes 
it a distinctive and new form of political association is its most abstract quality: it is a corporate  entity. 
A sovereign state is a state with a defined territory on 
which it exercises internal and external sovereignty, a 
permanent population, a govern ment, and the capacity to 
enter into relations with other sovereign states. It is also normally understood to be a state which is neither dependent on nor subject to any other power or state. 
While in abstract terms a sove reign state can exist without 
being recognised by other so vereign states, unrecognized 
states will often find it hard to exercise full treaty-making 
powers and engage in diplomatic relations with other sovereign states. 
The word "country" is often used to refer to sovereign 
states, although it means, or iginally, a geographic region. 
Sovereignty has taken on a different meaning with the 
development of the principle of  self-determination and the 
prohibition against the thre at or use of force as jus cogens  
norms of modern internationa l law. The UN Charter, the 
Declaration on Rights and Duties of States, and the charters of regional internat ional organizations express the 
view that all states are juridically equal and enjoy the 
same rights and duties based upon the mere fact of their existence as persons under inte rnational law. The right of 
nations to determine their own political status and exercise permanent sovereignty within th e limits of their territorial 
jurisdictions is widely recognised.  
In political science, sovereignty is usually defined as the 
most essential attribute of th e state in the form of its 
complete self-sufficiency in the frames of a certain territory, that is its supremac y in the domestic policy and 
independence in the foreign one.  
In the social sciences, a st ate is a compulsory political 
institution that maintains a mo nopoly of the legitimate use 
of force within a certain territory. 
Etymology and definition  
Etymology 
The word state and its cognates in other European 
languages ( stato in Italian, état in French, Staat  in 
German) ultimately derive from the Latin status , meaning 
"condition" or "status."  
With the revival of the Roman law in the 14th century in 
Europe, this Latin term was used to refer to the legal standing of persons (such as the various "estates of the 
realm" - noble, common, and cl erical), and in particular SMC 16/2011 ETC.  126
the special status of the king. The word was also 
associated with Roman ideas (d ating back to Cicero) about 
the "status rei publicae ", the "condition of public matters". 
In time, the word lost its reference to particular social groups and became associated with the legal order of the 
entire society and the appara tus of its enforcement.  
In English, "state" is a contraction of the word "estate", 
which is similar to the old French estat and the modern 
French état, both of which signify that a person has status 
and therefore estate. The highest estates, generally those with the most wealth and social rank, were those that held power.
  
 
According to the Oxford English Dictionary , a state is "a an 
organized political community  under one government; a 
commonwealth; a nation. b such a community forming 
part of a federal republic, esp the United States of America". However, the most commonly used definition is Max Weber's, which defines the state as a compulsory political organization with a centralized government that 
maintains a monopoly of the le gitimate use of force within 
a certain territory.  
General categories of state institutions include 
administrative bureaucracies, legal systems, and military 
or religious organizations.  
The concept of the state can be distinguished from the 
concept of government. The government is the particular group of people, the administrative bureaucracy, that controls the state apparatus at a given time. That is, governments are the means th rough which state power is 
employed. States are served by  a continuous succession of 
different governments.  
Each successive government is composed of a specialized 
and privileged body of individu als, who monopolize political 
decision-making, and are separated by status and organization from the population  as a whole. Their function 
is to enforce existing laws, legislate new ones, and arbitrate conflicts via their mo nopoly on violence. In some 
societies, this group is often a self-perpetuating or hereditary class. In other societies, such as democracies, the political roles remain, but th ere is frequent turnover of 
the people actually filling the positions.  
110.   As against the term “state”, a government is an institution 
whose existence precedes that of the state. A government is a person or group of persons who rule or administer (or govern) a political community or a state. For government  to come into being there must SMC 16/2011 ETC.  127
be existence of public on the te rritory of a State. Ruling within a 
household is not government. Govern ment exists when people accept 
(willingly or not) the authority of so me person or persons to address 
matters of public concern; the admi nistration of justice, and defense 
against external enemies being typi cal examples of such matters.  
111.   Article 90 of the Constituti on defines “executive authority” 
as “subject to the Constitution  the executive authority of the 
Federation shall be exercised in the name of the President by the 
Federal Government which consists  of Prime Minister and Federal 
Ministers, who shall act through th e Prime Minister who shall be the 
chief executive of the Federation.” Wh ereas in relation to the Provincial 
Government, Article 129 with the subs titution of Governor with the 
President defines the Executive Author ity of the Province consisting of 
the Chief Minister and Provincial Mi nisters, who shall act through the 
Chief Minster. Both these executiv e authorities represent the Federal 
and Provincial Governments wherea s the institution of State is 
distinguished from executive authorit ies as defined in Article 7 of the 
Constitution as under: -   
“7. Definition of the State 
 
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, "the 
State" means the Federal Government, Majlis-e-Shoora  
(Parliament), a Provincial Government, a Provincial Assembly, and such local or other authorities in Pakistan as are by law empowered to impose any tax or cess.”  
 
112.   Here the object of instan t proceedings is not to make any 
declaration against the State of Paki stan, but one of the Governments, 
namely, the Government of Sindh Province, which is represented 
through its executive as define d under Article 129 referred to 
hereinbefore. Although Article 7 of the Constitution defines the State 
as the Federal Government, Majlis-e-Shoora  (Parliament), a Provincial SMC 16/2011 ETC.  128
Government, a Provincial Assembly and local or other authorities in 
Pakistan empowered to impose any ta x or cess, therefore, distinction 
is abundantly clear as the act of the Executive of the Province is under 
consideration in terms of Article 129 of the Constitution, which is 
essentially a distinct and a different  concept from the State as defined 
in Article 7. The order dated 24.08.2011 reproduced supra  also 
explicitly makes it clear that the co nduct of the Executive in enforcing 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens guaranteed under Articles 9, 14, 
15, 18 and 24 is under examination,  and as far as the State is 
concerned, its role has not been  examined. The arguments so put 
forward by the learned counsel appear  to be irrelevant and are not in 
the context of the proposition under consideration. This is not for the 
first time that the conduct of th e Provincial Executive is being 
scrutinized. As such, its performanc e relating to enforcement of the 
Fundamental Rights or its failure no t to enforce these rights is under 
examination. Admittedly, under Ar ticle 184(3), this Court exercises 
same powers, which are available to a High Court under Article 
199(1)(c). The Court can make an or der giving such direction to any 
person or authority including any government exercising power or 
performing any function and, in or , in relation to, in any territory 
within its jurisdiction as may be appropriate for the enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of part II. Reference in this behalf may be made to the cases of Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. 
President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473), Syed Wasey Zafar v. 
Government of Pakistan  (PLD 1994 SC 621), Bank of Punjab v. Haris 
Steel Industries (pvt.) Ltd.  (PLD 2010 SC 1109) and Federation of 
Pakistan v.  Munir Hussain Bhatti  (PLD 2011 SC 752). Also see Zulfiqar 
Mehdi v. Pakistan Internat ional Airlines Corporation  (1998 SCMR 793), SMC 16/2011 ETC.  129
Benazir Bhutto  (supra), Asma Jilani v. Government of the Punjab  (PLD 
1972 SC 139), Fauji Foundation v. Shamimur Rehman  (PLD 1983 SC 
457), Jibendra Kishore v. Province of East Pakistan  (PLD 1957 SC 9).        
113.   So, on the basis of di stinction between the State and 
Executive authority vis-à- vis the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 
184(3), it is concluded that instan t proceedings are not against the 
State but to consider whether the Provincial Government of Sindh 
allegedly had failed to enforce the Fu ndamental Rights of the citizens. 
However, Pakistan as a sovereign country as well as a nuclear power 
for all intents and purposes is a su ccessful State because such a State, 
in the words of Max Weber, mainta ins a monopoly on the legitimate 
use of physical force within it s borders. But, coming to the 
fundamental question of exercise of jurisdiction keeping in view of the 
facts and circumstances noted hereinabov e in detail, it is held that this 
Court is empowered under Article 184( 3) to consider any question of 
public importance with refere nce to enforcement of any of 
Fundamental Rights, conferred by Ch apter 1, Part 11 and can make an 
order of the nature mentioned in Article 199. If the argument of the learned counsel referred to above is accepted, it would be tantamount 
to abdicating the powers and jurisdic tion conferred by the Constitution, 
thereby refusing to enforce Fundam ental Rights conferred by Chapter 
1 of Part II in a matter relating to public importance. The scope of the 
jurisdiction of the Court with proced ure, which is to be followed, has 
been examined in the case of Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz) v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2007 SC 642), wherein it has been held 
that this Court under Article 184(3)  is not dependent only at the 
instance of the "aggrieved party"  in the context of adversarial 
proceedings and while dealing with a case under Article 184(3) of the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  130
Constitution, this Court is neither bo und by the procedural trappings of 
Article 199 ibid nor by the limitations ment ioned in that Article for 
exercise of power by the High Co urt in any case. Relevant Para 
therefrom is reproduced hereinbelow:-   
“20. After having discussed the law laid down in the above 
mentioned cases the judicial consensus seems to be as 
follows: -  
 
(i)  That while interpreting Article 184(3) of the Constitution the interpretative approach should not be ceremonious observance the rules or usages of the interpretation but regard shou ld be had to the object and 
purpose for which this Article is enacted i.e. the interpretative approach must receive inspiration from the 
triad of provisions which satura te and invigorate the entire 
Constitution namely the Objectives Resolution (Article 2-A), 'the fundamental rights and' the directive principles of State policy so as to achieve democracy, tolerance, equity 
and social justice according to Islam. 
 
(ii)  That the exercise of powers of Supreme Court under 
Article 184(3) is not dependent only at the instance of the "aggrieved party" in the cont ext of adversary proceedings. 
Traditional rule of locus standi can be dispensed with and procedure available in public interest litigation can be made use of, if it is brought to the Court by a person acting bona fide. 
 
(iii)  That the provisions of Article 184(3), provide abundant scope for the enfo rcement of the Fundamental 
Rights of an individual or a gr oup or class of persons in the 
event of their infraction and it would be for the Supreme 
Court to lay down the contours generally in order to regulate the proceedings of group or class actions from 
case to case. 
 (iv)  That under Article 184(3) there is no requirement that only an aggrieved party can press into service this provision. Supreme Court can entertain a petition under 
Article 184(3) at the behest of any person. 
 
(v)  That the Article 184(3) is remedial in character and 
is conditioned by three prerequisites, namely −     
 
* There is a question of public importance.  * Such a question invo lves enforcement of 
fundamental right, and 
 
* The fundamental right soug ht to be enforced is 
conferred by Chapter 1, Pa rt II of the Constitution. 
 SMC 16/2011 ETC.  131
(vi)  That it is not every qu estion of public importance 
which can be entertained by this Court, but such question should relate to the enforc ement of Fundamental Rights. 
 
(vii)  That even the disputed  questions of facts which do 
not require voluminous evidence can be looked into where Fundamental Right has been breached. However, in case where intricate disputed qu estion of facts involving 
voluminous evidence are involved the Court will desist 
from entering into such controversies. 
 
(viii)  That the language of Article 184(3) does not admit of the interpretation that prov isions of Article 199 stood 
incorporated in Article 1 84(3) of the Constitution. 
Therefore, this Court I while dealing with a case under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is neither bound by the procedural trappings of Article 199 ibid, nor by the limitations mentioned in that Article for exercise of power 
by the High Court in a case. 
 
(McCabe v. Atchison (1914) 285 US 151, S.P. Gupta and 
others v. President of Indi a and others AIR 1982 SC 149, 
Standard Vacuum Oil Company v.  Trustees of the Port of 
Chittagong PLD 1961 Dacca 289, Sneed Khan v. Chairman, 
District Council of Bannu PLD 1967 Pesh. 347, Asma Jilani v. Government of the P unjab PLD 1972 SC 139, 
Muhammad Boota and 77 ot hers v. Commissioner, 
Sargodha Division PLD 1973 Lah. 580, Hakim Muhammad Anwar Babri v. Pakistan PLD 1973 Lah. 817, National Steel Rolling Mills v. Province of West Pakistan 1968 SCMR 317, 
Fauji Foundation v. Shamimur Rehman PLD 1983 SC 457, Abanindra Kumar Maity v. A. K. Majumdar AIR .1956 Cal. 
273, Fazal Din v. Lahore Improvement Trust PLD 1969 SC 223, K.K. Kochumii v. State of Madras AIR 1959 SC 725, 
Jibendra Kishore v. Province of East Pakistan PLD 1957 SC 
9, Messrs East and West Steamship Company v. Pakistan PLD 1958 SC (Palo.) 41 and Waris Meah v. The State PLD 1957 SC (Pak.) 157, PLD 1988 SC  413, PLD 1990 SC 513, 
1990 PLC 61, PLD 1988 SC 416, KLR 1988 SC 423, 1988 
PSC 809.”  
 114.  Thus, in view of the princi ple laid down hereinabove, this 
Court is empowered to examine as to whether the executive 
authorities of the Province have fa iled to enforce Fundamental Rights 
in terms of order dated 24.08.2011 an d the objections raised by the 
learned counsel that any declaration in this behalf would have serious 
repercussions against the State of Pakistan being without any 
substance for the above reasons are overruled.  SMC 16/2011 ETC.  132
115.  Learned counsel has emphasized that in a system based 
on trichotomy of powers being the basic feature of the Constitution, 
the Armed Forces of Pakistan are al so part of the executive or the 
g o v e r n m e n t  a s  h e l d  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  Liaqat Hussain v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1999 SC 504). There is no doubt about the fact that the 
Armed Forces also fall within the defi nition of the executive, but in the 
instant case, action of the Armed Forces is not under examination. However, this Court has examined this  aspect of the case in the light 
of the judgment cited by the learne d counsel wherein it was held that 
Pakistan Armed Forces (Acting in ai d of Civil Powers) Ordinance, 1998 
as amended up-to-date in so far as it allowed the establishment of the 
Military Courts for control of the ci vilians, charged with the offences 
mentioned in section 6 and the Sche dule to the said Ordinance is 
unconstitutional, without lawful au thority and of no legal effect. 
Therefore, it can safely be held that  this Court is not exercising such 
jurisdiction for the first time. This Court has jurisdiction to examine an 
instrument on the basis of which po wer to try the accused is conferred 
upon the executive or the Armed Forces.  116.  Learned counsel candidly co nceded that although in the 
18
th Constitutional Amendment, more  provincial autonomy has been 
given to the Provinces, but in spite of  it under sub-Article (3) of Article 
148 of the Constitution it is the duty  of the Federation to protect every 
Province against external aggression  and internal disturbance, and to 
ensure that the Government of ev ery Province is carried on in 
accordance with provisions of the Co nstitution. On having so admitted, 
he has cited following steps taken by the Federation to protect the 
Government of Sindh from internal disturbances: -   SMC 16/2011 ETC.  133
1. Placement of civil armed fo rces (Sindh Rangers and 
Frontier Constabulary) at the disposal of the 
Government of Sindh;  
2. Monetary support of 2.5 billion specifically for 
training and capacity building of the police 
department during this financial year;  
3. Sharing of real time intelligence with the Province, 
which is actionable intelligence;   
4. Data regarding family tree of criminals maintained in 
NADRA and the database is shared with the Province 
after an order by the Interior Minister;  
5. Information helped by FIA regarding different crimes 
and criminals shared with the Provincial 
Government;  
6. Blocking of over 20.1 m illion illegal mobile phone 
SIMs, which are mostly used in commission of crimes;  
7. Grant of 5 billion rupees outside the regular budget 
(besides 2.5 billion rupees) as  a special initiative of 
the President of Pakistan for enhancing the training 
and capacity of provincial law enforcement personnel, directing the Pr ovincial Government to 
equip the Police Department  with 15 APCs [20 more 
APCs are in the pipeline];  
8. Coordination set up is created for Sindh and 
Balochistan border posts – one of the infamous routes of illicit arms to the city of Karachi; 
9. Customs and FIA intelligence another outfit is 
created to control gun runn ing and drug trafficking 
into Karachi;  
10. Coastal border management also ordered through 
the Coast Guards to control the incoming traffic of 
guns and drug trafficking; 
11. Aerial surveillance from SUPARCO for determination 
of the factum of land gra bbing and to control land 
mafia;  
12. Google imageries through NADRA;   SMC 16/2011 ETC.  134
13. Complaint cell is established against bhatta  mafia in 
Karachi on the complaint of Chamber of Commerce, 
which is being monitored by  the Interior Minister 
directly through the police and all other intelligence 
sources.  
 
117.   He has further stated that  the President, Prime Minister, 
Army Chief and Chief of every Inte lligence Agency had visited Karachi 
and held meetings on the law and order situation. He admitted that 
the above steps were taken by th e Federation from January, 2011 
onwards; however, no documentary proof was brought on record. Be 
that as it may, except the stand taken by the learned counsel in respect of the steps taken by the Federal Government to protect the Province of Sindh from its internal disturbances, although most of the 
steps fall within the cate gory of long term solutions for the purpose of 
controlling the disturbances in Kara chi but unfortunately neither the 
executive of the federal government nor of the provincial government 
succeeded in controlling the internal disturbance as it is evident from 
the documentary evidence i.e. th e report of JIT dated 31.03.201 and 
the report of Special Branch of Police Department dated 18.08.2011 and the presentations of the IGP Sind h as well as the DG Rangers, and 
in camera briefing by the ISI to the Members of the Bench, which have already been discussed hereinabove.  118.   There is no dispute with the fact that only in one month 
from 24
th July to 24 August, 2011, 306 pe rsons lost their lives and in 
this period body bags, drilled bodies of human beings as well as torsos 
of persons who were tortured to de ath were recovered. Although the 
Rangers, vide deployment notification dated 17.05.1995 was available 
in the Province, but in the recent past despite internal disturbances 
powers were conferred upon the Rangers only on 25.08.2011. SMC 16/2011 ETC.  135
Although, admittedly the decision was taken in this behalf on 
22.08.2011, yet negligence was shown in  conferring the authority. In 
this manner, a huge loss of life and property of the citizens had occurred. It is to be noted that learned counsel, without realizing its 
repercussions, himself conceded th e obligation of the Federation in 
providing assistance to the Provin cial Government in controlling the 
disturbances in terms of Article 148(3) of the Constitution. As it has been pointed out hereinabove that at  the time when in the year 1997 
the Federal Government headed by Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto  was 
dismissed by the President, in ex ercise of powers under Article 
58(2)(b) of the Constitution, one of  the reasons for dismissal of the 
Federal Government was that it had failed to discharge its 
constitutional obligations under Arti cle 148(3). The principle laid down 
in the case wherein the order of  dissolution of Assembly was 
maintained by this Court, is undou btedly applicable to the present 
situation, as it has been explained by means of the documentary evidence produced by the learned Attorney General and the learned 
Advocate General before the Court.  Therefore, the conclusion can 
conveniently be drawn that despite the steps taken by the Federation, 
the situation of law and order has not been controlled and the life and 
property of citizens in Kara chi have not been secured.  
119.   It is contended by the learned counsel that the Speaker of the National Assembly has, with the consent of the political parties and leaderships acting in furtherance of the national call and duty, 
constituted a bipartisan Committee of the House to look into the issues 
of Karachi and Quetta and to re commend desired measures for the 
restoration of peace and tranquilit y and the Committee is holding its 
meetings. He has further stated that the Federation and the Provincial SMC 16/2011 ETC.  136
Government of Sindh had the will to control internal disturbances and 
to achieve this object following  steps have been taken and the 
documents produced before the Court: -  
1. JIT Report dated 31st March, 2011: report is being 
acted upon to achieve the desired result of controlling internal disturbances in Karachi 
2. Special Branch report dated 18
th August, 2011, 
which has also been produced before this Court. 
 
Both these reports have already been referred to hereinabove, 
particularly with reference to hardened and desperate criminals 
including one Ajmal Pahari , who has shown his connection with MQM.  
We inquired from the learned counsel that in spite of receiving credible 
information through both the above re ports, as to whether any action 
has been taken while remaining with in the Constitutional framework 
against the political party/organization with whom allegedly some of the accused have shown their linkage , he stated that as there is 
democratic system; the people have  chosen their representatives and 
the Government of the day while perfor ming its duty as per the will of 
the voters will take into consideratio n all these reports in due course of 
time. We have pointed out to him not only the above reports, but 
there are also the reports of IB, Da ily Situation reports, presentations 
of IGP as well as other information which have been received through 
ISI, which are sufficient to adjudge the position of law and order prevailing presently in Karachi, wh ich can confront not only Karachi 
but the whole country with a greater di saster if curative measures in 
accordance with the Constitution an d law to control the situation are 
not taken. Thus, we may note that in ternal violence in Karachi is also 
being noted with concern. Referenc e to a write-up published in The 
Economist of 27.08.2011, which is reproduced hereinbelow: -   SMC 16/2011 ETC.  137
“ETHNIC warfare in Pakistan’s most populous city has 
reached such a level that Karachi’s ambulance service now 
has to send out a driver matc hing the racial make-up of 
the destination district to pick up the victims of gang 
attacks. Otherwise, the district’s gunmen will not let the 
ambulance through. Now am bulances themselves are 
coming under fire, as gangster s try to stop them saving 
the lives of their enemies. Karachi’s ethnic wars have 
claimed some 1,000 lives this year, with more than 100 in 
the past week alone. By contrast the Taliban and other 
religious extremists kill ti ny numbers in Karachi. 
A grisly new feature of the ca rnage is that people are not 
just being shot. They are be ing abducted and tortured; 
then their bullet-ridden, mutilated bodies are dumped in 
sacks and left in alleyways and gutters. Victims’ limbs, 
genitals or heads are often se vered. Torture cells operate 
across Karachi. The butchery is  filmed on mobile phones 
and passed around, spreading the terror further. Most 
victims are ordinary folk randomly targeted for their 
ethnicity. 
At the city’s Abbasi Shaheed Hospital, a public facility, 
doctors treat only Mohajirs, who dominate the local district 
and are the biggest ethnic group in Karachi. Mohajirs are 
descendants of those who moved to Pakistan from India in 
1947, when the subcontinent was partitioned. Ambulance 
crews must determine the ethnicity of patients and take 
them to the right hospital. 
If this were just a turf war between criminal gangs, things 
might be brought under control. But each gang has the 
patronage of a mainstream political party, in a fight that 
exploded in 2008 when an el ection was held to end 
Pakistan’s latest period of military rule. Political support for 
warring ethnic gangs means the police largely stay out of 
the conflict: each gang will ca ll on political muscle if its 
henchmen are rounded up. The provincial authorities 
launched a crackdown this week, but little is expected of it. 
The Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), a party 
established in the 1980s that claims to represent the 
Mohajirs, once had an iron grip over Karachi. That 
monopoly is now being challe nged by the Awami National 
Party, which says it spea ks for the ethnic Pushtun 
population, who migrated fr om the north-west of the 
country, and the Pakistan Peop les Party (PPP) of President 
Asif Zardari, which heads the ruling coalition in the capital, 
Islamabad. Its gang following is ethnic Baloch, from the 
neighbouring province of Baloch istan. It is the MQM versus 
the rest. 
The conflict’s ferocity may yet threaten Pakistan’s fragile 
return to democracy. In re cent days Karachi businesses 
have called for the army to restore order. Violence in 
Karachi was repeatedly used as part of the justification for 
toppling four national governments in the 1990s. This city 
of 18m people is Pakistan’s economic lifeline, and the port SMC 16/2011 ETC.  138
through which most supplie s reach NATO forces in 
Afghanistan. 
Away from the ritzy villas of Defence and Clifton districts, 
the people of Karachi’s 3,500 square-kilometer (1,350 
square-mile) sprawl live in decrepit homes and apartment 
blocks set on narrow, filthy streets, where gangs rule with 
near impunity. Trouble often flares when one ethnic ghetto 
abuts another. 
In Korangi, a ramshackle semi-i ndustrial district in the east 
of the city mainly inhabited by Mohajirs, Pervez has not 
been to work for 20 days. He mends tyres on Tariq Road in 
the city centre, a half-hour bus ride away. But since gangs 
started pulling people off bu ses and killing them, he has 
been too afraid to venture out.  “The Pushtuns will cut your 
throat,” Pervez says. “If I am killed, what will my children 
do?” 
Kashif Malik, a 32-year-old  rickshaw driver and PPP 
activist, was at home with a friend, Shoib, in Orangi Town, 
in Karachi’s north-west, when  gunmen came to the door. 
Shoib was killed, while Mr Malik  was lucky only to be shot 
in the arm. He is sure the assailants were from the MQM. 
Mr Malik insists that joining a political party offers the 
safest protection these days. “A  lone person cannot survive 
in Karachi,” says Mr Malik from his bed at the Civil 
Hospital. Most of those kille d are not involved with any 
political party. Language, clothes and even haircuts betray 
a person’s ethnicity to the killing squads. 
For more than two decades the MQM has collected 
extortion money, known as bata, from businesses and 
homes across the city. Now, using the political backing 
they acquired in the 2008 elec tion, gangsters associated 
with the PPP and the Awami National Party, in a loose 
alliance, also want their share of cash, at the heart of the 
conflict. Businesses now have to  pay off up to three rival 
groups. In the past week Karachi’s markets selling marble, 
bathroom tiles and medicines have separately staged 
protests against bata. 
As for the political parties, they  seem to be able to turn the 
violence off and on as it su its them. This suggests that 
these are not mere criminals draping themselves in the 
party flag, but rather integral parts of the parties’ political 
machines. If the violence continues, more ordinary people 
will be forced to seek the protection of a political party, to 
which they will have to pay more dues. Perhaps this is 
what the politicians are aiming for. “You can call this the 
politicisation of crime, or th e criminalisation of politics,” 
says a security official in the city. “The state has lost its 
writ in Karachi.” 
 
120.  It has to be noted that in the past the democratic 
governments were dismissed either through the extra constitutional SMC 16/2011 ETC.  139
instruments or in exercise of the powers available under the 
constitutional provisions, inter alia, for the reason that both the 
Federation and the Province had faile d to control the disturbance in the 
Province. Therefore, it is now the right and appropriate time when the 
democratic set up must adhere to the constitutional provisions to 
protect the Province as well as the country from internal disturbances. 
However, in response to this, he has stated that a wake up call is not needed, only a call to attention is sufficient because the Federal Government is answerable to the Pa rliament and it is very much aware 
of its duties. We wish that the Federal Government as well as the 
Provincial Government could succeed  i n  b r i n g i n g  n o r m a l c y  i n  t h e  
Province according to the Constitution before it is too late to overcome 
the internal disturbances in view of the material brought before us.    
121.  The Federal Government could have provided assistance to the Provincial Government to cont rol the disturbances without any 
delay, but we fail to understand the reasons prevailing with the 
Federal Government in not acting pr omptly as the learned counsel has 
himself by reciting verses from Ho ly Quran pointed out that killing of 
one human being is tantamount to killing of whole mankind. During 
the current year, more than 1300 persons were killed. The Chief 
Secretary had admitted that the decisi on to extend powers to Rangers 
to control law and order had ta ken place on 22.07.2011, but the 
notification was issued on 25. 07.2011, which has already been 
reproduced hereinabove. Hence, th e argument raised by the learned 
counsel in this behalf does not adva nce the case of the Federation in 
any manner. So far the remaining steps, which according to the 
learned counsel had been taken by th e Federation, they all seem to be 
long term measures. The Federal Government has to protect the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  140
Provinces against internal disturbances . Such protection, if required by 
a Province in terms of Article 148(3)  in view of the given facts and 
circumstances and the scenario pres upposes prompt protection and 
failure to do so makes the Federal Government responsible as it has 
been held in the cases of Ahmed Tariq Rahim and Mohtarama Benazir 
Bhutto  (supra ).  
122.  The learned counsel emph asized that the executive 
authorities in Pakistan had not fa iled in maintaining law and order 
position and in that behalf he quoted the example of Swat. Precisely stating, the situation in Swat was alto gether different as in view of the 
specific facts and circumstances pert aining to the said area and there 
too, the civil administration had to  call the military for ensuring the 
writ of the Government, but in Kara chi, which is the hub of economic 
activity, breakdown of law and order for a single day allegedly causes 
loss of 2.5 billion rupees everyday. The Provincial Government and the 
Federal Government owe a duty to th e citizens of Karachi to ensure 
their Fundamental Rights without comparing the situation prevailing 
over there with any other part of the country. Without prejudice to any 
findings recorded herein, whether it is Swat or Karachi, equal 
responsibility lies on the shoulders of the Provincial Government and 
the Federal Government to ensu re the implementation of the 
Constitution and law.  123.  Learned counsel claimed that except in Karachi in other parts/districts of the Province of Sindh, the position of the law and 
order is normal. We do not want to enter into this controversy because 
the question relating to other districts of Sindh is not under consideration, although Mr. Abdul Mujeeb Pirzada, learned ASC, who 
appeared on behalf of Sindh Ba chao Committee, had uttered a few SMC 16/2011 ETC.  141
words to indicate that in the interior  of Sindh as well, situation of law 
and order was not satisfactory. However, it has been pointed out hereinabove that all the limbs of th e State, administrative units, etc. 
have got equal importance as far as the duty of the Provincial 
Government/Executive or the Federal Government or executive is 
concerned, but when there is seriou s situation of law and order like in 
Karachi and if there is non-adherenc e to the constitutional provisions, 
the consequences are bound to reflec t on the economic activity of the 
whole of country as well as internatio nally. Therefore, the argument so 
raised by the learned counsel needs no further discussion.  
124.  The learned counsel referred to the case of Jamat-e-Islami 
Pakistan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2000 SC 111) to contend that 
internal disturbance cannot be equated with the failure of the 
executive authority. In this behalf, it may be noted that in the cited 
case, two petitions, bearing Petiti ons No. 22 & 25 of 1999 filed by 
Jamat-e-Islami  Pakistan and MQM were file d before this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Cons titution, challenging the vires of Anti-
Terrorism Ordinance (No. IV of 1999) dated 27.04.1999 on the ground 
of being repugnant to the Constituti on and contrary to the guidelines 
provided by this Court in the case of Mehram Ali v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 1445). This Cour t examined the expression 
‘disturbances’ in the context of amendments made and provided its 
definition. However, no observation/comparison vis-à-vis  executive 
authority of the government was under challenge, therefore, the 
judgment being inept is not applicable.  125.  He next contended that th e will of the Government can be 
judged from the fact that this Government has constituted JIT to dig 
out the truth. He referred to p. 49 of JIT report to demonstrate that SMC 16/2011 ETC.  142
the Special Branch, CID, IB, ISI, MI and Pakistan Rangers are Federal 
agencies, have prepared the reports an d all these reports relate to this 
year, so this is ample proof of th e will of the executive authority to 
bring back normalcy in Karachi. It is  important to note that this report 
was neither filed by the Provincial/Federal Governments nor the 
learned counsel called for the same . It was Syed Iftikhar Hussain 
Gillani, learned Sr. ASC, who had filed this report, but in view of the 
statement so made by the learned counsel, it is abundantly clear that with effect from the date of its compilation, i.e. 31.03.2011, the 
Government being aware of its conten ts remained silent. This report 
contains horrifying facts. No one has claimed its confidentiality. To ascertain the willingness of the Fede ral or the Provincial Governments 
to act on this report, life histo ry of one of the persons, namely, Ajmal 
Pahari , without prejudice to him, is reproduced hereinbelow: -  
TRAINING IN INDIAN TRAINING  CAMP 
I along with Zeeshan PIB Wala on the direction of Nadeem 
Nusrat (London Secretariat) went to Singapore in 1996. When we reached Singapore I informed Nadeem Nusrat 
and told my location. Nadeem Nusrat told me that I must 
wait and soon Jameel @ Jimmi  will meet me with next 
schedule. We stayed for on e week in hotel (name not 
remember) in Mustafa Market. Jameel @ Jimmy came to us from South Africa. Also Zeeshan didn’t know about the 
programme. Jameel @ Jimmy take ours passport and 
photograph. Jameel @ arrange Indian Visa and send us via 
Singapore Airline. Sunny who was escaped from Karachi 
received us in India Delhi Airp ort, and took us to the house 
where we stayed for 15 days. T h e n  h e  t o o k  u s  t o  t h e  
training center in a jungle near to the Delhi 
OTHER TRAINING OF PARTY WORKERS IN INDIAN 
TRAINING CAMP 
 
When we reached at Indian Training Center we meet Noora 
(Shah Faisal Colony Wala),  Zafar Tension Duffer Zone SMC 16/2011 ETC.  143
Wala), Raja (North Nazi mabad Wala) Shakir Choota 
(Orangi Town) of MQM A group.  
MOTIVATION OF TRAINING IN INDIA 
After completion of our trai ning Sunny brought different 
book on Revolution and every body had been motivated 
that if we didn’t get our rights then we have to work under the Leadership of Altaf Hussa in and make our separate 
state by unite Karachi and other major parts of Sindh. 
WEAPON TRAININGG DURING THE SESSION 
We wake up early in the morn ing for exercise and running. 
After that we used weapons in  which we used AK 47, G-3, 
MP-5, LMG Rocket launcher, Grenade and other weapons. 
Our teacher also trained original fire of rocket launcher last 
day of our training.  
RETURN FROM INDIA TO PAKISTAN 
Sunny arrange Indian guide who took us to Indian Punjab 
and one day at about 9’0 cl ock in evening we illegally 
crossed the Indian border and entered into Pakistan area 
Shakar Garh with our Indian Gu ide. Then that Indian Guide 
took us to Lahore in Suzuki pick up and went back. Then 
we came to Karachi in train (Rail).  MEETING WITH OTHER INDIAN  TRAINEES IN KARACHI 
I met Noora of Shah Faisal, Zafar Tension of Buffer Zone, 
Shakir Choota of Orangi Town in Karachi but I never saw 
Raju of North Nazimabad in Karachi.”   
 
Above named person has given details  of 53 persons murdered by him 
from 1986 to 2000. Surprisingly, he  also admitted murder of Iqbal 
Raad Advocate, who was former Advoca te General, Sindh. He has also 
given the details of murder of 58 persons after his release from Jail in 
2005. This document is full of inform ation, which he has disclosed. The 
question here is not the veracity or correctness of his statement. The 
question is: what did the Federal Government or the Provincial Government do on the basis of this information. Of course the truth of 
the statement has yet to be determin ed but it was serious information SMC 16/2011 ETC.  144
of grave crimes in an alleged conf ession. Inaction on the statement, 
whatever its evidentiary value, means a certain backing and co-
operation with criminal activity. Howe ver, on the basis of this report, 
no action has been taken against hi m as well as the organization with 
which he showed his affiliation. Acco rding to him, he had been getting 
training outside the country in India,  etc. The remarks of the agencies 
of the Federal Government and othe rs, reference of which the learned 
counsel for the Federation, are as follows: -  
“The subject is a hard core an d high profile trained target 
killer affiliated with MQM (A) Group, who has been 
involved in heinous crimes of  murder, attempt to murder, 
target killing, several activities of creating law and order 
situation abduction, kidnapping, extortion.”  
 
Without commenting on its evidenti ary value, at least when the 
Federal Government is relying upon  it through its learned counsel, 
some weightage is to be given to it. We posed a question to the 
learned counsel that on the basis of  above report, what action so far 
was taken by the Government, howeve r, no explanation came forward. 
126.  It is to be noted that all criminals, howsoever influential, 
have to be dealt with across the board without any discrimination or 
compromising the position of the law on the subject. As we have 
already pointed out hereinabove th at instant proceedings are not 
adversarial, therefore, one cannot di scuss the case of all those persons 
whose names are mentioned in the report, but for the purpose of 
meeting argument of the learned counsel, reference to one of the 
same has been given with the observation that no prejudice will be caused to concerned persons as pe rhaps he has to face trial in 
different cases. But perusal of the report qua the argument raised by 
the learned counsel showing the willin gness of the Federal Government SMC 16/2011 ETC.  145
to take action in Karachi to control the law and order does not appeal 
to us. Thus, we are constrained to co nclude that if an agency of the 
Federal Government possesses such  overwhelming evidence, what 
could be the reasons for taking no action against concerned persons or 
organizations.  
127.  Learned counsel stated that every crime committed constituted violation of the Fundamen tal Rights one way or the other. 
Bhatta , chanda , abduction, extra judicial  killing, etc., whenever 
committed, constitute violation of the Fundamental Rights qua the individuals against whom such cr imes are committed. According to 
him, the Fundamental Rights of indi viduals have been violated due to 
the rivalries between the individual s, there are clashes or crimes 
committed by individuals against individuals and groups of individuals 
are pitched against each other. Assuming argument of the learned counsel is correct, then what is the function of the Executive in respect 
of protecting Fundamental Rights when  there is a violat ion. It is the 
duty of the Provincial Government as well as the Federal Government 
to protect and preserve the Consti tution, which confers such rights 
upon individuals. When violation of the Fundamental Rights is 
admitted, ultimately blame lies with  the executive authorities, both 
Provincial and the Federal, for non- implementation of their rights. In 
this behalf, detailed discussion has been made hereinabove. When the learned counsel for the Provincial Government, Mr. Hafeez Pirzada, ASC, calls upon this Court “give a wa ke up call” to his client, and the 
learned counsel of the Federal Go vernment concedes that a “Call 
Attention Notice” can be issued, what  more needs to be said: If they 
themselves admit that the Court’ s reprimand is need, how can the 
Governments concerned be defended? SMC 16/2011 ETC.  146
128.  Dr. Babar Awan, learned counsel stated that the 
Federation had no intention to invoke  Articles 232 to 234 or Article 245 
of the Constitution presently. Undoub tedly, it is for the Federation to 
take a decision, but if any decision is taken, it would be strictly in 
accordance with the Constitution. This Court has time and again 
insisted that except adherence to th e constitutional provisions in any 
situation prevailing in the country, no  extra-constitutional steps have 
to be followed. In the neighbouring  country, in case of failure of 
constitutional machinery in the Stat es, Article 356 is attracted to deal 
with the situation. This Article is identical to Article 232 of our 
Constitution, therefore, applicat ion of these provisions of the 
Constitution is not alien to our system because on more than one 
occasion the Executive resorted to the same. Reference may be made 
to Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari’s case  (supra ) wherein it was held as 
under: -  
“48. I am prompted to take above view inter alia for the 
following reasons:- (i) That the above view fits  in with the above modern 
jurisprudential theory of proportionality. 
(ii) That as a rule of interpretation, the Courts should 
make efforts to preserve the Fundamental Rights of the citizens while construing the Constitutional 
provisions. This aspect, I intend to deal with 
hereinafter while touching upon the aforesaid second question in issue. 
(iii) That those who have taken oath to protect the 
Constitution, particularly, the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are bound by their oath and duties to act so as to keep the provisions of the 
Constitution fully alive and operative, to preserve it 
in all respects, save from all defects or harm and to stand firm in defence of its provisions against attack o f  a n y  k i n d  a s  h e l d  b y  t h i s  C o u r t  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  Fazalul Quader Chaudhry (supra), in which the view taken is in line with the above Constitutional mandate. 
(iv) That even in spite of susp ension of the enforcement 
of certain Fundamental Rights under clause (2) of 
Article 233 of the Constitution, Article 4 thereof remains fully operative which lays down that "To SMC 16/2011 ETC.  147
enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in 
accordance with law is the inalienable right of every 
citizen, wherever he ma y be, and of every other 
person for the time being within Pakistan. 
    In particular -   
(a) no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, 
reputation or property of  any person shall be taken 
except in accordance with law; 
(b) no person shall be preven ted from or be hindered in 
doing that which is not prohibited by law; and 
(c) no person shall be compelled to do that which the 
law does not require him to do." 
 
as held by Salahuddin Ahmad, J. of this Court in the case of Manzoor Ilahi (supra).” 
 In view of the peculiar circumstance s prevailing in Karachi, issuance of 
a large number of arms licences, bo th prohibited and non-prohibited, 
also seems to be one of the reasons for not bringing normalcy in 
Karachi and perhaps this is anothe r reason that after every 2 to 4 
weeks, some incident of torture, gang war, target killing, etc., takes place, which comes to an end afte r taking heavy toll of life. The 
Administration/Executive never rea lized the untold miseries of the 
sufferers including widows and orph ans; therefore, the executive is 
bound to attend to this aspect of the case.  129.  After the Court concluded the hearing on 16.9.2011 
another very tragic incident took  place in Karachi. A car bomb 
exploded outside the house of Ch audhry Aslam, SSP CID, in the 
Defence area of Karachi. Six Polic emen and a mother along with her 
young son were martyred. Although this crime is apparently, and prima-facie of a different variety not related to the turf war or ethnic strife in Karachi, there is something to  be learnt from it by the citizens 
of Karachi. The vehicle that explod ed at the gate of the SP’s House 
must have been loaded with explos ives and prepared with a network 
of wires, fuses, projectiles such as ball bearings or shrapnels, and SMC 16/2011 ETC.  148
triggers. A sophisticated remote co ntrol device may also have been 
needed although it is yet to be de termined conclusively whether it was 
a suicide attack or not. One thing is  clear that the vehicle was loaded 
with explosives and prepared for exploding in Karachi and nowhere 
else. Surely it was not brought, fu lly equipped and loaded all the way 
from the FATA area with explosives, projectiles, wires, fuses, triggers 
and remote control or suicide orie nted equipment. It was indeed 
prepared in Karachi. All such vehi cles and suicide bombers are finally 
prepared and equipped in our ci ties, not in FATA. Houses are 
previously rented for this purpos e and rooms are taken in hotels. 
Whether the vehicle was prepared in a workshop or a house, the 
neighbours must have noticed so me strange or at least dubious 
movements around and/or inside the workshop or house. The same 
applies to other terrorists and suic ide attackers in Karachi, Lahore, 
Rawalpindi, Peshawar, Quetta and othe r cities of Pakistan. The vehicles 
and suicide bombers and assault teams are all assembled and prepared in our own neighborhoods and Mohallas. Thes e then go out 
and attack Bazaars, shrines esta blishments, killing innocent men, 
women and children. If the citizens were vigilant and responsive, such 
incidents could be prevented. They must report suspicious activity. 
That is the best, perhaps the only way to finish this menace.    No doubt the fear of reporting to some extent is due to a lack of confidence in the administration and the Police but that confidence will have to be revived for the mutual benefit of all. It is for 
the Government to revive that  confidence by not using the 
administration and the police for political or private ends. That is the responsibility of the Government of the Day. We have seen the 
beneficial and positive effects of a depoliticized administration with the SMC 16/2011 ETC.  149
intervention of the Court. It is  now the bounden duty of the 
government to continue with th is status and not deflect the 
administration to its own benefit in  preference to the citizen. The 
Police must also be cleansed of unm erited appointments. We intend to 
keep an eye on this process and will respond to any genuine complaint.  
130.  The morale of the police is low. Even honest Policemen are 
demoralized. They are caught between the devil and the deep blue sea. 
On the one hand, they may be punished  for doing their duty if it runs 
counter to the political objectives of the party in power and on the 
other, they are afraid of being shot by the persons they have 
apprehended or their associates. They are conscious of th e fact that so 
many policemen who took part in the operations of 1992 and 1996 
have disappeared or have been elim inated. It is necessary, therefore, 
for the Police to fully and impartia lly investigate and find out the 
circumstances of each such disa ppearance/elimination and provide a 
detailed report to this Co urt in respect thereof.  
131.  Thus, from the material pr oduced before the Court and the 
information conveyed during hearing of the case by the ISI followed by 
intensified arguments advanced by the learned counsel appearing for 
the Provincial and Federal Governme nts, learned Attorney General, 
learned Advocate General, learned counsel for the Province of Sindh 
and learned counsel for the interveners, the Inspector General of Police, the DG Rangers, the Presidents of the Sindh High Court Bar Association and the Karachi Bar Associ ation as well as all others, we –  
Observe that violence in Karachi during the current year and in 
the past is not ethnic alone but i t  i s  a l s o  a  t u r f  w a r  b e t w e e n  
different groups having economic, socio-politico interest to 
strengthen their position/aggrandizement, based on the phenomenon of tit for tat with political, moral and financial SMC 16/2011 ETC.  150
support or endorsement of the political parties, who are claiming 
their representation on behalf of public of Karachi including 
components and non-components  of Provincial Government/ 
Executive;   
A   N   D 
 
Declare that recent violence in Karachi represents unimaginable 
brutalities, bloodshed, kidnapping and throwing away dead 
bodies and torsos in bags; as illu stration, indicating toll of 306 
lives in one month; detection of torture cells video of which has 
been produced; receiving bhatta  to strengthen the ranks of one 
group against the other; gra bbing land; drug mafia etc., 
destroying moveable and immovabl e properties of the citizens, 
establishes that the Fundamental Ri ghts of the citizens enshrined 
in Articles 9,14,15,18 and 24 of the Constitution have not been 
protected/enforced by the Prov incial Government/Executive 
authority and this failure has made the lives and properties of 
the citizens insecure, inasmuch as Federal Government/ 
Executive has also not protecte d Province of Sindh against 
internal disturbance, thus the go vernment of Province of Sindh, 
on this account, too, failed to carry out functions in accordance 
with the provisions of the Co nstitution [Article 148(3)];  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that both the Provincial and Federal 
Governments/Executives have to  find out solutions of the 
present scenario as per provis ions of the Constitution; 
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that to come ou t of instant grave situation of 
law and order in Karachi, police force being principal law 
enforcing agency has to be de-p oliticized and strengthened so 
that they could, with full commitment, dedication, zeal and zest, 
perform its bounden duty, and unl ess there is a de-politicized 
police, the situation of law and order is likely to become more 
aggravated, no sooner the assist ance of Rangers is withdrawn; SMC 16/2011 ETC.  151
 
A   N   D 
 
We apprehend that any further fa ilure to protect the lives and 
property of the citizens is likel y to cause unprecedented disaster, 
therefore, all efforts should be made to avoid the same in the 
interest of the nation and country, which is supreme as per the mandate of the Constitution and the law;  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that in respect of banning any political party including MQM, against whom all the interveners mostly had 
voiced complaints is not within do main of the Court at this stage 
as in terms of Article 17(2) of th e Constitution every citizen, not 
being in the service of Pakistan, shall have the right to form or 
be a member of a political party, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in th e interest of the sovereignty or 
integrity of Pakistan and it is the responsibility of the Federal 
Government to act under Article 17 for action against any party 
violating this Article. The Court w ill only review such issue at any 
other appropriate stage or proceeding if then necessary to determine whether the actions of  any party are directly or 
indirectly prejudicial to the sove reignty or integrity of Pakistan 
within the meaning of the Arti cle. The Court will remain, in 
appropriate proceedings, the ultima te arbiter of this question but 
will not allow any government to avoid its duty under the law and the Constitution; 
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that as per mate rial brought before the Court, 
there are criminals who have succ eeded in making their ways in 
political parties notwithstanding whether they are components or 
non-components of government, and are getting political and 
financial support allegedly from such parties, therefore, the 
political parties should denounce th eir affiliation with them in the 
interest of the country and democratic set up and they should 
not allow them to use their names as militant outfits of the political parties. Failure to do so may entail consequences of a SMC 16/2011 ETC.  152
penal nature against the party or person responsible, whether in 
office or not;  
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that to avoid political polarization and to break 
the cycle of ethnic strife an d turf war, boundaries of 
administrative units like police stations, revenue estates, etc., 
ought to be altered so that the members of different 
communities may live together in peace and harmony, instead of 
allowing various groups to claim that particular areas belong to 
them and declaring certain area s as NO GO Areas under their 
fearful influence. Subsequent ther eto, on similar considerations, 
in view of relevant laws, delimitation of different constituencies 
has also to be undertaken with the same object and purpose, 
particularly to make Karachi, wh ich is the hub of economic and 
commercial activities and also the face of Pakistan, a peaceful 
city in the near future. The Elec tion Commission of Pakistan may 
also initiate the process on its own in this behalf;  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that equal chan ces should be provided to 
different communities of Karachi to participate in economic and 
commercial activities instead of confining the same to different 
political groups on the basis of pa rochial, racial, tribal, sectarian, 
partisan and provincial prejudices;  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that Karachi is full of arms and ammunition of 
prohibited and non-prohibited bo res including licensed and illicit, 
therefore, Karachi has to be clea nsed from all kinds of weapons 
by adhering to the laws available on the subject, and if need be, 
by promulgating new legislatio n. All licensed arms genuinely 
required for security concerns  and personal safety may be 
retained but these must also be registered with NADRA. All other 
licenses, where such need cannot be shown, or where multiple 
licenses have been issued to th e same individual (as distinct 
from security firms) if not justified, or which are used for SMC 16/2011 ETC.  153
unnecessary display at ceremonies or  elsewhere for aerial firing 
should be cancelled after summary and expeditious proceedings 
in accordance with law;  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that there is a need for a fresh comprehensive 
law to eliminate and punish land grabbers and encroachers. This 
is one of Karachi’s greatest problems. The Court has already 
dealt with some cases Suo Motu and otherwise, and will continue 
to do so whenever necessary or appropriate. Sometimes this Court is the last hope of the ci tizens or a community which turns 
to it for redress when all other avenues are denied to them. But 
overall it is the duty of both Governments to formulate such law 
and initiate it in the appropri ate assembly; and thereafter to 
implement it fully without showin g any favour or immunity to 
any person whether a political favourite, ally or for any other 
personal or party consideration;  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further reiterate that monitoring  of the criminal cases should 
t a k e  p l a c e  i n  v i e w  o f  t h e  o b s e r v a t i o n s  m a d e  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  Sheikh Liaqat Hussain  (supra ). Besides, the appointments of the 
Presiding Officers of the Anti-Terro rism Courts should also not be 
delayed for any reason, as we ex perienced during the hearing of 
the case that those appointments  were delayed for a period of 
nearly two years. However, under  the direction issued by the 
Court, the Presiding Officers were  appointed and we expect that 
such delays shall not be a llowed to occur in future;  
 
A   N   D 
 
We observe that since innocent citizens have lost their lives, 
number of which comes to 1310  during the current year. 
Similarly, a good number of citi zens have been injured and/or 
lost their valuable property, both movable and immovable, 
therefore, provincial government /executive shall constitute a 
Commission to assess their losse s and on its recommendation, SMC 16/2011 ETC.  154
compensation must be paid to the sufferers without partisan 
consideration, as early as possible;  
 
A   N   D 
 
We direct that there must be no ‘NO GO AREAS’ at all in Karachi. 
If any is found or credibly report ed to the Court the Police and, if 
required by the Provincial Government, the Rangers shall take 
strong and decisive action to e liminate it. Moreover, if such an 
area is proved to exist to the sa tisfaction of the Court, we may 
require the IGP himself, and if necessary the DG Rangers also, to personally lead the operation into such areas. The Police and 
Rangers are therefore, expect ed to conduct the on-going 
operation across the board withou t showing any favour to any 
one and without being in fluenced from any quarter, be it political 
or otherwise. In case they are asked to obey any illegal orders, 
or to show leniency to any crimin al, it will be their duty to bring 
it to the notice of the Court and appropriate orders will be 
passed accordingly; 
 
A   N   D 
 
Further direct that an independent and a depoliticized 
investigation agency be depute d to conduct investigation of 
cases fairly, honestly and without being influenced in any 
manner. Similarly, the prosecutio n agency comprising competent 
prosecutors and the Provincial  Government/Executive must 
provide protection to the witne sses so that they may depose 
against the perpetrators of crimes without any fear, enabling the 
courts to decide cases against th em in accordance with law. The 
prosecutors, particularly for the Anti-Terrorism Courts should be 
appointed in a highly transp arent manner according to the 
Constitution and the law. Appo intments of prosecutors are 
required to be undertaken without any political whims and 
considerations;  
A   N   D 
 
Further direct that DG NADRA an d the IGP will set up a special 
joint cell with specialized officials and experts along with SMC 16/2011 ETC.  155
sufficient manpower to establish several teams to visit on the 
spot and identify illegal foreigners so that they may be dealt with 
strictly in accordance with law after a proper hearing and 
opportunity to present proof of their citizenship. They should 
attempt to conclude this exerci se preferably in one year;   
 
A   N   D 
 
Further direct that the IGP sha ll collect the record and facts 
about the disappearance or elim ination of all police and other 
officials who took part in the Karachi operations of 1992 and 
1996 or were witnesses in ethnic or  related crimes and present a 
report to the Court within th e next one month also showing 
whether their families were compensated or not;   
A   N   D 
 
Further direct that the Provincial Government shall place on 
record of the Court copies of all ju dicial inquiries instituted in the 
matter of law and order in Karachi since 1985. These shall be 
retained for perusal and for any necessary action or appraisal of 
the situation at any time in the future;  
 
A   N   D 
 
Further observe that the Provinci al Government/Executive shall 
ensure smooth running of econom ic and commercial activities 
and shall take necessary steps th at the protection is provided 
against uncalled for and illegal shutter down and strikes to the 
businessmen. During arguments, it was also brought to our 
notice that due to illegal strikes and shutter down calls, the 
normal life of citizens of Karach i is paralyzed, and allegedly it 
causes loss of billions of rupees  in a day, therefore, it is 
observed that the Government and the political parties shall 
evolve a respectable way out to avoi d such a situation in future;    
 
A   N   D 
 
Finally, it is directed that a Committee be constituted by the 
Provincial Government/Executive, headed by the Chief Justice of SMC 16/2011 ETC.  156
Sindh High Court, who shall be assisted by the Chief Secretary, 
the heads of the security agencies i.e. para-military 
organizations and I.G. Police, to supervise and ensure that law 
enforcement agencies take action  indiscriminately, across the 
board against the perpetrators in volved in causing disturbances 
in Karachi. The Chief Justice sh all convene the meeting at least 
once in a month to review the implementation of this judgment 
and copy of the proceedings shall be transmitted to the Registrar 
of this Court for our perusal and passing appropriate orders at a 
later stage, if need be.  
 
132.   In view of above decl arations/observations, instant Suo 
Motu proceedings as well as Constituti on Petition No. 61 of 2011 under 
Article 184(3) stand disposed of while  parting with the saying of James 
Bryce that “ Our country is not the only thing to which we owe our 
allegiance. It is also owed to ju stice and to humanity. Patriotism 
consists not in waving the flag, but in  striving that our country shall be 
righteous as well as strong.”   
 
 
    Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ     
Anwar Zaheer Jamali, J.    Sarmad Jalal Osmany, J.  
    
Amir Hani Muslim, J.    Ghulam Rabbani, J.   
  
 
Announced in open Court on 06
th October, 2011 
         C H I E F  J U S T I C E   APPROVED FOR REPORTING   