IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali  
Mr. Justice Dost Muhammad Khan  
 
 
 
 
 
Civil Petition No.1472 of 2013  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 
14.05.2013 passed by the Federal Service 
Tribuna l, Islamabad in Appeal 
No.269(P)CS/2012)  
 
 
The Commandant Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Constabulary FC Head 
Quarters, Peshawar and another  
… Petitioner s 
versus  
 
Amir Ullah Islam and another  
… Respondents  
 
For the petitioner s: Ms. Shireen Imran, ASC  
 
For respondent N o.1: Mr. Ijaz Anwar, ASC  
 Mr. M.S.Khattak, AOR  
 
Date of hearing:  03.03.2014  
 
ORDER  
 
    Dost Muhammad Khan, J. — This CPLA is barred by 4 days. 
CMA No.5578/2013 has been filed , seeking condonation of delay on 
the ground that the impugned order is void ab initio, without 
jurisdiction  and no limitation runs against the void order and 
because , the delay occurred in filing of the petition  was due to 
misunderstanding and mis -calculation of time by the petitioner 
department.  
2.   We are in no manner convinced fro m the ground taken 
in the CMA and the submissions made at the bar  by the learned 
ASC for the petitioners . On this ground alone , the main petition is CP 1472/13  2
liable to be dismissed , hence, the delay cannot be condoned and  
the CMA is dismissed .  
3.   There is anothe r CMA No.5577/2013 , seeking 
suspension of the operation of impugned judgment dated 
14.05.2013 given in W.P.No.269 (P)CS/2012, passed by the Federal 
Service Tribunal (FST), Islamabad . However, as we are deciding the 
main petition on merits, therefore, this C MA having become 
infructuous , is disposed of.  
4.   Precisely, stating facts of the case are that Amir Ullah 
Islam, respondent No.1 was working as Naib Subidar in Platoon 
No.276, Front ier Constabulary, was stationed at Khyber 
Pakhtunkhaw. During operation in F.R. Peshawar, he along with 
many others, allegedly , refused to launch strike against the 
militants, thus, the main charge against him and his co -employees, 
was that they had not only disregarded the command of the 
superior officer but also had shown co wardice.  
5.   Departmental inquiry was conducted but during that no 
opportunity of hearing was provided to him like his colleagues and 
at the conclusion he was dismissed from service.  
6.   After exhausting other remedies, he filed Appeal 
No.296(P)CS/2010  before the FST,  Islamabad,  which was allowed 
vide judgment dated 06.09.2010 directing the respondent (therein) 
to hold de -novo pr oceedings against the appellant (s) in accorda nce 
with the law and the rules , and also to reinstate him into service 
during the  period of inquiry.  CP 1472/13  3
7.   It was further directed in the judgment by the FST that 
the inquiry be completed , preferably , within a period of four months 
and the  question of  payment of back benefits would  depend upon 
the outcome of the fresh proceedings.  
8.   In the second round, same and similar treatment was 
given to respondent No.1 and not a little respect was shown to the 
judgment of the FST, as it was not complied with in letter and 
spirit, rather the inquiry was conducted in the old fashion  and 
accordin g to the whims and wishes of the superiors of respondent 
and that of the inquiry officer, as at that stage  too, respondent No.1 
was condemned unheard, so much so  that he was not informed 
about the res ult of inquiry, thus, he again  approached the FST, 
Islam abad, which passed the judgment dated 14.05.2013, 
impugned herein , and while relying upon the ratio decidendi , laid 
down by this Court in the case of Pakistan International Airlines 
Corporations v. Shaista Naheed  (2004 SCMR  316) set aside the 
dismissal ord er of respondent, declaring it unlawful and illegal. It 
was further directed that the earlier judgment be given effect from 
06.09.2010 in its letter and spirit by issuing clear order of 
reinstatement of respondent No.1 into service. However, the 
petitioner s were not restrained from conducting fresh inquiry.  
9.   The learned ASC for the petitioner s vehemently argued 
that the appeal filed before the FST was barred by time, however, 
this contention, in our view, has no legal force because the second 
inquiry co nducted , was in disregard of the earlier judgment of the 
FST and because , the result of the same was not communicated to 
respondent No.1 as required under the rules. Moreover, the                 CP 1472/13  4
co-employees of respondent No.1 have already been reinstated  into 
service  as was stated at the bar .  
10.   Learned coun sel for the replying respondent  stated at 
the bar that the delay in filing the appeal before the FST was for the 
reason stated above , besides the fact that during that period the 
FST was not vested  with the powers and jurisdiction to implement 
its judgment s/order s till the time this Court directed the 
government to amend the law on the subject investing the FST with 
powers to implement its judgments and orders by adopting coer cive 
measures .  
11.   The plea of the learned ASC for the replying respondent 
is based on sound reason s, to which no exception could be  taken, 
more so, the petitioner -side has committed wrong to the 
respondent twice in two successive inquiries and also disregarded 
the binding ju dgment of the FST in this regard with all convenience.  
12.   Accordingly,  for reasons  stated above , the petition 
being barred  by time  and on merits too, does not deserve any 
indulgence by this Court, hence the same is dismissed and leave to 
appeal decline d.  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
3rd March, 2014  
Nisar/*  
    Not Approved For Reporting  