IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
MR. JUSTICE MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED  
 
Criminal Petition No. 27-P of 2014  
(Against the judgment dated  05.03.2014  passed by the 
Peshawar High Court  Peshawar in Cr. A. No. 100/201 1) 
 
Gul Zarin and other  
 …Petitioner  
Versus  
 
Fazal Khaliq and another  
..Respondent  
     
 
For the  Petitioner(s) : Haji Muhammad Zahir Shah, ASC  
 
For the Respondent (s): N.R. 
 
For the State :  Mr. Muhammad Nisar,  
    Addl. Advocat e General KPK  
 
Date of hearing:   06.7.2021  
 
ORDER  
 
 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J-. Respondent was 
tried for murderous assault as well as on two counts of homicide by a 
learned Additional Sessions Judge at Wari , District Dir Upper ; 
convicted on all counts , he was sentenced to imprisonment for life 
and ten years rigorous imprisonment respectively vide judgment 
dated 10.10.2011 , overturned by a Division Bench of Peshawar High 
Court, Mingora Bench vide impugned judgment dated 03.05.2014 , 
vires whereof, are bein g assailed on the ground s that in the face of 
overwhelming evidence  comprising of witnesses that included an 
injured to support a dying declaration , there was no occasion for the 
High Court to acquit the respondent , blamed  alongside the 
absconding co -accus ed for the crime in the backdrop of a motive over 
immovable property , resulting into the loss of two lives ; he has 
referred to respondent’s  return after absconsion,  spreading over a 
quarter of a century  with his accomplices still away from law , to 
finally earn acquittal . The learned counsel  has further argued that 
non-performance of autopsy on the dead , being a practice in line with Cr.P. 27-P/2014  2
local c ustom  did not adversely reflect upon the prosecution case  
inasmuch as the homicidal death s of both the deceased remaine d a 
common ground throughout ; according to him, the impugned view 
being based upon reasons, artificial and illusory, is untenable at law  
and, thus, tends to result into miscarriage of justice , clamouring 
interference by this Court .  
 Though much water has flown under the bridge,  nonetheless,  
the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case , despite flux of time,  
call for reappraisal of prosecution’s evidence to secure the ends of 
justice.  Leave is granted , inter alia , to consider the above contentions . 
Send  for the respondent  through bailable warrant in the sum of 
Rs.200,000/ - with one surety in the like amount, returnable to the 
Assistant Registrar of this Court at Peshawar , to be executed through 
the Station House Officer , within a fortnight . 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Peshawar ,  
6th July, 2021  
Azmat /- 
‘Not approved for reporting’  