IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
 
Suo Moto Case No. 4 of 2021   
AND 
Suo Moto Case No. 5 of 2021  
 
AND 
 
Constitution Petition No. 27 of 2022  
 
Syed Ibn -e-Hussain and others .    … Petitioner s 
     Versus  
Federation of Pakistan through its Secretary M/o  
Information, Islamabad and others .    … Respondent s 
 
AND 
 
Constitution Petition No. 4 of 2024  
 
Press Association of the Supreme Court through its  
President Mian Aqeel Afzal, Islamabad and another.  … Petitioners  
     Versus  
Federation of Pakistan through its Secretary M/o  
Interior , Islamabad and another .    … Respondent s 
 
 
 
For the Petitioner:    Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, ASC.  
(In Const.P.4/24)    a/w Mr. Aqeel Afzal and Imran Wasim.  
  
For Petitioner s/Applicants : Mr. Matiullah Jan.  
 (In SMCs. 4 & 5/21)    Mr. Abdul Qayyum Siddiqui . 
     Mr. Absar Alam.  
     Mr. Jahangir Khan Jadoon, ASC.  
     (on behalf of Mr. Amir Mir)  
 
For the Petitioner:    Nemo.  
(In Const.P.27/22)  
 
On Court’s Notice : 
For the Federation:   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
Malik Javed Iqbal,  
Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 
For Islamabad Police:   Mr. Ayyaz Shaukat,  
Advocate -General, Islamabad.  
     Dr. Nasir Akbar Khan, IGP.  
     Mr. Masood Bangash, SSP (inv.), Islamabad.  
     Mr. Hasan Raza, DSP (Legal).  
 SMC No. 4/2021 etc.  
 
 2
For Govt. of Punjab:   Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik,  
Additional Advocate -General, Punjab.  
       
 
For Govt. of Sindh:   Mr. Hassan Akbar, Advocate -General, Sindh.  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan : Mr. Ayaz Swati,  
Additional Advocate -General, Balochistan.  
 
For Govt. of KP:    Mr. Zahid Yousaf, AOR for State.  
 
For PEMRA:     Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, ASC.  
     Mr. Haris Azmat, ASC.  
 
For FIA:     Mr. Waqar -ud-Din, Addl. D.G. (Ops),  
FIA Cyber Crime.  
 
For M/o Information  
And Broadcasting:   Mr. Abid Mehmood Ch., Law Officer.  
 
For Pak. Bar Council:   Mr. Riazat Ali Sahar, Vice Chairman.  
 
For SCBA:     Syed Ali Imran, Secretary.  
     
Date of Hearing:    11.03.2024 . 
 
ORDER  
 Pursuant to the orders dated 29 and 30 January 2024 two reports 
have been submitted by Senior Superintendent of Police, Islamabad  (‘SSP’) 
(CMA No. 1230 of 2024) and the other by Federal Investigation Agency 
(‘FIA’) (CMA No. 22 of 2023). We have read these  reports and are not 
satisfied with them. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AGP’) is 
also not satisfied with them and assures us that comprehensive reports 
attending to the crimes that were committed will be submitted by or before 
the next date of  hearing.  
 
2. Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed  states that he has filed Constitution 
Petition No. 4 of 2024 on behalf of the Press Association of the Supreme 
Court (‘ PASC ’) and it has been fixed with these cases as it was ordered that 
all such cases be fixed together. Since learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed 
represent s PASC he was asked whether he would represent those 
journalists who are mentioned in the said two CMAs and he agreed . 
Therefore, the learned AGP to provide him copies  of the CMAs. Some of the 
said journalists are present in Court and some are not and learned Mr. 
Salahuddin Ahmed states that he will be seeking instructions  from all of 
them . It is stated in CMA No. 1230/2024 that Mr. Matiullah Jan  was not 
cooperating in the investigation , therefore, we en quired from the SSP to SMC No. 4/2021 etc.  
 
 3
explain this, but instead of doing so he withdrew the allegation . Mr. 
Matiullah Jan states that he has certain information which, in the first 
instance, should be provided to the investigation officer.  
 
3. We expect that no stone would be left unturned to unearth the 
perpetrators of these crimes against journalists.  Intimidation of the press 
will not be tolerated ; the freedom of the press  is a valuable fundamental 
right enshrined in Article 19 of the Constit ution and this right helps secure 
other fundamental rights as a responsible/vigilant press highlights 
infringement s of fundamental rights . Let fresh reports be submitted both by 
the police as well as by the FIA in respect of the attacks on  the said 
journal ists.  If a thorough investigation is not carried out it may imply that 
this is not done so as to facilitate the perpetrators of the said crimes .  
 
4. Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed has referred to notice s dated 25 
January 2024 issued by the FIA , under section 16 0 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1860 , wherein it is stated that ‘ Gist of Allegation : Explicit and 
malicious campaign against Hon. Judges of Supreme Court of Pakistan ’. We 
enquired whether any judge or the Registrar of the Supreme Court had 
complained and were told that no complaint was made.  We next enquired 
whether prior to issuing such notice s the concerned Judge or the Registrar 
was informed of the proposed action and were told that this too was not 
done.  
 
5. The learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed has also referred to FIR 
No.54/2024 , registered on 26 February 2024 , by an Inspector of Cyber 
Crimes, FIA  under section s 9, 10 and 24 of the Prevention of Electronic 
Crimes Act,  2016 (‘ the Act ’), and states that even if the contents are taken 
to be correct then too it would not constitute these offence s. The learned 
AGP stated that a plain reading of the FIR suggests that section s 9 and 10 
of the Act are not attracted, and he will be looking into the matter.  
 
6. That when reference t o Judges of the Supreme Court is made in the 
notices and this is followed by registering an FIR the public will assume 
that action was initiated on the complaint of or on the behest of a Judge or 
the Registrar of the Supreme Court . However, the FIR does no t mention any 
Judge or the judiciary but mentions ‘civil servants /government officials ’. 
The FIR is also lacking in material particulars with regard to the alleged 
offence s. Resultantly, a  bad name  is brought to the Judiciary and the 
people are misled into  thinking that the action was initiated at its behest.  SMC No. 4/2021 etc.  
 
 4
7. Learned Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed also refers to the joint investigation 
team (‘ JIT’) constituted under section 30 of the Act , which include s 
members of an intelligence agency and states that section 30 does not 
permit their association with the investigation, however, the Prevention of 
Electronic Crimes Investigation Rules, 2018  permits this, therefore, the 
rules  are ultra vires  to section 30 of the Act and to such extent are not 
sustainable.   
 
8. Issue notice  to the respondents in Constitution Petition No. 4 of 
2024. Concise statements to be filed by or before the next date of hearing. 
As suggested to come up on  Monday, 25 March 2024 . 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
11.03.2024  
(M. Tauseef)  