IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:  MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR , CJ 
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
 
SUO MOTU ACTION  TAKEN UP IN COURT  
  
 
  
  
 
  
Date of Hearing:   01.02.2018 
ORDER  
   It has be en common knowledge for years that a large 
number of Pakistani citizens , who are resident s of Pakistan and 
are maintaining accounts in foreign countries without disclosing 
the same to the authorities competent under the Laws of Pakistan 
or paying taxes on the same in accordance with law . Prima facie, it 
appears that such money is siphoned off without the payment of 
taxes through illegal channels and represents either ill -gotten 
gains or kickbacks fro m public contracts. Such money creates 
gross dis proportion , inequality and disparity in the society, which 
warps economic activity and growth , and constitutes plunder and 
theft of national wealth.  
2.  Recently, the names of a large number of Pakistani 
citizens were disclosed in the Panama Papers and Paradise Pape rs. 
The Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) had appeared 
before the Court and made a statement that appropriate action 
was being initiated against the citizens whose names had appeared 
in above said papers . However, no appreciable progress appears to 
have been made in this regard. The society and economy of the 
country is being bled by illegal and surreptitious theft of national SMC -: 2 :-
wealth , which is stashed in foreign countri es, the same could 
otherwise be utilized for the welfare of the people in projects  such 
as education, health and public welfare. Such delinquency 
constitutes violation of the fundamental rights of the citizens of 
Pakistan and is a matter of great public importance.  
3.  Therefore, in exercise of powers under Article 184(3) of 
the Consti tution of  the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, we 
direct as follows:  
i) The State Bank of Pakistan shall before the next date 
of hearing submit a comprehensive report regarding 
steps which have been taken under the International 
agreements/treaties/prot ocols to identify the citizens 
who hold accounts in foreign jurisdictions , including 
UAE, Switzerland, Luxemburg, Spain, UK, etc. and 
other tax haven jurisdictions , including , British Virgin 
Islands, Cayman Islands, Channel Islan ds, etc. 
ii) The State Bank  of Pakistan , the FBR, the Security & 
Exchange Commission of Pakistan and the Ministry of 
Finance shall submit report about the steps taken , in 
collaboration with other State institutions , for retrieval 
of the said money.  
iii) The Federal Board of Revenue shall also submit a 
report providing details of the steps taken on the basis 
of information available , inter alia , through Panama 
Papers and Paradise Papers and the action taken 
against citizens holding properties and banks accounts  
in foreign countries .  SMC -: 3 :-
iv) All State agencies including IB, ISI, MI and FIA are 
directed to share all requisite information available 
with them with this Court.  
v) The State Bank of Pakistan, FBR , the Ministry of 
Finance and Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall 
collaborate with ea ch other, collect and share 
information  and approach the afore -noted foreign 
jurisdictions to obtain such/other further information , 
as may be necessary , through legal and diplomatic 
channels.  
4.   Let responsible officers, conversant with the necessary 
facts appear before this Court on  15.02.2018 .   
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
ISLAMABAD.  
1st February, 2018. 
Mudassar / 
 