IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik  
 
Constitution Petition  No.13 of 20 23  
(Setting Aside Show Cause  Notices Dated 
12.4.2023 issued by Pakistan  Bar Council to 
Muqtedir  Akhtar Shabbir, Secretary and  Malik 
Shakeel ur Rehman,  Additional Secretary, 
Supreme  Court Bar Association)  
  
Supreme Court Bar Association, through  
its Vice -President, Islamabad and others       …Petitioner  
  
                                       Versus  
 
Pakistan Bar Council, through its  
Secretary, Islamabad and another  …Respondents  
 
 
In attendance:  
Mr. Abid S. Zube ri, ASC 
Mr. Ishtiaq A . Khan , ASC  
Mr. Shoaib Shaheen , ASC 
Mr. Ghulam Musta fa Kandwal , ASC
Ch. Ikraam , ASC  
Sh. Ahsan -ud-Din, ASC  
Mr. Niaz ullah Khan Niazi , ASC  
Ch. Hafeez ullah Ya qoob, ASC  
Malik Jawwad Khalid , ASC  
Mr. Tallat Abbas , ASC  
Mr. M. Saim Chaudhry,  ASC  
Mr. Javeed Ahmad Cha ttari, ASC 
Ms. Shazia Bilal, ASC  
  
  
Date of Hearing:  05.05.2023 
 
ORDER  
 
This constitution petition has  been instituted under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973  
(“Constitution ”) for setting aside show cause notices dated 12.4.2023, 
issued by Pakistan Bar Council to Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir, 
Secretary , Supreme Court B ar Association  (petitioner No.2) and Malik 
Shakeel -ur-Rehman, Additional Secretary,  Supreme Court Bar 
Association  (petitioner No.3).  In the course of  hearing, Mr. Abid S. 
Zuberi, learned ASC, filed an unnumbered Civil Miscellaneous 
Application, which shows  that during the pendency of this petition, the Const.P.12/23  2 
 
respondents No.2 and 3 have a lready de -seated the petitioner no. 2 
and 3  and sent the matter to the disciplinary committee of the 
Pakistan Bar Council ( “PBC”) for further proceedings . The learned 
counsel referred to Rule 118 of the Pakistan Legal Practitioner & Bar 
Council Rules, 1976 and argued that , under the niceties of this Rule, 
the only competent authority was the disciplinary committee where a 
complaint, if any, against petitioners No.2 and 3  should hav e been 
filed to take cognizance and decide the matter as per the Rules , which 
is applicable mutatis mutandis  even in the cases where Pakistan Bar 
Council starts suo moto  disciplinary  proceedings against an advocate  
under Rule 125 . He further argued that no  specific rule or any section 
of law has been cited in the show cau se notice s. We asked the learned 
counsel  why the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution is directly invoked rather than filing writ petition in the 
High Court u nder Article 199 of the Constitution ? In response, the 
learned counsel argued that certain  dictums have been laid down by 
this Court  wherein the invoking of High Court jurisdiction was not 
approved. In support  of his contention, he relied on the cases  reported 
as Muhammad Shoaib Shaheen and others vs. Pakistan Bar Council 
and others (PLD 2017 SC 231)  and Syed Iqbal Hussain Shah Gillani 
vs. Pakistan Bar Council through Secretary, Supreme Court Bar and 
others (2021 SCMR 425) . 
 
2. We have also asked the learne d counsel to satisfy us on the 
maintainability of this petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
which predominantly  relates to the question of public importance with 
reference to the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights 
conferred by Chapte r 1 of Part -II of the Constitution on which he seeks 
time to make submissions on the next date , but right now it was 
contended that the reply to the  show cause notices were submitted 
but, without providing any opportunity of hearing , the drastic action of 
de-seating was taken which is a grave violation of Article 10 -A of the 
Constitution and after passing illegal order of de -seating, the matter 
has been referred  to Disciplinary  Committee . He made a request that 
since the order of de -seating has not been imp lemented therefore, its 
operation may be suspended on the imminent  apprehension that if no 
restraining order is passed, the incumbent to the posts will take over 
the charge  from petitioner  No.2 and 3 . As we have been informed that 
the order of de -seating h as already been passed by the PBC with 
regard to the offices of the petitioners No.2 and 3, therefore at this Const.P.12/23  3 
 
stage a mandatory form of injunction  cannot be granted  without notice 
to the other side .  
 
4. However, s ubject to satisfying the maintainability o f this 
Constitution  Petition, let notice be issued to the respondents as well as 
the Attorney General for Pakistan for 09.05.2023 at 1:00 p.m. 
Meanwhile, status quo is to be maintained.  
 
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
5th May, 2023 
Mudassar /                                            
 