IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
( Appellate Jurisdiction )  
 
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
 
Criminal Original Petition No.06 of 2024  
(Contempt proceedings against Senator Faisal Vawda on account of  his  
press conference in the National Press Club, Islamabad on 15.05.2024)  
 
Attendance  
    
On Court Notice:     Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. Attorney General  
      Raja Muhammad Shafqat Abbasi, DAG  
 
On behalf of SCBA: Ch. M. Younas, Member Executive.  
      Mr. Asim Ali Bokahri, Member Executive Committee  
      Mr. Rifaqat Islam Awan, Finance Secy.     
 
Date of hearing :   17.05.2024  
 
 
ORDER  
1. On 15 May 2024  Senator  Faisal Vawda held a press conference at the 
National Press Club, Islamabad which was broadcast live on a number of 
television channels. In the press conference he apparently  leveled several 
malicious and serious allegations against the Judiciary , commented on the 
Judges of the superior courts an d spoke about sub  judice cases, including 
those before this Court. The press conference was also streamed on the 
internet and social media forum s and extract s from his talk w ere published 
in different newspapers.  
2. After the matter of Senator Faisal Vawda was numbered as Criminal 
Original No.6 of 2024 a similar press conference was conducted by            
Mr. Mustafa Kamal, Member of the National Assembly (‘ MNA ’), on 16 May 
2024 , also at the National Press Club, Isla mabad , and which was also 
broadcast live on a number of television channels. In the press conference 
he apparently leveled several malicious and serious allegations against the 
Judiciary, commented on the Judges of the superior courts and spoke 
about sub  judice cases, including those before th is Court. The press 
conference was  also streamed on the internet and social media for ums and 
extract s from his talk were  published in different newspapers.  Crl.O.P.6/2024  
 
 2
3. Article 19 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘ the 
Constitution ’) grants to every citizen the right to freedom  of speech and 
expression  but places restriction s, amongst others,  with regard to contempt 
of Court. Article 204 of the Constitution defines contempt of Court  and 
empowers this  Court to punish any person who : 
‘(a) abuses, interferes with or obstructs the process of the Court in 
any way or disobeys any order of the Court;  
(b) scandalizes the Court or otherwise does anything which tends 
to bring the Court or a Judge of the Court i nto hatred, ridicule 
or contempt;  
(c) does anything which tends to pre judice the determination of a 
matter pending before the Court; or    
(d) does any other thing which, by law, constitutes contempt of 
the Court. ’ 
 
 Contempt of Court is further  attended t o by the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance , 2003.  
4. Prima facie  what was said by Senator Faisal Vawda appears to be 
contempt of Court, therefore, we are constrain ed to issue show cause notice 
to him and Senator Faisal Vawda is granted an opportunity to submit his 
explanation/reply within two weeks of the receipt of the show cause notice . 
He is directed to be in attend ance before this Court on the next date of 
hearing. Show cause no tice to him be sent at his residential addr ess and 
also to the Secretar iat of the Senate of Pakistan.  
 
5. What Mr. Mustafa Kamal, MNA, said also  prima facie  appears to be 
contempt of Court, therefore, we are constrain ed to issue show cause notice 
to him and Mr. Mustafa Kamal, MNA , is granted an opportunity  to submit 
his explanation/reply within two weeks of the receipt of the show cause 
notice . He is directed to be in attend ance before this Court on the next date 
of hearing.  Show cause notice be sent to him at his residential address and 
also to the Secreta riat of the National Assembly.  
 
6. Notice be also issued to the Attorney -General for Pakistan , under rule 
7(2) of Order XXVII  of the Supreme Court R ules, 1980 , who shall conduct 
the proceedings. Copy of this order be sent to the learned Attorney -General.  
 Crl.O.P.6/2024  
 
 3
7. The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) is 
directed to submit recording of said two press -conferences together with 
their complete transcript s, including that of the question and answer  
session.  
8. That television channels and all t hose who broad cast, re -broadcast 
and/or publish  material constituting contempt of Court may also be 
committing contempt of Court, therefore, the y should desist from doing so, 
failing which they may also be proceeded against  contempt of Court.    
 To come up on Wednesday, 5 June 2024 .    
  
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad:  
17.05.2024  
(M. Saeed)  
 
   Approved for Reporting.  
 
 