IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
MR. JUSTICE YAHYA AFRIDI  
 
 
Civil Appeal No. 73 -K of 2018  
(Against the order dated 13.08.2018 
passed by the High Court of Sindh, 
Karachi in Civil Revision No. 54 of 2012)  
 
Syed Jamil Ahmad  
…Appellant  
     Versus  
Muhammad Salam, etc.  
      …Respondent s 
               
 
For the  appellant:  Mr. Shahab Sarki, ASC  
Mr. K. A. Wahab, AOR  
 
Respondents:  Ex-parte.  
   
Date of hearing:    06.01.2022   
 
ORDER  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, J . Learned counsel for the appellant states that on 
31 August 1989 the appellant was granted a lease of a 204.06 
square yards plot by the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation (‘ KMC ’), 
however, he should also have been leased an additional 40.56 
square yards, but  instead it was granted to the respondent No. 1 
on 21 May 1985. He states that the Appellate Court had correctly 
decreed the suit of the appellant but the learned Judge of the High 
Court set aside the judgment of the Appellate Court and restored 
the decisi on of the Trial Court, which had dismissed the suit, 
primarily on the ground of limitation.  
 
2. It transpires that the appellant had sought the same relief in 
a suit filed by him in the year 1991 which was dismissed for non -
prosecution. The suit, which is the subject matter of this case, was 
filed in the year 1995 and was dismissed as it was time -barred. 
Learned counsel was not able to satisfy us that the suit filed 
seeking a declaration and cancellation of a lease granted in the 
year 1985 could be filed in the year 1995. The suit was clearly 
time-barred and the judgments of the Trial Court and of the  High 
Court are correct.  
 
3. Another question arises and one that went to the very 
maintainability of the suit which was whether the appellant could Civil Appeal No. 73 -K of 2018  2
claim entitlement to a plot which was not in his possession. The 
leases granted by the Directorate of Katchi Abadi es of the KMC to 
the respondent No. 1 and the appellant are both titled, ‘ Lease for 
Plot by Regularization of Unauthoris ed Possession .’ Persons in 
unauthorised possession of land (not owned by them) and which 
formed part of a declared Katchi Abadi e were granted ownership 
rights to the land in their possession by the KMC. Admittedly, the 
appellant was not in possession of the land in respect of which the 
respondent No. 1 was granted a lease. The appellant contended 
that the respondent No. 1 was his t enant. Therefore, the 
respondent No. 1 should not have been granted the said lease. 
Even if it be assumed that the respondent No. 1 was the 
appellant’s tenant still the appellant could not claim leasehold 
rights on the basis of the purported tenancy in res pect of land 
situated in a declared katchi abadie.  The law regularizing katchi 
abadies is meant to accommodate/benefit the landless. The 
appellant based his claim to the land which admittedly was not 
owned by him nor was in his possession. Land in katchi a badies  
cannot be used for personal enrichment by somehow acquiring 
possession of it and then handing over its possession to a 
purported tenant. It would be against public policy if money is 
permitted to be made at the expense of the landowner, by 
exploitin g the landless and then claiming ownership rights 
emanating from having had possession of such land. The appellant 
had no legal character  in terms of section 42 of the Specific Relief 
Act, 1877 and his suit, seeking declaration to ownership of the 
said plot, in possession of the respondent No.1, was not 
maintainable.  
 
4. Therefore, for the aforesaid reasons, this appeal is dismissed 
but wi th no order as to cost as it has proceeded ex parte . Copy of 
this order be sent to the respondents.  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Karachi  
06.01.2022  
Approved for Reporting  
Arif   