IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Faisal Arab  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 169 of 2020  
(Against judgment dated 13.2.2020 passed by the 
High Court of Sindh, Karachi in Cr. Bail Application 
No.1327 of 2019)  
 
Ghulam Farooq Channa  
   …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
Special Judge ACE (Central -I) Karachi & another  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Ghulam Sajjad Gopang, ASC 
with petitioner  
 
For the State : N.R. 
 
Date of hearing:  03.03.2020. 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Avoiding arrest 
since 28.8.2019,  in the wake of dismissals,  Ghulam Farooq 
Channa, Secretary Union Council  Jamshed Town, Karachi  seeks 
bail in anticipation thereto ; he is accused  of having fabricated a 
fake death certificate of one Naseem Begum Chotani, on the basis 
whereof, his co -accused attempted to hoodwink judicial process  to 
grab valuable properties vesting in the lady . Upon disclosure, the 
scam was reported to the Anti -Corruption Authorities and 
pursuant to an inquiry, the petitioner has been arrayed as accused 
alongside the accomplices.  
2.  Learned counsel for the petit ioner contends that 
alleged fabrication was reported after five years  and in fact was 
committed  by the officials at the higher rung and that the 
petitioner was being hounded  as a scapegoat to save the real 
culprits ; it is argued that the co -accused have si nce been enlarged 
on post arrest bail  and, thus, petitioner ’s remission into custody is 
not likely to serve any useful purpose , relative to investigation.  
3.  Heard.  Cr. Petition No. 169 of 2020  
 
 2
4.  Grant of bail  to an accused required in a cognizable 
and non -bail offence prior to hi s arrest  is an extraordinary judicial 
intervention  in an ongoing or imminent  investigative process . It 
clogs the very mechanics  of State authority  to investigate and 
prosecute violations of law designated as crimes . To prevent arrest  
of an accused where it  is so required by law  is a measure  with far 
reaching consequences  that may include loss or disappearance of 
evidence . The Statute does not  contemplate  such a remedy and it 
was judicial ly advented  way back in the year 1949 in the case of 
Hidayat Ullah Khan Vs. The Crown  (PLD 1949 Lahore 21)  with 
purposes sacrosanct and noble , essentially to provide judicial 
refuge to the innocent  and the vulnerable  from the rigors of abuse 
of process of law ; to protect human dignity and honour  from the 
humiliation of arrest intended for  designs sinister and oblique . The 
remedy oriented in equity cannot be invoked in every run of the 
mill criminal case, prima facie  supported by material and evidence , 
constituting  a non -bailable/cognizable offence , warranting arrest , 
an inherent attribute of the dynamics of Criminal Justice System  
with a deterrent impact ; it is certainly not a substitute for post 
arrest bail . 
The petitioner  was at the helm of affairs when the bogus 
certificate was issued ; cognizance on belated disclosure  does not 
mitigate the culpability  nor can be equated with mala fide .  Release 
of co -accused on post arrest bail s is entirely beside the mark  for 
the reasons stated above.  View taken by the learned High Court of 
Sindh as we ll as the learned Special Judge  (Central -I) Karachi  is in 
accord with the law, being consistently followed  by this Court  till 
date. Petition fails. Leave declined.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad , the 
3rd March , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 
 