IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
 
Case Under  Objection No. 19/2024  
In 
Constitution Petition NIL/2024  
 
 
All Public Universities BPS Teachers Association  
(APUBTA) through its President.     … Petitioner  
     Versus  
The Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Federal Education  
and Professional Training, Islamabad and others.   … Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioner :   Mr. Umer Ijaz Gilani, ASC.  
     Assisted by Mr. Sajjad Hameed, AHC.   
Mr. Mehmood Ahmed Sheikh, AOR.  
a/w Petitioner.  
 
For the Respondents:   Not represented.  
 
Date of Hearing:    01.04. 2024 . 
 
ORDER  
 Learned Mr. Umar Ijaz Gilani states that th is constitution petition 
has been filed by the All Public Universities BPS Teachers Association  
(‘Association ’), a registered charity , which represents about fifty thousand 
teachers working in public universit ies. He states that the Association ’s 
only reason for bringing this matter to the attention of the Court and its 
only interest is to ensure that federal laws, provincial laws and statutes of 
public sector universities are implemented. He submits that there are three 
major grievances of the petitioner: firstly, that out of the 147 public  sector 
universities about 60 are functioning without vice chancellors; secondly, 
the tenured positions in public sector universities are not filled -in; thirdly, 
the decision making bodies of the public sector universities, including their 
boards of govern ors, syndicates, senates and academic councils do not hold 
meetings with the frequency as stipulated in the law or their respective 
statutes , consequently public sector universities are under performing  and 
impinges on their academic freedom . He further su bmits that public sector 
universities , as envisaged in the law , were supposed to be autonomous but CUO No. 1 9/2024  
 
 2 
when the said positions are not filled -in and meeting s do not tak e place it 
facilitates outside interference including by the Federal and provincial 
governme nts.  
 
2. Learned counsel submits that the grievance of the petitioner falls 
squarely within the parameters of Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘the Constitution ’) as it is a matter of public 
importance and require s the enforcement of the Constitution and the 
Fundamental Rights  mentioned therein . In this regard he submits that 
Article 4 of the Constitution stipulates that citizen s must be treated in 
accordance with the law, which is their inalienable right , and that when 
public sector universities , which are dependent on their funding on 
taxpayers money , are not governed in accordance with the law and their 
respective statutes, th e citizens’ inalienable right is violated. He further 
states that Article 25 of the Const itution requires that all citizens be treated 
equally, however, when some public sector universities are functioning in 
accordance with law and other s are not with regard to the latter the citizens 
are not treated equally. He further submits that the Const itution was 
amended and Article 25A was inserted therein in the year 2010 , and 
though the said provision  attends to children upto the age of 16 years  it 
show s the importance attached by Parliament to education. Reference is 
made to the case of Aamir Raza A shfaq v Minhaj Ahmed Khan  (2012 SCMR 
6) wherein it was held that the position of Vice Chancellor should not be left 
vacant and that delay in such appointment has an adverse affect on the 
functioning of the University, and reliance therein was placed on Article 9 
(right to life ) which was given a broad meaning. Principle s of Policy  
mentioned in Article 37(c) and (f) of the Constitution  are also relevant , 
which are reproduced hereunder:  
 
‘37.  The State shall.  
 
(c) make technical and professional education  
generally available and higher education equally 
accessible to all on the basis of merit;  
 
(f) enable the people of different areas, through 
education, training, agricultural and industrial 
development and other methods, to participate fully in 
all forms of national activities, including employm ent 
in the service of Pakistan’  
 
 CUO No. 1 9/2024  
 
 3 
3. For the aforesaid reasons, the office objection is overruled and the 
Constitution Petition  is entertained under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  
since it raises questions of public importance with regard to the 
enforcement of Fundamental Rights and other rights of citizen s mentioned 
in the Constitution. Therefore , office is directed to number the Constitution 
Petition.  
 
4. Issue notice  to the respondents , except respondent No. 2. The said 
respondents should submit their comments with regard to the public sector 
universities within their respective jurisdictions, including identifying the 
public sector universities where the positions of vice chancellors and other 
tenured positio ns are lying vacant or such positions are held on acting 
charge basis and since when. The comments should also disclose the 
statutory requirements regarding the periodic holding of meetings 
stipulated therein and whether the universities are compliant therewith. To 
be fixed in the second week of May, 2024.   
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
01.04.2024  
(M. Tauseef)  