IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
 
 (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
  PRESENT:
 
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, HCJ  
  Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
  Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
Constitution Petition No.5 of 2013
 
(Challenging the constitution of Election 
Commission of Pakistan)  
 
 
Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri  
… … Petitioner  
     Versus
    
 
The Federation of Pakistan,  
thr. Secretary M/O Law, Islamabad & others  
… … Respondent  
 
 
Petitioner :     In person  
       
On Court Notice & for the  : Mr. Irfan Qadir, A.G. for Pakistan  
Federation  (Resp. No.1&3)    
 
 
For Election Commission  : Mr. Muhammad Munir Peracha,  Sr. ASC  
      Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
      Mr. Abdul Rehman, Addl. D.G. Legal  
 
For Parliamentary Committee  : Mr. Muhammad Latif Qureshi,  
      Joint Secy. National Assembly  
 
 
Dates of hearing    : 11th to 13th February, 2013 
 
JUDGMENT
 
 
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.
— It is the will of the 
people of Pakistan to establish an order wherein the State shall 
exercise its powers and authority through the chosen r epresentatives 
of the people and wherein the principle of democracy , freedom, 
equality, tolerance and social justice, as enunciated by the Islam, shall 
be fully observed and to achieve the principle and provisions set out in Const.P.5/13  2 
the objective resolution, they have to elect their representatives i.e. 
Members of the National Assembly and Provincial Assemblies and 
Senate as well as Local Government, through the process/procedure of 
elections to be organized and conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in 
accordance with law, by the Election Commission, constituted under 
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  
2.   This petition has been filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  by the petitioner Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri in his 
personal capacity as a citizen of Pakistan. Following relief has been 
claimed in the petition: - 
(i) The appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and 
four Hon ’ble Members of the Election Commission of 
Pakistan is not in accordance with the provisions of 
Article 213 and 218 of the  Constitution . Hence, all 
these appointments are void ab -initio.  
(ii) That a direction to respondent No.1 may graciously 
be issued on an urgent basis to appoint the Chief 
Election Commissioner and all other Members of the 
Election Commission of Pakistan immedia tely in 
accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 
213(2)(a) and 218(2) (a) and (b) of the Constitution 
of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, so that the 
forthcoming election may not be delayed on any 
pretext and is conducted, fairly, justly and in  
accordance with law.  
3.   The Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) has to 
conduct/organize elections enabling the people of Pakistan to elect 
their representatives by means of a free and fair electoral process. As 
per prevailing constitution al dispensati on, vide notification No. 
F.3(13)/2010 -Estt-I dated 16.06.2011, issued under  Article 218(2)(b) 
of the Constitution , four former Judges of the High Courts were Const.P.5/13  3 
appointed as members of ECP  by the President of Pakistan. Thereafter, 
on the retirement of the th en Chief Election Commissioner , incumbent  
Chief Election Commissioner  was appointed vide notification 
No.F.5(7)/2011 -PA(C) dated 16.07.2012. Admittedly, the Commission , 
after fully becoming operational , performed the duties envisaged 
under Article 219 of t he Constitution  i.e. preparing electoral rolls for 
electi ons to the National Assembly,  the Provincial Assemblies, and 
revising such rolls annually ; organizing and conducting elections to the 
Senate or to fill  up casual vacancies in a House or a Provincial 
Assembly ; appointing Election Tribunals , etc. and is now ready for 
holding general elections to the National Assembly and the Provincial 
Assemblies as the general elections are due on the completion of  their  
five year  term s in the month of March 2013 under  Article 55 of the 
Constitution.  Instant petition has been  filed on 07.02.2013 , 
challenging the appointment of Chief Election Commissioner  as well as 
members of ECP . As the petitioner had  not established  his locus standi  
to file instant  petition,  therefore , on 11.02.2013 , he was directed to 
file a concise statement.   
4.  A Perusal of the concise statement dated 14.2.2013 filed 
vide CMA No.  756/2013  has revealed that he also holds citizen ship of 
Canada , which he has acquired under section 24 of the Canadian 
Citizenship Act,  1985  as a consequence whereof , he has shown 
allegiance on oath to the following effect :-  
“From this day forward, I pledge my loyalty and allegiance 
to Canada and Her Majesty Elizabeth the Second, Queen of 
Canada. I promise to respect our country’s Rights and 
freedoms, to uphold our democratic values, to faithfully 
observe our laws and fulfill my duties and obligations as a 
Canadian citizen .”  Const.P.5/13  4 
 
5.  Under section 14(1) of the Pakistan Citizenship Act, 1951 , 
if any person is a citizen of Paki stan under the provisions of that  Act, 
and is at the same time a citizen or national of any other country, he 
shall, unless he makes a declaration according to the laws of that 
other country renouncing his status as citizen or national thereof, 
cease to be  a citizen of Pakistan. However, under sub -section (3), the 
said provision shall not apply to a person who being, or having at any 
time been, a citizen of Pakistan, is also the citizen of the United 
Kingdom and Colonies or of such other country as the Fede ral 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf.  
However,  for a person with dual citizenship, there is an express 
prohibition that disqualifies him  to be elected as Member of P arliament 
under Article 63( 1)(c) of the Constitution, which reads as under: - 
“63. Disqualifications for membership of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) . (1) A person shall be disqualified from being 
elected or chosen as, and from being, a member of the 
Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament), if: -  
(a) … …  
(b) … … 
(c) he ceases to be a citizen of Pakistan, or acquires the 
citizenship of a foreign State; ” 
 
Reliance in this behalf is also made on the case of  Syed Mehmood 
Akhtar Naqvi v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 1089).  
6.   Petitioner contended that being a citizen  of Pakistan  there 
is no bar to invoke  the jurisdiction of this  Court under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution. Reliance has been placed on  the cases of Benazir 
Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416),  Muhammad 
Saifullah Khan v. Federat ion of Pakistan (1989 SCMR 22), Shehla Zia 
v. WAPDA (PLD 1994 SC 693),  Yasmin Khan v. Election Commission of Const.P.5/13  5 
Pakistan (1994 SCMR 113),  Al-Jehad Trust v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 1996 SC 324),  Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 
161),  Ardeshi r Kowasjee v. Karachi Building Control Authority (1999 
SCMR 2883), Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2006 SC 
697), Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
2009 SC 879), Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries  (PLD 2010 SC  
1109), Al-Jehad Trust v. Lahore High Court (2011 SCMR 1688),  Shahid 
Orakzai v. Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 365)  Workers ’ Party Pakistan v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 681) and  Umar Ahmed Ghuman v. 
Government of Pakistan (PLD 2002 Lahore 521).  
7.   Learned Attorney General  stated as follows: - 
(a) If the case law cited by the petitioner  is taken to be 
correct, he has locus standi  in this case.  
(b) The judgment of 31.03. 2009 reported as Sindh High Court 
Bar Association v. Federation (PLD 2009 SC 879) , relied 
upon by the petition er is unconstit utional, especially when  
Supreme Court Bar Association has passed a resolution for 
revisiting it .  
(c) Any judgment of the Supreme Court is not important but 
the provisions of the Constitution are important and as he 
has been appo inted under Article 100 of the Constitution , 
therefore, as a Constitutional functionary it is his first and 
foremost duty to follow the Constitution  and any decision 
of the Court, which runs co ntrary  to the Constitution, he 
cannot subscribe to that.  
(d) Articles 189 and 190  of the Constitution  will only apply to 
those judgments , which are within the confines of Article 
175(2) of the Constitution.  Const.P.5/13  6 
(e) As far as the bona fide  of the petitioner is concerned, it is 
something which is not to be prove n but bona fides  are to 
be presumed, unless and until mala  fides are attributed. 
And this is exactly what the law of evidence says , that 
question of good conduct  and character is irrelevant unless 
evidence is given of a bad character in which it becomes 
relevant. In the ins tant case the question of bona fides  
would pale into insignificance and would not be relevant 
unless we have evidence that all this has been brought 
with mala fide  intention and Courts have held in a number 
of rulings that mala fides are not only to be sta ted but they 
are to be prove n.  
(f) The petitioner has laid information before this Court and 
the Court can always take notice of that information 
irrespective of any bona fides  and if the Court feels that 
there is a law point involved which touches upon 
Funda mental Rights  and is a matter of public importance 
which has been brought to the notice of the Court then 
surely the Court on the basis of such information laid 
before it can assume jurisdiction , which it has done in a 
number of cases.  
(g) There is no mala fi de of the petitioner apparent from the 
record . However, this Court ha s to examine the question of 
laches that at this point of time the petitioner has 
approached this Court. Why has the petitioner not 
approached  this Court at an appropriate time?   Const.P.5/13  7 
8.   Mr. Muhammad Munir Peracha, learned counsel who 
appeared on behalf of the ECP stated that: - 
(a) The p etition  is barred by laches. Therefore, at this stage , 
discretion may not be exercised by granting relief claimed 
by the petitioner.  
(b) Petitioner has no locus stan di to file this petition as neither 
a request has been made to enforce any Fundamental 
Right involving question of public importance nor any bona 
fide has been shown to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . 
9.   It is the contention of Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha , 
learned ASC that petitioner demanded in his first public address , inter 
alia, that appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner and the 
Members be set aside for being contrary to constitutional provision s. 
Subsequently,  he arranged Long March and  a sitting in Islamabad from 
14th to 17th January, 2013 wherein he had put forward the same 
demand , among others . Having failed to achieve his object , he has 
initiated instant petition with the prayer noted above. Therefore, mere 
filing of petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution itself would 
not provide him locus standi to seek relief as he has not put forward 
any question of public importance and the enforcement of fundamental 
rights . Hence, discretion may not be exercised in his favour.  
At one stage , the learned counsel also stated that the petitioner 
in his first public address after coming to  Pakistan raised a slogan, 
“ ﺳﯿﺎﺳﺖ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ۔ رﯾﺎﺳﺖ ﺑﭽﺎوٰ“  (save the State, not politics)  and to achieve this 
object , stated that the  postponement of election s for a period of two 
years would be in the interest s of the State.  Const.P.5/13  8 
The petitioner controverted the stand taken by the learned 
counsel and presented a transcript of his speech , forcefully stat ing that 
he had never d emanded postponement of election s for a period of two 
years.  
10.   The factual aspect of the case as has been alleged by the 
parties has to be resolved either in view of the pleadings and facts 
which have been brought on recor d or by taking into considera tion 
certain constitutional provisions relating to the completion of five year  
term of Parliament in the month of March , 2013 in terms of Article 55 
of the Constitution .  
11.   It is to be noted that under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution , the appointmen t of Chief Election Commissioner and the 
members of the ECP have been challenged . Therefore, i t would be 
advantageous to reproduce the text of the provision  here:- 
184. Original Jurisdiction of Supreme Court . (1) … …  
(2)  … …  
(3)  Without prejudice to th e provisions of Article 199, 
the Supreme Court shall, if it considers that a question of 
public importance with reference to the enforcement of 
any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of 
Part II is involved have the power to make an order of t he 
nature mentioned in the said Article.  
 
A perusal of above noted sub-Article (3) of Article 184 manifest s that 
there are two conditions , on the availability of which, original  
jurisdiction of this  Court is to be exercised i.e. question of public 
importa nce and enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights , 
subject to discretion of the Court as the words “if it considers ” have 
been prefaced.  
12.  As per the case law which has  developed so far , the 
jurisdiction of the Court can be invoked  individually and collectively by 
citizen(s) who succeed(s) in establishing  his/their locus standi to Const.P.5/13  9 
achieve the purposes envisaged by the Constitution. In the instant 
case, the petitioner has relied upon various judgments of this Court to 
determine  his locus standi  but he has lost sight of the fact  that 
jurisdiction has to be exercised subject to consideration by the Court 
that a question of public importance with reference to enforcement  of 
any of the Fundamental Rights  has been raised. Essentially , 
consideration of the Court remains  on the existence of public 
importance, which is to be interpreted depending upon the particular  
facts raised before it on a case to case basis. A citizen who invokes the 
jurisdiction of the Court is bound to satisfy the Court that he has come 
before the Court with bona fide intention s and  therefore, he has locus 
standi  to seek enforcement of the Fundamental Rights in question . In 
the cases relied upon by him, this Court exercised jurisdiction where it 
was established that violation of any one o r more Fundamental Rights 
were involved. It would be appropriate to note that in the case of  
Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416) this Court 
held that a fter all , the law is not a closed shop and even in the 
adversar ial procedure, it i s permissible for the next of kin or friends  to 
move the Court on behalf of a minor or a person under disability, or a 
person under detention or in restraint . Why not then a person, if he 
were to act bona fide  to activate a Court for the enforcement of the  
Fundamental Rights of a group or a class of persons who are unable to 
seek relief  from the Court for several reasons . Article 184(3) does not 
say as to what proceedings should be followed . Whatever its nature 
may be must b e judged in light of the purpose,  that is, the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights . The said Article 
provides abundant s cope for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights of 
an individual or a group or a class of persons in the event of their Const.P.5/13  10 
infraction. However , it would be for the Court to generally lay down 
the contours in order to regulate the proceedings initiated by a  group 
or class actions from case to case. Having regard to the connotation of 
the words “public importance ”, it will be for the Supreme Court to 
consider each case  to determine whether an element of “public 
importance ” is involved in the enforcement of Fundamental Rights 
irrespective of the  violation of an  individual ’s rights  or the infractions 
against  the rights of a group or a class of persons.  The Court granted 
relief on the ground that the petitioner had succeeded to show the 
violation of his Fundamental Rights provided under Article 17 of the 
Constitution . In the case of Muhammad Saifullah Khan v. Federation of 
Pakistan (1989 SCMR 22) , this Court declined to acc ept the plea of the 
petitioner with regard to unconstitutionality of certain amendments 
made in the Delimitation of Constituencies Ordinance, 1988 and 
Representation of People Ordinance, 1988 and for declaring the 
constitution of Election Commission to be illegal , on the ground that he 
invoked the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  without alleging any infringement of his Fundamental 
Rights for the enforcement of which he sought to invoke the 
jurisdiction of the Court. In the  case of Shehla Zia v. WAPDA (PLD 
1994 SC 693),  though the proceedings were initiated on a letter but 
the relief was granted for the reasons that violation of Article 9 of the 
Constitution had been prove n. In the case of Yasmin Khan v. Election 
Commission of Pakistan (1994 SCMR 113), the petitioners who were 
permanent residents of Pakistan but were earning their livelihood 
abroad, sought enrolment as voters in the electoral rolls. In the case 
of Al-Jehad Trust v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1996 SC 324) , the 
appointment of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and other Judges of the Const.P.5/13  11 
superior judiciary was challenged for being contrary to the mode  
prescribed in the Constitution for such appointment s. It was  held that 
this Court is entitled to take cognizance of a ma tter which involves a 
question of public importance with reference to any of the 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II of the 
Constitution , even suo motu, without requiring  any formal petition. 
The relief was granted as the Court found that the petitioner ’s right of 
“access to justice for all” enshrined in Article 25 of the Constitution  
was violated . In the case of Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
1998 SC 161) , relief was granted to the petitioner on the ground that 
the petitioner had locus standi  to approach this Court as his right to 
have free, fair and equal access to an independent and impartial 
tribunal granted under Articles 9 and 25 of the Constitution was 
violated. Proceedings in the case of Ardeshir Cowasjee v. Karachi 
Building  Control Authority (1999 SCMR 2883) were initiated under 
Article 18 5(3) of the Constitution against the judgment of Lahore High 
Court  and  thus not applicable in the instant case. Further , the 
petitioner had succeeded in proving a violation of Article 25 of  the 
Constitution as construction of high rise buildings was allowed on an 
amenity plot in a park. In the case of Wattan Party v. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2006 SC 697),  relief was granted to the petitioners on 
the ground  of violation of Articles 4 and 9  of the Constitution.  In the 
case of Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 2009 SC 879) , the Proclamation of Emergency and issuance of 
PCO of 2007 was challenged. The Court declared the petition to be 
maintainable on the ground th at violation of Fundamental Rights of the 
petitioners under Articles 9 and 25 was involved.  Const.P.5/13  12 
13.   An analysis of the above  referred case law  shows that in all 
these cases , the Court was inclined to grant relief  where the 
petitioner(s) therein succeeded in  establishing the violation of any of 
the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 Part II of the 
Constitution . In the instant case, neither violation of any of the 
Fundamental Rights has been listed in the petition nor established 
during the course of ar guments.   
14.   It is to be noted that the petitioner has acquired the 
citizenship of Canada and has taken an oath inter alia to pledge his 
loyalty and allegiance to Canada , and as such this disqualifie s him  
from contest ing election s to Parliament , in view  of the bar contained in 
Article 63(1)(c) of t he Constitution  which has been elaborately 
discussed in the case of Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi v. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 1089).  It is to be noted that after acquiring the 
citizenship of  another coun try and pledging his loyalty to that countr y, 
he has to lose some of his rights including the right to be elected as 
Member of Parliament, even though he does not lose his Pakistani 
citizenship as well as other  rights granted under the Constitution  and 
the law, as a consequence of his dual nationality . 
15.   Similarly, a person who has acquired dual citizenship can 
claim his individual rights such as the right to acquire property or 
other private rights and can also sue for the enforcement of such 
rights. This court ha s been entertaining such petitions in the past. 
Reference may be made to Cons titution Petition No. 15/2007( Amjad  
Malik v. Federation of Pakistan ). The said petition was clubbed with 
identical petition s, wherein the action of former President of Pakistan 
against one of us ( Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry , Chief Justice  
of Pakistan ) was challenged . [Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Const.P.5/13  13 
Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 61)]. I n 
the said case, the petitioner, Amjad Malik introduced himself as a life 
member of the Supreme Court Bar Association and a Solicitor -
Advocate of the Supreme Court of Engla nd & Wales, member of 
International Bar Association and current chair of Association of 
Pakistan Lawyers (UK) practicing from his offi ce at 149 Dark Street, 
Rochadle, OL 11 IEF (UK) . He made the following prayer: - 
“The leave to move a petition may graciously be granted 
as it involves a question of public importance as well as 
interpretation of Article of which the whole nation is 
concern ed, and a larger is forme d as Respondents have 
shown bla tant disregard to the rule of law,  and norms of 
Constitution and petitioner believes and disputes there is 
no term as such as ‘non functional’ Chief Justice of 
Pakistan as it is only the Honourable Of fice of the Chief 
Justice  which upholds the supremacy of the Constitution, 
the custodian and guardian of justice & rule of law and the 
sooner larger bench settles the actual interpretation of 
Article 209 and relevant proposition the better it is to avoid 
any further media trial of the sitting Chief Justice as well 
as future media trial of the sitting Chief Justice as well as 
future Chief Justice(s) of Pakistan.  
 
Petitioner fears that filing a reference under Art.209 may 
be used as ploy with mala  fide inte ntions to remove a pro 
active Chief Justice in future if the law is not settled now 
and may create serius legal questions for the 
independence of judiciary and safety of the work and well 
being of the judges of the Superior Court.  
 
It is also prayed that d irection may be issued to 
Respondent to remove all restraints on the Chief Justice, 
allow him and his family move freely, access to Chief 
Justice to Court and restore his protocol and privileges 
befitting to his office until reference and or the question o f 
law is settled by this superior court and may be permitted 
to perform his functions in Court as Chief Justice of 
Pakistan.  
 
16.   It is abundantly clear that for a person to activ ise the 
jurisdiction of  this Court as a public interest litigant, for the 
enforcement of the Fundamental Rights of a group or a class of 
persons, he must show on the given facts that he is acting bona fide. 
However, it would be for this Court to decide, on the given facts Const.P.5/13  14 
whether he is acting bona fide  or not and whether the petition is 
suffering from laches  or not .     
17.  It is a settled principle of law that mala fides are to be 
pleaded and proven by the persons so pleading whereas bona fides  are 
always to be apparent or should be shown from the record. It is also 
settled that  the superior Courts exercise discretionary jurisdiction 
conferred under Articles 184(3) of the Constitution  where the 
petitioner succeeds in establishing his bona fides  from the record. 
Reference may be made to the cases of Shahid Hussain Qureshi v. 
Manag er SBFC (2001 YLR 454). Similarly, in the case of Waqar Haider 
Butt v. Judge Family Court (2009 SCMR 1243) this Court has held that 
constitutional jurisdiction is always discretionary in nature and he who 
seeks equity must come with clean hands.  
18.   It may also be noted that the expression ‘ bona fide’ , for 
the purpose of invok ing jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution , has to be applied  in contradistinction to the 
expression ‘mala fide’. Because mala fide s, if alleged against  any 
person, is to be prove n by bringing admissible evidence on record, as 
it has been held in the case of  Government of West Pakistan v. Begum 
Agha Abdul Karim Shorish Kashmiri  (PLD 1969 S C 14), where as to 
prove bona fide, burden is  placed  upon the person  who has 
approached the Court and persuaded it to exercise jurisdiction, 
particularly with reference to the circumstances of the instant case. 
The e xpression, ‘bona fide’ has been defined as per dictionary 
meanings as follows: - 
 
Corpus Juris Secundum page 387: 
Latin literally, “by or in good faith ”. It has been defined as 
meaning acting honestly without purpose to defraud; good Const.P.5/13  15 
faith, as distinguished from bad fait; honest; without fraud 
or unfair dealing; also, in a derived sense, real.  
 
Chambers 20th Century Dictionary:  
‘In good faith; genuine’. The word ‘genuine’ means 
‘natural: not spurious: pure: sincere’.  
 
Law Dictionary, Mosley and Whitley:  
Bona fide  means ‘good faith, without fraud or deceit.  
 
Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary:  
‘Bona fide ’. (1) The equi valent of this phrase is 
‘honestly’……  
 
Concise Law Dictionary of Osborn:  
‘Bona fide ’ – In good faith, honestly, without fraud, 
collusion or participation in wrong -doing. ”  
 
While dealing with the question of “bona fides” of a petitioner, 
especially in the case of a person approaching the Court in the name 
of Public Interest Litigation , the Indian Supreme Court i n the case of 
Ashok Kumar Pandey v. State of West Bengal  (AIR 2004 SC 280) has 
held as under : -  
“Public interest litigation is a weapon which has t o be used 
with great care and circumspection and the judiciary has to 
be extremely careful to see that behind the beautiful veil of 
public interest an ugly private malice, vested interest 
and/or publicity seeking is not lurking. It is to be used as 
an effe ctive weapon in the armory of law for delivering 
social justice to the citizens. The attractive brand name of 
public interest litigation should not be used for suspicious 
products of mischief. It should be aimed at redressal of 
genuine public wrong or publ ic injury and not publicity 
oriented or founded on personal vendetta. As indicated 
above,  Court must be careful to see that a body of persons 
or member of public, who approaches the court is acting 
bona fide and not for personal gain or private motive or 
political motivation or other oblique consideration . The 
Court must not allow its process to be abused for oblique 
considerations. Some persons with vested interest indulge 
in the pastime of meddling with judicial process either by 
force of habit or from im proper motives. Often they are Const.P.5/13  16 
actuated by a desire to win notoriety or cheap popularity. 
The petitions of such busy bodies deserve to be thrown out 
by rejection at the threshold, and in appropriate cases with 
exemplary costs. ” [Emphasis supplied]  
 
Relying  upon the said case, this Court in the case of Dr. Akhtar Hassan 
Khan v. Federation of Pakistan  (2012 SCMR 455) has held that while 
holding that the petitions are maintainable, the Court has to guard 
against frivolous petitions as it is a matter of common observation that 
in the garb of Public Interest Liti gation, matters are brought before the 
Court which are neither of public importance nor relatable to 
enforcement of a Fundamental Right  or public duty.  
19.  Applying the above stated  principle  to the fact s of instant 
case, it is to be observed that this country, after having remained in 
the clouds of extra -constitutional eras from time to time , as has been 
discussed in  the case of  Sindh High Court Bar Association  (supra)  
finally succeeded in establishing a democratic order in the country 
through the process of election s when General Election s were held  on 
18.2.2008 . Thereafter, a ll the unconstitutional actions of the then 
Military Regime were declared non est by this Court in the above  cited  
judgment, inclu ding the appointment  of Judges, who violated the 
restraint order passed by a seven -member  Bench of this Court on 
3.11.2007 against the Military Regime and appointment of Judges who 
were appointed on the recommendations of an unconstitutionally 
appointed Ch ief Justice, including the incumbent Attorney General  of 
Pakistan. It is heartening to note that all unconstitutional actions of 
the Military Regime were also not confirmed by the Parliament, as it is 
manifest from the 18th Constitutional Amendment. Since then, the 
democratic system has continued for a period of 5 years , as the 
Parliament is about to complete its term on or before 18. 03.2013 , and Const.P.5/13  17 
approximately  80 million  registered voters are ready to elect their 
representa tives within the coming few months . For that reason, at this 
critical stage, no one amongst the 18 0 to 20 0 million  citizen s or 
registered voters  has come forward to question the appointment of the 
Chief Election Commissioner and Members of the ECP, who were 
appointed vide notifications dated 16.7.2012 and 16.6.2011 
respectively . At the same time , no objection  or reservation has been 
admittedly shown  to such  appointment s by the 342 incumbent 
Members of the National Assembly  and 104 Members of  the Senate  as 
well as 65, 124, 371  and 168 Membe rs of the Provincial Assemblies  of 
Balochistan, KPK, Punjab and Sindh respectively . Nor have the 
prospective candidates for the forthcoming Elections raised a question 
of public importance for enforcement of any of their Fundamental 
Rights , either in this Court or before any of the Provincial High Courts , 
for the simple reason that the entire  nation is fully ready for the 
forthcoming elections . Further, the ECP has also geared up the process 
of Election s and statistical pre -poll preparations have almost been 
completed by taking all necessary steps in accord ance with the  
Constitution  and law, as well as the recommendations made by this 
Court in the cases of  Imran Khan v. Election Commission of Pakistan 
(2012 SCMR 448)  and Workers ’ Party  Pakistan v. Federation  of 
Pakistan (PLD 2012 SC 681) . In such a situation , the appointment s to 
the ECP (both the Chief Election Commissioner and Members of the 
Commission) have been challenged by a person , who though can 
exercise his own right to vote but is disqualified from contest ing 
Election s in view of the bar contained in Article 63(1)(c) of the 
Constitution , for the relief which has been noted herein above. It may 
not be out of context to note that in the speech delivered by the Const.P.5/13  18 
petitioner on 23.12.2012 at Lahore ( transcript of which he has 
provided  himself ), he insisted upon the invocation of  Article 254 of the 
Constitution  to delay the elections . Relevant portion thereof is 
reproduced here: - 
 ”آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﮩﺘﺎ ھﮯ ﮐہ اﮔﺮ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﮐﺎم اور ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﭼﯿﺰ آﺋﯿﻦ ﺗﻘﺎﺿﺎ ﮐﺮے ﮐہ اﺳﮯ اﺗﻨﯽ  
ﻣﺪت ﮐﮯ اﻧﺪر اﻧﺪر اس ﮐﺎم ﮐﻮ ھﻮﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﺋﯿﮯ ﺟﯿﺴﮯ اﺳﻤﺒﻠﯿﻮن ﮐﮯ ﺧﺎﺗﻤﮯ ﮐﮯ ﺑﻌﺪ 
٠٩ دﻧﻮں ﻣﯿﮟ  interim government   اور elections   ﮨﻮﺗﮯ ﮨﯿﮟ۔
آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﮩﺘﺎ ھﮯ ﮐہ ﮐﻮﺋﯽ ﮐﺎم ﯾﻌﻨﯽ if any act   اور آﺋﯿﻦاس ﮐﺎ ﺗﻘﺎﺿﺎ  ﮐﺮے ﮐہ 
ﻣﻘﺮرﮦ ﭨﺎﺋﻢ ﮐﮯ اﻧﺪر اﻧﺪر اﺳﮯ ھﻮﻧﺎ ﭼﺎﺋﯿﮯ ﯾﻌﻨﯽ within a particular 
period and it is not done within that period   اور ﮐﺴﯽ
وﺟہ ﺳﮯ وﮦ اس period   ﮐﮯ اﻧﺪر ﻧہ ھﻮ ﺳﮑﯿﮟ ﺗﻮ آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﮯ ﻟﻔﻆ ھﯿﮟ ﮐہthe 
doing of the act or thing shall not be invalid   ﺗﺐ ﺑﮭﯽ
وﮦ act  ﺧﻼف ﻗﺎﻧﻮن اور ﺧﻼف آﺋﯿﻦ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ ھﻮﮔﺎ۔   
اﮔﺮ وﮦ period   ﺑﮍھ ﺑﮭﯽ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎﻃﺮ، آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﯽ ﺷﺮاﺋﻂ ﮐﻮ ﭘﻮرا ﮐﺮﻧﮯ
ﮐﯽ ﺧﺎﻃﺮ، اﻧﺘﺨﺎﺑﺎت ﮐﻮ ﺷﻔﺎف ﺑﻨﺎﻧﺎ، آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﮯ ﻣﻄﺎﺑﻖ اس ﻗﺎﺑﻞ ﮐﺮﻧﺎ ﮐہ آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﯽ 
ﺷﺮاﺋﻂ ﭘﻮری ﮨﻮں۔ اﮔﺮ اس ﭘﯿﺮﯾﮉ ﺳﮯ زﯾﺎدﮦ ﻋﺮﺻہ ﺑﮭﯽ ﻟﮓ ﺟﺎﺋﮯ اور ٠٩ دن 
ﺳﮯ ﭨﺎﺋﻢ ﮔﺰر ﺟﺎﺋﮯ آﺋﯿﻦ ﮐﮩﺘﺎ ھﮯ ﮐہ the doing of the act or 
thing shall not be invalid   وﮦ ﮐﺎم ﻏﯿﺮ آﺋﯿﻨﯽ اور ﻏﯿﺮ ﻗﺎﻧﻮﻧﯽ ﻧﮩﯿﮟ
ھﻮﮔﺎ۔“ 
20.  It is to be noted that the petitioner, to achieve his declared 
agenda , admittedly led a Long March from Lahore to Islamabad on  
14.01.2013,  which was concluded after a  bilateral agreement dated  
16.01.2013  signed between him and the coalition Government . In one 
of the clause s whereof it was provided that the parties shall  examine  
the dissolution of the ECP. It is not know n whether a decision, if  any, Const.P.5/13  19 
was taken  officially in this behalf , but it seems that following the above 
events, instant petition has been filed. If the f acts and circumstances 
noted above  are put in juxtaposition , no difficulty is experienced in 
holding that the petition er lacks  bona fide s in approaching this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution.  
21.  As the petitioner lacks bona fides , therefore, at one stage 
he stated that he has instituted instant petition in the nature of quo 
warranto . We enquired from him as to wh ether he had any 
objection (s) to the eligibility or competency of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and the Members of the Election Commission? He 
replied that he had no such objection against them. Learned Attorney 
General  for Pakistan also stated that the petitioner  has laid information 
before this Court to exercise/issue a writ in the nature of quo 
warranto . Suffice it to say that in view of the above noted statement of 
the petitioner about eligibility and competence of Chief Election 
Commissioner and Memb ers a writ of quo warranto  cannot be issued. 
For these reasons the Chief Election Commissioner and Members  of the 
ECP have not been made party in this petition. Therefore,  the cases 
noted in the petition, being distinguishable, are not attracted. It must 
also be explained that in Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case  (ibid) 
no writ of quo warranto  was issued. The Judges who took oath under 
PCO and Oath of Office (Judges) Order in violation of the order of this 
Court dated 03.11.2007 were declared to have rendered themselves 
liable to action under and in accordance with the Constitution. 
Resultantly, notices for Contempt of Court were issued to them and 
they subsequently submitted their resignations from such positions 
voluntarily. Additionally, the appoint ments of the Judges which were 
made without the requisite consultation of the de jure Chief Justice of Const.P.5/13  20 
Pakistan were declared to be unconstitutional, illegal, void ab initio  and 
of no legal effect. The judges so removed approached this Court by 
means of re view petitions which were dismissed by the judgment 
dated 13.10.2009 in the case of Justice Khurshid Anwar Bhinder v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 483) . Thus, clearly moulded relief 
of issuing writ of quo warranto reflects on the bona fides  of the 
petitioner for these added reasons as well.  
22.  It is now a settled position i n our system of administration 
of justice that  relief is not to be denied to the litigants on technical 
consideration. However, in peculiar circumstances  where the Courts , 
owing a duty to preserve and protect the Constitution , consider that on 
the one hand, the object of a case and the relief sought from the Court 
as under Article 184(3) by one person alone as against public at large.  
The question of maintainability of proceedin gs would arise that of 
suffering from an infirmity/hurdle  to effect the result of such 
proceedings  and cannot be left unnoticed by the Court . A constitutional 
bar of limitation  is not applicable  to the  proceedings under  Article 199 
or Article 184 of the Co nstitution , however,  insistence is placed on 
initiating proceedings promptly  and within a reasonable time to avoid 
the question of laches.  
23.  The doctrine of laches has been discussed in detail by this 
Court in the case of State Bank of Pakistan v. Imti az Ali Khan  [2012 
PLC (C.S.) 218]. Relevant portion from the judgment is reproduced 
here: - 
 
“30. … … Laches is a doctrine whereunder a party which 
may have a right, which was otherwise enforceable, loses 
such right to the extent of its enforcement if it is  found by 
the Court of a law that its case is hit by the doctrine of 
laches/limitation. Right remains with the party but it 
cannot enforce it. The limitation is examined by the Const.P.5/13  21 
Limitation Act or by special laws which have inbuilt 
provisions for seeking rel ief against any grievance within 
the time specified under the law and if party aggrieved do 
not approach the appropriate forum within the stipulated 
period/time, the grievance though remains but it cannot be 
redressed because if on one hand there was a rig ht with a 
party which he could have enforced against the other but 
because of principle of limitation/laches, same right then 
vests/accrues in favour of the opposite party.  
  
It is settled principle of our jurisprudence as well that 
delay defeats equity an d that equity aids the vigilant and 
not the indolent. In the case of Jawad Mir Muhammadi v. 
Haroon Mirza (PLD 2007 SC 472), a full Bench of this Court 
has held that lathes per se is not a bar to the 
constitutional jurisdiction and question of delay in fili ng 
would have to be examined with reference to the facts of 
each case; question of delay/lathes in filing constitutional 
petition has to be given serious consideration and unless 
a satisfactory and plausible explanation is forthcoming for 
delay in filing ,  constitutional petition, the same cannot be 
overlooked or ignored subject to facts and circumstances 
of each case.  
  
In this very case reference has also been made to words of 
Lord Camden L.C. from the judgment of Smith v. Clay 
(1767) 3 Bro. C.C. 639n at 640n wherein it has been 
observed that  “a Court of equity has always refused its aid 
to stale demands, where a party has slept upon his right 
and acquiesced for a great length of time; nothing can 
call forth this Court into activity, but conscience, good 
faith, and reasonable diligence, where these are wanting 
the Court is passive, and does nothing ”. Cited judgment 
also refers to a book titled Snell’ s Equity by John Meghee 
13th Edition, wherein at page 35 it has been observed that 
“the doctrine of laches in  Courts of equity is not an 
arbitrary or a technical doctrine; where it would be 
practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the 
party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be 
regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where by his 
conduct and neglect he has, though perhaps not waiving 
that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in 
which it would not be reasonable to place him if the 
remedy were afterwards to be asserted in either of these 
lapse of time and delay are most mater ial”. 
 
In Member (S&R)/  Chief Settlement Commissioner v. 
Ashfaque Ali (PLD 2003 SC 132), this Court has held that 
“writ jurisdiction is undoubtedly discretionary and 
extraordinary which may not be invoked by a party who 
demonstrates a style of slackness an d laxity on his part: 
law is well -settled that a party guilty of gross negligence 
and laches is not entitled to the equitable relief. ” 
 
In S.A. Jameel v. Secretary to the Govt. of the Punjab Const.P.5/13  22 
(2005 SCMR 126), this Court while addressing the question 
of lach es has observed that “there is marked distinction 
between delay in filing of a legal proceedings within the 
period specified under the provisions of Limitation Act, 
1908 and undue time consumed by a party in filing of 
Constitutional petition, for which no statutory period is 
prescribed under the law; in the former case,  delay of -
each day is to be explained by furnishing sufficient cause 
for enlargement of time and condonation of delay within 
the contemplation of section 5 of the Limitation Act 
whereas in t he later case lapse of time or the question of 
lathes has to be examined on equitable principles for the 
reason that the exercise of Constitutional jurisdiction is 
always discretionary with the Court and the relief so 
granted is always in the nature of equ itable relief in case if 
the Court finds that the party invoking writ jurisdiction of 
the High Court is guilty of contumacious lethargy, inaction, 
laxity or gross negligence in the prosecution or a cause for 
enforcement of a right, the Court would be justi fied in non -
suiting such person on the premise of laches ” (emphasis 
provided). Hon ’ble Mr. Justice Rana Bhagwandas (as  he 
then was), also relied upon  the following para of Pakistan 
Post Office v. Settlement Commissioner (1987 SCMR 
1119): - 
 
“There is absolu tely no justification to equate laches 
with statutory bar of limitation. While the former 
operates as a bar in equity, the latter operates as a 
legal bar to the grant of remedy. Thus, in the 
former, all the dictates of justice and equity and 
balance of leg itimate rights are to be weighed, in the 
latter, subject to statutory relaxations in this behalf 
nothing is left to the discretion of the Court. It is a 
harsh law. Thus, passage of time per se brings the 
statute of limitation in operation, but the bar of 
laches does not deny the grant of right or slice the 
remedy unless the grant of relief in addition to being 
delayed, must also perpetuate injustice to another 
party. It is also in this very context that the 
condonation of delay under section 5 of the 
Limita tion Act will be on different harder 
considerations than those in a case of laches. For, 
example, while it is essential to explain and condone 
the delay of each day vis-à-vis statutory limitation, 
there is no such strict requirement in cases of 
laches. ” 
 
The doctrine of laches was also under discussion and dealt 
with by Privy Council in the judgment reported as John 
Objobo Agbeyegbe , v. Festus Makene Ikomi (PLD 1953 PC 
19) where the Lord Oakseyquoted the following para from 
Erlanger v. New Sombrero Phosphat e Company (1878 LR 3 
AC at page 1279): - 
 
“In Lindsay Petroleum Company v. Hurd (LR 5 PC Const.P.5/13  23 
239) it is Said:  
 
‘The doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an 
arbitrary or a technical doctrine. Where it would be 
practically unjust to give a remedy, either  because 
the party has, by his conduct done that which might 
fairly be regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or 
where, by his conduct and neglect he has, though 
perhaps not waiving that remedy, yet put the other 
party in a situation in which it would n ot be 
reasonable to place him if the remedy were 
afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases 
lapse of time and delay are most material. But in 
every case if an argument against relief, which 
otherwise not amounting to a bar in any statute of 
limita tions, the validity of that defence must be tried 
upon principles substantially equitable Two 
circumstances always important in such cases are 
the length of the delay and the nature of the acts 
done during the interval, which might affect either 
party and cause a balance of justice or injustice - in 
taking the one course or the other, so far as relates 
to the remedy. ” 
 
In the instant case doctrine of laches will have double force 
against the respondent -employees because in the first 
instance they could not p rove or show the infringement of 
any right as held by us in the T preceding paras 
hereinabove and secondly because they are guilty of 
laches in approaching the legal forum in for redressal of 
their grievance, if at all they had a legal and genuine 
grievanc e.” 
 
In the case of Muhammad Azhar Siddiqui v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 2012 SC 774) , this Court has held that the Supreme Court 
retains the discretion to deny petitioners who approach the Court after 
undue delay or with unclean hands and the question a s to whether a 
particular case involves the element of public importance is to be 
determined by the Court with reference to the facts and circumstances 
of each case.  In the case of Dr. Akhtar Hussain Khan v. Federation of 
Pakistan (2012 SCMR 455) this Cour t after relying upon the judgment 
of the Indian Supreme Court in the case of Air India Ltd. v. Cochin 
International Airport Ltd. [(2002) 2 SCC 617] has held that in the 
event of some irregularity in the decision making process , the Court Const.P.5/13  24 
must exercise its discretionary power of judicial review with 
circumspection and only in furtherance of public interest and not 
merely for making out a legal point. It should always keep the larger 
public interest in mind to interfere or not to interfere.  
24.   As pointed o ut by Mr. Muhammad Munir Peracha, learned 
counsel for the Election Commission of Pakistan , the petitioner came to 
Pakistan on 21.12.2012 and filed the instant petition on 07.02.2013 
after almost a period of about two months, when the general elections 
are just around the corner. A number of bye -elections have been held 
under the supervision  of incumbent Chief Election Commissioner and 
the Members of the Commission . The  National Assembly as well as 
Provincial Assemblies are about to complete their Constituti onal terms, 
Electoral Rolls by and large have been completed and as such much 
water has flown under the bridge . In such a situation, the arguments 
raised by the learned counsel for the Election Commission of Pakistan 
as well as the learned Attorney General  that the petition is hit by 
laches , appeal to mind.  
25.  Laches are vital in the instant case, as noted hereinabove, 
the Election Commission is functioning from the day of the notification  
dated 6.2.2011 appointing  the members , followed by notification  dated 
16.07.201 2 of the appointment of Chief Election Commissioner. After 
having become fully functional , the Commission is head ed towards 
holding elections and no one except the petitio ner alone , as a voter , 
has questioned their appointments through the in stant petition on 
07.02.2013 wh ich was taken up for hearing on 11.02.2013 . Therefore, 
arguments of the Attorney General  and Mr.  Muhammad Munir P iracha,  
learned ASC in this behalf , in view of the discussion above is Const.P.5/13  25 
accordingly accepted that the petition su ffers from laches. Thus, it is 
held that the petition is not maintainable on this score as well.   
26.  As far as the other pre -requisite under  Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution  is concerned,  namely, an element of ‘public 
importance’  enabling this Court t o exercise such jurisdiction, the 
petitioner, in addition to  proving his bona fide s in app roaching this 
Court and s eeking relief as has been prayed for by instituting instant 
petition , has to show  that a question of public importance  is involved 
in the mat ter and that  therefore,  Fundamental Rights  have to be 
enforced .  The expression ‘public importanc e’ was interpreted in the 
cases of Manzoor Elahi v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1975 SC 66) , 
Shahida Zaheer Abbasi v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 632) , 
Syed Zulfiqar Mehdi v. Pakistan International Corporation (1998 SCMR 
793), wherefrom following principles have been determined: - 
(a) The term ‘public ’ is invariably employed in contradistinction 
to the terms private or individual and connotes, as an 
adjective,  something pertaining to or belonging to the 
people; relating to a  nation, State or community. In other 
words, it refers to something which is to be shared or 
participated in or enjoyed by  the public at large, and is 
not limited or restricted to any partic ular class of the 
community.  
(b) The phrase  ‘public purpose ’, ‘whatever else it may me et 
must include a purpose, that is an object or aim, in which 
the general interest of the community as opposed to the 
particular interest of individuals is directly and vita lly 
concerned ’. 
(c) It is quite clear that whether a particular case involved the 
element of ‘public importance ’ is a question which is first to 
be determined by this Court with reference to the facts and 
circumstances of each case.  
(d) The public importance shoul d be viewed with reference to 
freedom and liberties guaranteed under Constitution, their 
protection and invasion of these Rights in a manner which 
raises a serious question regarding their enforcement 
irrespective of the fact whether such infraction of rig ht, 
freedom or liberty is alleged by an individual or a group of 
individuals.  Const.P.5/13  26 
(e) The issues arising in a case  cannot be considered as a 
question of public importance  if the decision of the issues 
affects only the Rights of an individual or a group of 
individu als. The issue , in order to assume the character of 
public importance, must be such that its decision affects 
the rights and liberties of people at large.  
(f) The objective “public ” necessarily implies a thing belonging 
to people at large, the nation, the Stat e or a community as 
a whole.  
(g) If a controversy is raised in which only a particular group 
of people is interested and the body of the people as a 
whole or the entire community has no interest, it cannot 
be treated as a case o f public importance.  
(h) In all sys tems of law which cherish individual freedom and 
liberty  and which provide Constitutional  safeguards and 
guarantees in this behalf, any invasion of such freedom in 
circumstances which raise serious questions regarding the 
effectiveness and availability of those safeguards, must be 
regarded as a mat ter of great public importance. ” 
 
 
This Court discussed  in the case of Al-Jehad Trust v. Lahore High Court 
(2011 SCMR 1688) , all the cases wherein the scope of Article 184(3) 
with reference to the jurisdiction of this Court was highlighted, and 
held as under: -  
11. We have also examined cases titled Zafar Ali Shah v. 
Pervez Musharraf (PLD 2000 SC 869), Qazi Hussain Ahmad 
v. Pervez Musharraf, Chief Executive (PLD 2002 SC 853), 
Sabir Shah v. Shad Muhammad Khan (PLD 1995 SC 66), 
Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2006 SC 697), 
Wasim Sajjad v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2001 SC 
233), Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan 
(PLD 1993 SC 473), Amanullah Khan v. Chairman Medical 
Research Council (1995 SCM R 202), Zulfiqar Mehdi v. 
Pakistan International Airlines Corporation (1998 SCMR 
793), All Pakistan Newspapers Society v. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2004 SC 600), State Life Insurance 
Employees Federation v. Federal Government of Pakistan 
(1994 SCMR 1341) , Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2004 SC 583), Muhammad 
Siddique v. Government of Pakistan (PLD 2005 Supreme 
Court 1),. Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
1988 SC 416), Javed Jabbar and 14 others v. Federation of 
Pakistan  and others (PLD 2003 Supreme Court 955). “The 
ratio of the judgment referred hereinabove is that unless 
the matter is of public importance relating to the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred 
by Part II, Chapter 1 of the Constitution (Ar ticles 8 to 28), 
the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 184(3) of the Const.P.5/13  27 
Constitution, cannot be invoked. The mere importance of 
a matter, without enforcement of any fundamental right 
or reference to a fundamental right without any public 
importance, wil l not attract the jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Consequently, we 
having considered the matter in the light of the law laid 
down by this Court in the judgments referred hereinabove, 
find that these petitions under Arti cle 184(3) of the 
Constitution are not maintainable and we are not 
persuaded to agree with the assertion that in view of the 
nature of dispute and importance of the matter, the 
Court may ignore the objection and decide these 
petitions ’ on merits. This may be pointed out that in the 
light of constitutional mandate as contemplated in Article 
184(3) of the Constitution this Court may not entertain a 
direct petition under Article 184(3) in a matter not 
involving the enforcement of any of Fundamental Rights 
mentioned therein. The question raised in the present 
petitions do not as such relate to the Fundamental Rights 
conferred by Part II, Chapter 1 of the Constitution and 
most of these questions even otherwise are speculative 
and presumptive in nature at this sta ge. There is clear 
distinction between Article 199 and Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution and this Court has repeatedly held that in 
the matters which do not involve enforcement of the 
Fundamental Rights of the public at large as envisaged in 
Article 184 ( 3) of the Constitution, a direct petition in 
original jurisdiction is not entertainable. ” (Jamat -e-Islami 
v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 2008 SC 30).  
  
27.   As the facts surrounding the instant petition are rather 
peculiar and merit a complete appreciation  of the various factors 
involved, it is to be noted at the cost of repetition that the petitioner is 
a renowned, well reputed and respected religious scholar, jurist and 
professor of law. However, as per his own declaration in his petition 
and concise stat ement submitted before this Court, he is a citizen of 
Canada. He holds the nationality of Canada and carries a Canadian 
passport which he uses to travel the world for his frequent 
international engagements. As per his own admission, he only travels 
to Paki stan on his Pakistani passport and is otherwise allowed to enter, 
remain in and treated as a Canadian national throughout the world. As 
already noted hereinabove, acquisition of nationality of any foreign 
country is not an impediment by itself in filing a petition under Article Const.P.5/13  28 
184(3) or 199 of the Constitution. However, there are other 
circumstances surrounding the matter that aggravate the effect of 
seeking relief through the enforcement of Fundamental Rights for all 
citizens of Pakistan. First and foremo st, the petition is geared against 
the election Commission  of Pakistan, an independent institution and 
creature of the Constitution that ensures the very strength, survival 
and continuity  of our democratic system. Given that this is an election 
year, the i mportance of the Election Commission is highlighted more 
than ever and we must be ever more cautious to not even appear to 
be partaking in placing restrictions upon its independent and 
Constitutional functions. I n this regard, this is certainly a matter of  
great public concern as it pertains to the deliverance of the right of 
representation through fair and free elections which has been held to 
be a key aspect of democracy identified by the Constitu tion in Workers 
Party Pakistan  v. Federation of  Pakistan (PLD 2012 Sc 681). Therefore, 
an attack on the constitutional validity of such an important institutio n 
cannot be well received from the  petitioner .  
28.  From the perusal of the petition it is clear that the 
petitioner primarily has emphasized  that the proc edure provided in 
Articles 213 and 218 of the Constitution with regard to appointment of 
the Chief Election Commissioner as well as the Members of ECP  has 
not been followed in letter and spirit . However,  neither infraction of 
any of the Fundamental Rights has been listed in the petition nor 
enforcement of the same has been sought in the prayer clause ; and 
even during the course of arguments the petitioner has failed to  
identif y any of the Fundamental Rights , which may have  been violated . 
Despite insistence of the  Court , the petitioner did not show as to whic h 
of the Fundamental Rights had  been violated.  Thus, one of the Const.P.5/13  29 
fundamental requirement s of Article 184(3) of the Constitution, 
namely, the violation of any of the Fundamental Rights , enabling this 
Court to exercise jurisdiction conferred by said Article , is apparently 
missing in the instant case.   
29.  At this stage , it would be appropriate to consider the scope 
of Article 184(3) of the Constitution as deliberated upon by this Court 
in various pronouncem ents. In the cases of Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416), it has been held a s under: - 
“Article 184(3) of the Constitution empowers Supreme 
Court to enforce the Fundamental Rights where the 
question of public importance arises in rel ation thereto. 
And if looked at from this angle it is hardly of any 
importance whether the Executive has passed a prejudicial 
order or not when the infraction of the Fundamental Rights 
takes place by the operation of the law itself. In this 
context what wo uld be relevant would be the language of 
the provisions of the impugned Act itself. It will then not 
be a question of the Court merely granting a declaration as 
to the validity or invalidity of law in the abstract. An 
enactment may immediately on its comin g into force take 
away or abridge the Fundamental Rights of a person by its 
very terms and without any further overt act being done. 
In such a case the infringement of the Fundamental Right 
is complete co instant the passing of the enactment and, 
therefore , there can be no reason why the person so 
prejudicially affected by the law should not be entitled 
immediately to avail himself of the constitutional remedy. 
To say that a person, whose fundamental Right has been 
infringed by the mere operation of an enac tment, is not 
entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of Supreme Court for the 
enforcement of his right, will be to deny him the benefit of 
a salutary constitutional remedy which is itself his 
Fundamental Right. The infractions alleged cannot be 
regarded as se eking a declaration in the air or asking the 
Court to decide, in abstract, and for that matter 
hypothetical or contingent questions. ” 
 
Similarly, this Court in the case of  Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. 
President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473)  has held as under: - 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Pakistan pertains to 
original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and its object is 
to ensure the enforcement of Fundamental Rights 
referred to therein.  This provision is an edifice of 
democratic way„of life and manifes tation of responsibility 
casts on this Court as a protector and guardian of the Const.P.5/13  30 
Constitution. The jurisdiction conferred by it  is fairly wide 
and the Court can make an order of the nature envisaged 
by Article 199, in a case where a question of public 
impor tance, with reference to enforcement of any 
fundamental right conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II of the 
Constitution is involved. Article 184(3) is remedial in 
character and is conditioned by three prerequisites, 
namely :- 
  
(i) There is a question of public  importance.  
  
(ii) Such a question involves  the enforcement of a 
fundamental right, and  
  
(iii) The fundamental right sought to be enforced is 
conferred by Chapter 1, Part II of the Constitution .” 
 
In case of Jamat -e-Islami v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2008 
Supreme Court 30) following observations have been made :- 
  
31. There are two essential conditions for invoking the 
jurisdiction of Supreme Court of Pakistan under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution. The first condition is that 
subject matter of the petitio n under this Article must be of 
public importance and second condition is that it must 
relate to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights conferred by Part II, Chapter  1 of the Constitution. 
We, therefore, in the light of law laid down by this Cour t 
on the subject, would like to examine the question whether 
the present petitions qualify the above test to entertain the 
same under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. ” 
 
In the case of Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries  (PLD 2010 SC 
1109) relief wa s granted to the petitioner on the ground that the right 
of property granted under Articles 9 and 24 of the Constitution were 
involved, as due to gravest financial scams in the history of Pakistan, 
the bank stood cheated of an enormous amount of around 11 billions 
Rupees. In the case of Shahid Orakzai v. Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 365) 
the appointment of the Chairman National Accountability Bureau  (NAB)  
was declared illegal and ultra vires the Constitution  and the law on the 
ground that Article 5(2) of the Const itution  mandated an obligation of 
obedience to the Constitution  and law as an inviolable obligation of 
every citizen. In the case of Al-Jehad Trust v. Lahore High Court (2011 Const.P.5/13  31 
SCMR 1688) , a petition was filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution against  initiation of disciplinary proceedings against the 
District & Sessions Judge/Special Judge (Central) Rawalpindi by the 
Lahore High Court. This Court declined to entertain the petition on the 
ground that the jurisdiction , as conferred upon this Court under  Article 
184(3) of the Constitution , can be exercised only where a question of 
public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights was involved, which was missing in the said case. 
In the case of Workers’ Party Pakistan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2012 SC 681) , the petitioner invoked the original jurisdiction of this 
Court , questioning the contents of a memo published in a newspaper  
as being violative of the Fundamental Rights of the petitioners. The 
Court declared the pe titions to be maintainable for the reasons that 
the issues involved in the case were justiciable and a question of 
public importance with reference to Fundamental Rights under Articles 
9, 14 and 19A of the Constitution had been made out.  
30.  The upshot of  the above discussion is that the burden  of 
proof was upon the petitioner to demonstrate  as to which of his 
fundamental rights  had been infringed upon but he failed to point out 
an infraction of any of his fundamental rights. Thus, judgments  relied 
upon by  the petitioner are not attracted to the facts of the instant 
case.  
31.  Before parting with the judgment,  it is to be noted with 
regard to the question of extending  the right of vote to citizen s of 
Pakistan  living abroad , some of who m may be holding dual citizenship , 
that as a voter, the petitioner can also exercise h is right of vote like 
other overseas Pakistanis whose names have been incorporated in the 
Electoral Rolls. This right has been  recognized under the Constitution Const.P.5/13  32 
and has also been held by this  Court in the case of Yasmin Akhtar v. 
Election Commission of Paksitan (1994 SCMR 113), which was finally 
disposed of vide judgment dated 18.12.1993 in Constitution Petition 
No.26/1993. Reference in this regard  may also be made to the case 
Ch. Nasir Iqbal v. Federation of Pakistan  (Constitutional Petition 
No.39/2011 etc.), wherein vide order dated 14.02.2013, the ECP was 
directed to ensure that all the overseas citizens of Pakistan, who are 
qualified/eligible for the registration of their votes in accordanc e with 
the Electoral Rolls Act, 1974 and the Rules framed thereunder must be 
registered before the forthcoming elections.  
32.  Hereinabove are the reasons of our short order of even 
date, which reads as under: - 
“For reasons to be recorded later it is held  that petitioner, Dr. 
Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri has failed to make out a case for 
exercising the discretionary jurisdiction by this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, for the facts that violation of any of the  Fundamental 
Rights under Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution  has neither 
been listed in the petition nor established during course of 
arguments, despite of insistence by the Bench to do so. The  
petitioner has also failed to prove his bona fides in view of the 
facts, which have been noticed at the hearing of the case, to 
invoke the jurisdiction of this Court coupled with the fact that 
under the peculiar circumstances he has no locus standi to claim 
relief as it has been prayed for in the petition, in ter alia, for the 
reasons that being a holder of dual citizenship, he is not 
qualified (disqualified) to contest the election to the Parliament 
in view of the constitutional bar under Article 63(1)(c) of the 
Constitution, which has been interpreted by this  Court in the 
case of Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 2012 SC 1089).  
2.   However, it is loudly and clearly observed that as a 
voter like other overseas Pakistanis, whose names have been 
incorporated in the Electoral Rolls, he can exercise his right of 
vote as this right is recognized under the Constitution and has Const.P.5/13  33 
also bee n held by this Court in the case of Yasmin Khan v. 
Election Commission of Pakistan 
(1994 SCMR 113), which was 
finally disposed of vide judgment in Constitution Petition 
26/1993 dated 18.12.1993. Thus, the petition is dismissed.  
3.   Before parting with th e short order, it is essential 
to note that at the time of concluding his arguments on the 
points noted hereinabove, he started making uncalled for 
aspersions against the member of the Bench, which are 
tantamount prima facie to undermine its authority call ing for 
action against him for Contempt of Court under Article 204(3) of 
the Constitution read with section 3 of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance, 2003. However we, while exercising restraint, have 
decided not to proceed against him following the principle that 
such jurisdiction has to be exercised sparingly on case to case 
basis. ” 
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the 
 
13th February, 2013  
Nisar/*  
 
   APPROVED FOR REPORTING
 





5

2013

 


 
  
  
  
 
 
  
201313 11 

1
 


  



 184(3)  2

 (i)
 218213
 1  (ii)
 1973 
  218(2)(a)(b) 213(2)(a)


 3

 218(2)(b)  16.06.2011 F.3(13)/2010-Estt-I

2 
  16.07.2012 F.5(7)/2011-PA(C) 
 219 



2013  55 

  7.02.2013
  
 11.02.2013
756/2013  14.2.2013  4

 24 1985 

 
 



 14(1) 1951  5
3
 

    

  63(1)(c) 
   
 (1) 
63


 (a)
 (b)
 (c)

(PLD
 SC 1089)


2012
 6
 184(3) 

(PLD 1988 SC 416) 

(PLD 1994 SC 
(1989 SCMR 22) 

(1994 SCMR 113) 
693)

(PLD 1996 SC 324) 
4
(PLD 1998 SC 161)
(PLD 2006 SC 697) 
 (1999 SCMR 2883)
(PLD 2009 SC 979) 

(PLD 2009 SC 879) 

(PLD 2010 SC 1109) 
(PLD 2011 
(2011 SCMR 1688) 

(PLD 2012 SC 681) 
SC 365)
(PLD 2002 Lahore 521) 
 7
 (a)


 13.03.2009  (b)
 (PLD 2009 SC 879) 


 (c)
  100 

  
 190189  (d)
 175(2)
 (e)
5  





  (f)


  

 /  (g)


-  8
 (a)

 (b)
  
 
 184(3)
 9

6  1714 

  184(3) 



(save the State, not politics)   -  



  
 10
  2013 
 55 
 184(3)  11

 (1)  184
 (2)
 199  (3)


7 (3) 184 

 "  " 
 12
 / 
 / 



 / 
 /


 (PLD 1988 SC 416) 


 /


 184(3) 



8
 " " 
 " " 

 17  12


Delimitation  (1989 SCMR 22) 
 of Contituencies Ordinance, 1988 

 184 (3) 
(PLD 1994 SC 
  
 693)

 9
 (1994 SCMR 113) 

 (PLD 1996 SC 234) 




 25 
 (PLD 1998 SC 161) 

99 

 25
 (1999 SCMR 2883) 
 185 (3) 
 25 


 (PLD 2006 SC 697) 

 94
 PCO2007  (PLD 2009 SC 79) 
259 

 13

 

 14


 63(1)(c) 
 (PLD 2012 SC 1289) 



10
 15

(Const. 

 P. No. 15/2007) 

(PLD 

 2010 SC 61)
  Solicitor - Advocate England & walks 
 Association of Pakistan Lawyers (UK) 
 149 Dark Street Rochadle, 02 11 IEF (UK 





 209 


 209 


11



 16

 / 

 17

 183(3) 

" 

 (2001 YLR 454) "
 (2009 SCMR 1243)  

 
 18
 
 148(3)

" 
(PLD 1969 SC " 
 14)
 
12 
Corpus Juris Secundum Page 387
 '' by or in good faith"  


Chambers 20th Century Dictionary
 /  / 

Law Dictionary, Mosley and Whitley

Strowd's Judicial Dictionary

Concise Law Dictionary of Osborn


  
 280 2004
13 







 
  






 
 



   19
14  
 18.02.2008 


 2007



 8  18.03.2013 
20 
  
  16.06.2011 16.07.12 
 104  342 
 104  371  124  65





 (2012 SCMR 448) 
  (PLD 2012 Sc681) 

15
 63(1)(c)

 23.12.2012 
 254 


interim government 
 if any act  elections
within a particular period and 
 period  it is not done within that period
the doing of the act or thing shall not be invalid 
 act
 period

the doing of the 
 act or thing shall not be invalid
14.01.2013  20
 16.01.2013  




16 184(3)
 21
 (quo warranto)
(writ of quo warranto) 


 (ibid)


 (writ of quo warranto) 
 PCO  3-11-2007 
 



 13.10.2009
 (writ of quo warranto) 

 22
 184(3) 


 199184 

17
(2012 
 23
 PLC(C.S)218)

 30






 / 




    (PLD 2007 SC 472)





Smit  Vs.  Lord Candian LC 
183 Bro. C.C. 639n at 640n (1767) Clay
 





 
 Snell's Equity by John Maghee 13th Edition 
 35








(PLD 2003 S C 
(S
&
R)


 132)


19 (2005 SCMR 126) 
 1908  


 5 1908






(1987 SCMR 1119) 

 








 5 

20

 (Privy Council)  (Doctrine of Laches) /

(John Objobo Agbeyegbe)


 (PLD 1953 PC 19)
(Festus makene Ikomi)

(Erlanger v.


 (Oasksey) 
(1878 LR 3 AC at page
New Sombrero Phosphate Company)
1279)
(LR 5 (Lindsay Petroleum Company v. Hurd) 
 PC 239)
 /












21

  / 
 T 
  

 PLD 2012 SC 774  




 (PLD 2012 SCRM 455) 

 
 (2002, 2 SCC 617) 
(Cochin)






 24
 07.02.2013   21.12.2012  

22




 25
  06.02.11 

 16.07.2012 

 11.02.1307.02.13 



  184(3)  26
 


  

(PLD 1975 SC 66) 


(PLD 1996 SC 632) 
 (1998 SCMR 793) 
23
   (a)
 


   (b)


    (c)


   (d)
  


 (e)




 "" (f)

 (g)
24
 (h)


(2011 SCMR 1688) 

 184(3) 
-: 

 11

(PLD 2000 SC 869) 

(PLD 2002 SC 853) 
(PLD 2006 SC 
(PLD 1995 SC 66)

(PLD 2001 SC 233) 
697)

(PLD 1993 SC 473) 

(1995 SCMR 202) 

(1998 SCMR 793) 

(PLD 2004 SC 600) 

(1994 SCMR 1341) 

(PLD 2004 SC 583) 

(PLD 2005 Supreme Court 1) 

14

 (PLD 1988 SC 416)
 (PLD 2003 SC 995)
 28 8 
25 184(3) 
 
 184(3) 

 184(3) 

184(3) 

 184(3) 

 1 9 9 
 184(3)
 184(3) 

PLD 2008 SC 30 

 27






26
 199 184(3) 







(PLD 2012  SC 681) 


 28
  218213




 184(3) 


27 184(3)  29


-:  (PLD 1988 sc416) 
 184 (3)  "

















 (PLD 1993 SC  
-  473)
  184(3)  
28



  199


  184(3) 
- 
 (i
 (ii
 (iii
  (PLD 2008 SC 30) 

  184(3)  31





 184(3) 
 
(PLD 2010 

29 249  SC1109)

(PLD2011 

 (NAB)  SC365) 
 5(2) 
 (2011 SCMR 1688) 

 /  184(3) 

 184(3) 
 

 (PLD 2012 SC 681) 



 19A14,9 
 30
  

 31


30

 18-12-1993  (1994 SCMR 113) 
 

 14-02-2013   39/2011
 1974 

  32
 "


 
 184(3) 




 63(1)(c) 
 (PLD 2012 SC 1089) 


" 
 2


(1994 SCMR " 
"
31 26/1993  Cosntitution Petition 113)
 18.12.1993

 3

 204(3) 
 3 2003 







201313th
32