IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
                               (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present  
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
 
 
Civil Petition No. 1975 /201 9 
(Against the judgment dated 25.02.2019 
of the Peshawar High Court, Bannu Bench 
passed in CR No. 104-B/2015 ) 
 
Gul Nawaz & others       Petitioner s 
                                               Versus  
  
Rashid Ahmed & others       Respondent s 
 
  
For the Petitioner s : Mr. Salahuddin Malik, ASC  
Mr. Mehmood Ahmed Sheikh, AOR  
 
For the Respondent s : Not represented  
 
Date of Hearing  : 02.02.2021  
     
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, J . A suit for specific performance was filed by the 
petitioners who alleged that they ha d entered into an agreement to 
sell dated 30 April 2009 with the respond ents for the sale of 
certain lands . The petitioners were required to lead evidence in 
support of their claim which  they failed to do despite being granted 
a number of opportunities; resultantly their side was closed and 
the learned Judge of the Trial Court  dismiss ed their suit. The 
petitioners challenged the decision by filing an  appeal , which was 
dismissed and so too  the revision  filed by them before the High 
Court . Therefore , it is against three concurrent judgments that the 
instant petition has been file d. 
 
2. The learned counsel says that the petitioners were not given 
sufficient opportunity to lead evidence  before closing their side and 
dismiss ing their suit . The learned counsel has referred to the order 
sheet s of the  Trial Court,  which have been  filed through CMA No. 
1473/2020 . 
 
3. The Trial Court’s order dated 3 October 2012 refers to an 
application of the petitioners whereby they  sought the Court’s  
permission to prove the ‘Iqrar Nama , [agreement]  through CP 1975/2019  
   2
secondary evidence ’ because its original was stated to be  with the 
defendants (respondents herein) . We asked the learned counsel to 
refer to the second ary evidence  sought to be produced , that is the 
copy of the said Iqrar Nama , however, the learned counsel state s 
that the same was not  an Iqrar Nama  but a decision dated 30 April 
2009.  
 
4. The petitioners  had relied on an Iqrar Nama  (agreement) but 
later stated that the document  was instead a decision . Leaving 
aside the question whether they could change their stance  so 
fundamentally , we have examined  the referred to document which 
is a ‘decision’  issued by  the “Emarat -e-Islami Taliban , Waziristan 
wa Afghanistan ” (‘Taliban ’). The Taliban had no legal authority to 
decide cases . The Taliban  infiltrated into Pakistan and  by mid -
2005  had illegally occup ied and assume d control over a part of the 
territory of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , including parts of  
Waziristan . Pakistan is a sovereign country and the applicable law 
of Pakistan applies  over every inch of its territory . Every square 
inch o f the territor y of Pakistan is pre cious and must be kept free 
and safe.  
 
5. The physical possession of any part of the  territory of 
Pakistan  taken over by the Taliban contravened the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan ( ‘Constitution ’) and any decision 
given by the Taliban would be unconstitutional, unlawful and of no 
legal effect. Subverting the Constitution and subjugating the 
people does not confer legitimacy on an aggressor nor renders an 
aggressor’s  decisions constitutionally legitimate. The learned 
counsel’s attempt to alternative ly categorise the purported 
‘decision’  as an agreement  is also not permissible because it 
undermine s the sovereignty of Pakistan . The purported  agreement 
is ‘forbidden’, ‘unlawful’ and opposed to ‘public policy’ in terms of 
section 23 of Contract Act,  1872 , therefore , it is of no legal effect.  
 
6. The learned Judge of the Trial Court ha d provided a number 
of opportunities to the petitioners  to lead evidence but they had 
repeatedly failed to do so and failed to establish the su bsistence of 
an agreement between them selves  and the respondents . We have 
also considered the submission that if the petitioner s were CP 1975/2019  
   3
permitted to produce the ‘decision’ / ‘agreement’,  they would have 
succeeded. However,  as stated above,  the purported ‘dec ision’  / 
‘agreement’ , could n either  be made the basis of a suit  nor relied 
upon. Therefore , leave to appeal is declined and consequently this 
petition is dismissed.   
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
Islamabad , 
2nd February , 2021 
Rizwan   
Approved for reporting  