IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
 
Civil Petition No. 722-P of 2021   
(Against the order dated 05.10.2021 passed by the  
Peshawar High Court Peshawar in W.P. No.2622 -P/2021)  
 
 
Waseem Zeb Khan  
  …..Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
The Chairman, National Accountability Bureau, NAB 
Headquarters, Islamabad and others  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Barrister Waqar Ali Khan, ASC  
        
For the NAB:             Mr. Akbtar Tarar, Addl. P.G.  
 Mr. Nasir Mehmood Mughal,  
 Special Prosecutor with Ansar Butt, I.O.  
 
Date of Hearing           25.01.2022. 
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Veiled behind a 
fake online company fraudulently  shown to have been regist ered 
with the Security & Exchange Commission of Pakistan  with the 
name and style of Space Construction Pvt.  Ltd., alongside the 
co-accused, the petitioner is part of the scam  that lured people 
to invest  against monthly profit at the rate of 21% of  the 
depo sited amount . 1700 claimants  parting  with an amount of 
Rs.1.7 billion fell in the trap  before the hoax  was detected , 
pursuant whereto, the petitioner was arrested on the 20th of 
May, 2021 .  
 The mast ermind  behind the scam was Muhammad 
Taimoor who establish ed online deceit through fake identity of 
Rabia Batool; the petitioner joined him in September 2019  and 
projected himself to the unsuspecting public as Senior Director Criminal Petition No. 722-P of 2021  
of the Company ; at his tier, he operated alongside Riaz Khattak 
and Iftikhar Khattak, ab sconders  till date , through an office set 
up at Peshawar. As the investigation progressed, the affectees , 
still pouring in  to join the process , recorded their statements  
wherein they unambiguously blamed the petitioner for having 
received the sums through the trap . Colossal amounts  were 
siphoned off beyond investigative reach  through conversion into 
crypto currency /bit coins .  
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that 
petitioner is himself victim of the scam as he initially made a 
deposit in the hope to earn profits  and, thus, joined the 
company without any mens rea  to defraud the public at large  
and as such is not beneficiary  of the fraud ; it is next argued that 
despite lapse of considerable time, the NAB has not yet filed the 
reference and, thus , his continuous detention is serving no 
useful purpose.   
3.  Heard. Record perused.  
4.  With the assistance of learned Law Officer , we have 
gone through the record to find a long list of victims deprived of 
huge amounts , each blaming the petitioner for soliciting deposit 
in lieu of regular lucrative profit , a promise that soon turned out 
as farce ; the affectees are from different regions and 
backgrounds  and, thus, cannot be possibly stage -managed to 
cook up a false case  that too without any earthly reason . 
Investigative details confirm establishment of an office at 
Peshawar as is unanimously pointed out by the witnesses in 
their statements before the Investigating Officer . A small amount 
statedly deposited by the petitioner to project himself  as a n 
innocent  victim of the scam  without any tangible proof , in the 
face of formidable evidence,  does not provide any space  to 
hypothesize  his claim  of innocence . In this backdrop, refusal by 
the High Court to release the petitioner on bail in exercise of its 
equitable  Constitutional jurisdiction is not open to any 
legitimate exception . Petition fails. Leave declined. We are 
dismayed by Investigating Officer’s failure to recover the 
pilferage  and locate asse ts accumulated through the scam; his Criminal Petition No. 722-P of 2021  
failure to arrest the co -accused and file reference in time are no 
less disquieting  either .  
   
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
25th January , 2022  
Azmat /- 