IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Justice Yahya Afridi  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
REFERENCE NO. 1 OF 2011  
[Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan under Article 
186 of the Constitution]  
 
In Attendance : 
 
On behalf of the  Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
President:    Attorn ey-General for Pakistan  assisted by  
Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
Additional Attorney -General , 
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains,  
Additional Attorney -General,  
Raja M. Shafqat Abbasi,  
Deputy Attorney -General and  
Ms. Marium Ali Abbasi, Advocate.  
 
 
On Court Notice :  Mr. Khalid Is haq, Advocate -General,  Punjab , 
    assisted by Mr. Sanaullah Zahid, Addl. AG.  
Mr. Hassan Akbar, Advocate -General , Sindh  
assisted by Qazi M. Bashir, Addl. AG.  
Mr. Amir Javed, Advocate -General,  
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, assisted by  
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Add l. AG.  
Mr. Asif Reki, Advocate -General,  Balochistan  
assisted by Mr. M. Ayaz Swati,  Addl. AG. 
 
 
On behalf of the LRs of   Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC , assisted by  
the late  Mr. Zulfiqar Ali  Messrs Iftikhar Shah and Sheraz Shaukat  
Bhutto :   Rajpar, Advocates.  
    (representing grandson Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari)  
 
    Mian Raza Rabbani, ASC, assisted by  
    Mr. Zeeshan Abdullah, Advocate.  
(representing daughter Ms. Sanam Bhutto  and 
grandchildren Ms. Bakhtawar Bhutto  and Ms.  
Aseefa Bhutto)  
 Reference No. 1/2011.   2 
 
      Mr. Zahid F. Ibra him, ASC, assisted by  
    Mr. Altamash Arab, Advocate.  
(representing grandchildren Ms. Fatima Bhutto and 
Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto)  
 
 
Amicus Curiae:  Mr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik,  
Hon’ble former Judge , 
assisted by  Mr. Ansar Nawaz Mirza, ASC , 
Mr. Haider Rasul  Mirza, ASC and  
Mr. Shahryar Riaz, Advocate High Court.  
 
    Mr. M. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC,  
    assisted by  Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC.  
 
    Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan , ASC . 
 
    Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC,  
    assisted by  Ms. Zunaira Fayyaz Siwia, Adv.  
    and Mr. Qaiser Nawaz, Advocate.  
 
    Mr. Assadullah Khan Chamkani, ASC , 
    assisted by  Mr. M. Tariq Khan Hoti, ASC.  
 
    Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed , ASC , 
    assisted by  Mr. Ehsan Malik and  
Mr. Aman Aftab, Advocates.  
 
 
Complainant:   Mr. Ahmed Raza Khan Kasuri, ASC.  
    (in person)  
 
 
For SCBA:    Mr. Ali Imran, ASC.  
 
 
Dates of Hearing:   12.12.2023, 08.01.2024 , 20.02.2024,  
26.02.2024 , 27.02.2024, 28. 02.2024  
and 04.03.2024 . 
 
Opinion  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . 
 
Background  
1. The Federal Cabinet1 headed by the Prime Minister decided 
to file a reference under Article 186 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) ‘in respect of the 
proceedings of the judicial process in the case of trial Shaheed 
                                                             
1 In its meeting held on 28 March 2011.  Reference No. 1/2011.   3 
 
  Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, former Prime Minister ’ (‘Mr. Bh utto’), and t he 
Prime Minister advised2 the President of Pakistan (‘ the President ’) 
to file the reference . Resultantly, t he President submitted a 
reference to the Supreme Court ,3 which was numbered as 
Reference No. 1 of 2011  (‘the Reference ’). 
 
Seeking the  Opinion of the Supreme Court  
2. Article 186 of the Constitution, pursuant to which the 
Reference was filed , states  that: 
‘186. (1) If, at any time, the President considers that it 
is desirable to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court 
on any question of law which he considers of public 
importance, he may refer the question to the Supreme 
Court for consideration.  
 
(2) The Supreme Court shall consider a question so 
referred and report its opinion on the question to the 
President. ’ 
 
Questions Formulated for Opinion  
3. The following questions for the opinion of the Court  were 
formulated : 
‘1. Whether the decision of the Lahore High Court 
as well as the Supreme Court of Pakistan in the 
murder trial against Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto 
meets the requirements of fu ndamental rights as 
guaranteed under Article 4, sub - Articles (1) & 
(2) (a), Article 8, Article 9, Article 
10A/due  process, Article 14, Article 25 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973? If it does not, its effect and 
consequences?  
 
2. Whether the conviction leading to execution of 
Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto could be termed as 
a decision of the Supreme Court binding on all 
other courts being based upon or enunciating 
the principle of law in terms of Article 189 of the 
Constitution of  the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973? If not, its effect and consequences?  
 
3. Whether in the peculiar circumstances of this 
case awarding and maintaining of the death 
                                                             
2 On 1 April 2011, pursuant to entry 54 o f Schedule V -B, Rule 15 -A(1) of the 
Rules of Business, 1973 (enacted under Articles 90 and 99 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  
3 On 2 April 2011.  Reference No. 1/2011.   4 
 
  sentence was justified or it could amount to 
deliberate murder keeping in view the gl aring 
bias against Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto?  
 
4. Whether the decision in the case of murder trial 
against Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto fulfills the 
requirements of Islamic laws as codified in the 
Holy Quran and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet 
(SAW)? If so , whether present case is covered by 
doctrine of repentance specifically mentioned in 
the following Suras of Holy Quran:  
 
 (a) Sura Al -Nisa: verses 17 & 18  
  Sura Al -Baqara: verses 159, 160 and 222  
  Sura Al -Maida: verse 39  
  Sura Al -Aaraaf: verse 153  
  Sura Al-Nehal verse 119  
  Sura Al -Taha: verse 82  
 
as well as  
 
(b) Sunan Ibn -e-Maaja, Chapter 171, Hadith 
No. 395  
 
What are effects and consequences of doctrine 
Re: Repentance  
 
5. Whether on the basis of conclusions arrived at 
and inferences drawn from the 
evidence/material in the case an order for 
conviction and sentence against Shaheed 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto could have been recorded? ’ 
 
Larger Bench  
4. The Supreme Court4 ordered that a larger Bench should be 
constituted to hear the Reference . Resultantly a large r Bench, 
comprising of the Chief Justice and eight Judges, was constituted , 
and it last heard the Reference on 12 November 2012 ; the 
Reference was not fixed in Court for eleven years . All the members 
of this Court who were hearing the Reference have retire d. 
 
Rehearing  of the Reference  
5. The Reference was again fixed in Court for hearing on 12 
December 2023. This Court noted that, ‘ A number of other 
presidential references, filed later under Article 186, of the 
                                                             
4 Before a three -Member Bench, comprising of Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, 
CJ, Muhammad Sair Ali, J and Ghulam Rabbani, J.  Reference No. 1/2011.   5 
 
  Constitution, were taken up for hearing and d ecided by this Court,5 
but this Presidential Reference remains pending, it merits 
determination as early as possible. ’ It would be appropriate to 
reproduce the following paragraphs from the order passed on 12 
December 2023:  
‘2. Learned Mr. Farooq H. Naek r eferred to an 
application (CMA No.8622/2018) filed on behalf of Mr. 
Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, the grandson of the late Mr. 
Bhutto and states he wants to be represented herein. 
We are informed that there is only one surviving 
daughter of the late Mr. Bhutto a nd he has eight 
grandchildren. The application is allowed and learned 
Mr. Naek may represent Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari 
and assist this Court. If Mr. Bhutto’s daughter and 
any of his grandchildren also want to be represented 
they may engage counsel. Mr. Na ek states that he has 
also filed an application (CMA No. 10492/2023) 
seeking live telecast of these proceedings, however, the 
committee constituted in this regard had before filing 
of the application already made requisite 
arrangements and recommended that  the Presidential 
Reference be broadcast, and proceedings are being 
broadcast,6 therefore, this application has become 
infructuous and is disposed of.  
 
3. Learned Mr. Naek refers to the report of Justice 
Shafi -ur-Rehman, who was then a Judge of the Lahore 
High Court, regarding the investigation into the 
murder of Mr. Mohammad Ahmed Khan, the father of 
the complainant, Mr. Ahmed Raza Khan Kasuri. He 
requested that he be provided its copy. A Tribunal of 
inquiry was constituted by the Government of Punjab 
in exercise of its powers conferred by section 3 of the 
West Pakistan Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 1969.7 
The Report of the Tribunal  is dated 22 February 1975 
and comprises of 30 pages, and is mentioned in the 
judgment of the Lahore High Court8 and also in the 
appeal therefrom.9 
 
4. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AG’) 
was asked whether any of the successive Presidents or 
the Federal Government sought to withdraw the 
Presidential Reference or wants to do so now, and the 
                                                             
5 (1) Reference No. 1 of 2012 filed on 7 December 2012, (2) Reference No. 1 of 
2020 filed on 23 December 2020, (3) Reference No. 1 of 2022 filed on 21 March 
2022 and (4) Reference No. 2 of 2022 filed on 18 October 2022.  
6https://www.youtube.com/live/fnsKtf1yM78?si=Wnye57Er_IJ39zB0 . 
7 Notification No.SOG -III-6-309/74, dated 13 November 1974, published in the 
Punjab Gazette on 11 December 1974.  
8State v Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  PLD 1978 Lahore 523.  
9Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto v State , PLD 1979 Supreme Court 53, p. 61, para 9.  Reference No. 1/2011.   6 
 
  learned AG stated that thi s was not done nor is this 
sought to be done now.  
 
5. Learned AG was asked to read the Presidential 
Reference, which he did. He also read some of the 
orders of this Court, including order dated 21 April 
201110 which formulated questions for the opinion of 
this Court. A number of amici curiae  were appointed, 
some of whom have passed away and others we are 
told are indisposed. Learned Mr. Ali Ahmed Kurd, an 
amicus appointed by this Court, states that he will be 
rendering assistance. We are also informed that 
learned Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, another amicus 
appointed by this Court, will also be rendering 
assistance. Notice had also been issued to the 
Supreme Court Bar Association (‘ SCBA ’) and the late 
Ms. Asma Jahangir represented SCBA; if SCBA want 
to be represent ed before this Court they may nominate 
a counsel to assist us. We also appoint learned Messrs 
Khalid Javed Khan, Salahuddin Ahmed and Zahid F. 
Ebrahim as amici curiae . Mr. Yasser Kureshi, an 
academic working at Oxford University, United 
Kingdom, and Ms. Re ema Omer of the International 
Commission of Jurists are also appointed as amici 
curiae . They are appointed to particularly attend to the 
constitutional and legal aspects of the matter.  
 
6. The first and foremost constitutional and legal 
points, in addition  to those recorded in order dated 21 
April 2011, that require consideration are:  
 
(1) Whether the Presidential Reference is 
maintainable under Article 186 of the 
Constitution;  
 
(2) Whether the Presidential Reference requires a 
factual inquiry, and if so, w hether under Article 
186 of the Constitution an opinion can be given 
in this regard;  
 
(3) The constitutional -legal position of the trial and 
appeal, and its credibility/legitimacy when the 
person being tried was removed from power by a 
usurper who himself assumed power and then 
launched the prosecution of Mr. Bhutto in a 
criminal case which was filed as ‘untraced’; and  
 
(4) Were certain judge(s) removed from the trial 
and/or hearing the appeal to secure a particular 
result.  
 
                                                             
10In re: Reference No. 1 of 2011 , 2011 SCMR 962.  Reference No. 1/2011.   7 
 
  7. If the aforesaid aspect is su ccessfully attended 
to then we will need to consider the trial and appeal 
which will require expertise in criminal law and 
procedure. Justice Manzoor Ahmed Malik, former 
Judge of the Supreme Court, and Justice Assadullah 
Khan Chamkani, a former Judge of th e Peshawar High 
Court, have vast experience and we want to benefit 
from their knowledge in this regard, therefore, they are 
appointed as amici curiae, who may either submit a 
written brief and/or address us in person. We note 
that learned Mr. Khawaja Haris  Ahmed was the 
Advocate -General, Punjab and was associated with the 
Presidential Reference when it was earlier heard and is 
also a criminal law expert, therefore, he is also 
appointed as amicus curiae to assist with the criminal 
law and procedure.  
 
8. With regard to the criminal law aspects the 
learned amici curiae  may assist on the following:  
 
(1) If, and when, can a murder trial be conducted 
by the High Court, and to cite local and 
international precedents;  
 
(2) Was the murder -trial being conducted by the  
High Court objected to, and if it was, how was 
the objection attended to;  
 
(3)  The consequences, if any, of departing from the 
usual mode of trial;  
 
(4) The admissibility or otherwise of a confessional 
statement of an approver and to what extent can 
it be used against a co -accused;  
 
(5) Was there any legal bias, and if so its effects; 
and 
 
(6) What were the facts leading to reopening the 
investigation, and was it because fresh evidence 
had been discovered or was it on account of the 
usurper securing his p osition.  
 
9. The Presidential Reference refers to an interview, 
which we are told was given to Mr. Iftikhar Ahmed of 
Geo television by Justi ce Nasim Hassan Shah, who 
was on the Bench of the Supreme Court which decided 
the appeal and review11. Mr. Ahmed Raz a Kasuri also 
refers to his applicatio n (CMA No. 5788/2011) and 
states that he has filed extracts from a book written by 
the same learned Judge - Constitution, Law and 
                                                             
11 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto v State,  PLD 1979 Supreme Court 741.  Reference No. 1/2011.   8 
 
  Pakistan Affairs . Mr. Naek states that Justice Dorab 
Patel had also given an interview a bout the case.  
 
10. Office is directed to send copies of the 
Presidential Reference, all orders and the Report of the 
Tribunal to the learned amici curiae  who may attend to 
the questions noted above, in order dated 21 April 
2011 and in the Presidential Ref erence. The learned 
amici  may submit their respective written opinions on 
all or any of the said matters, and on any other aspect 
which they consider relevant, by Friday, 5 January 
2024. ’ 
 
6. We heard this Reference on 8 January, 20, 26, 27 and 28  
February  and 4 March 2024 . On 6 March 2024  we announced our 
Opinion under Article 186 of the Constitution  which read as 
follows : 
‘In the course of performing our core duty to 
administer justice ‘in accordance with the Constitution 
of the Islamic Republic of Pakist an and the law’, we 
(judges) are bound to ‘do right to all manner of people, 
according to law, without fear or favour, affection or 
ill-will.’12 There have  been some cases in our judicial 
history that created a public perception that either fear 
or favour d eterred the performance of our duty to 
administer justice in accordance with the law. We 
must, therefore, be willing to confront our past 
missteps and fallibilities with humility, in the spirit of 
self-accountability, and as a testament to our 
commitment t o ensure that justice shall be served with 
unwavering integrity and fidelity to the law. We cannot 
correct ourselves and progress in the right direction 
until we acknowledge our past mistakes.  
 
2. The advisory jurisdiction, under Article 186 of 
the Constit ution, requires this Court t o render an 
opinion on any question of law of public importance 
referred to by the President. To us, the question of law, 
in essence, is whether the requirements of due process 
and fair trial were complied with in the murder tri al of 
Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto (“Mr. Bhutto”), the former 
Prime Minister of Pakistan, by the trial court (the 
Lahore High Court) and the appellate court (the 
Supreme Court). This question we approach and 
answer considering whether the trial court and the 
appellate court attended to and dealt with the 
requirements of due process and fair trial.  
                                                             
12 Oath of Office for Judges o f the Supreme Court and the High Courts, 
prescribed under Articles 178 and 194 in the Third Schedule to the Constitution 
of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  Reference No. 1/2011.   9 
 
   
3. The reference filed by the President of Pakistan 
has provided us an opportunity to reflect upon the 
proceedings of the trial, conviction and death sentence 
of Mr. Bhutto, under the regime of the military dictator 
General Zia Ul Haq. The reference was filed during the 
government of the political party founded by Mr. 
Bhutto but the successive governments of other major 
political parties carried forward this inquiry an d did 
not opt to withdraw the reference. This collective 
interest reflects the widespread desire of the people of 
Pakistan to seek the opinion of this Court on whether 
Mr. Bhutto was afforded a fair trial and due process 
for his trial for the murder of Mr.  Muhammad Ahmed 
Khan Kasuri.  
 
4. With the able assistance of the eminent legal 
minds of the country, we for the reasons to be 
recorded later and subject to amplifications and 
explanations made  therein, render an opinion on the 
referred questions in the fol lowing terms:  
 
Question (1)  
 
Whether the decision of the Lahore High Court as well 
as the Supreme Court of Pakistan in the murder trial 
against Shaheed  Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto meets the 
requirements of fundamental rights  as guaranteed 
under Article 4, sub -Articles (1) and (2)(a), Article 8, 
Article 9, Article 10A/due process, Article 14, Article 
25 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973? If it does not, its effect and 
consequences?  
 
Opinion  
 
(i)   The proceedings of the trial by the Lahor e High 
Court and of the appeal by the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan do not meet the requirements of the 
Fundamental Right to a fair trial and due process 
enshrined in Articles 4 and 9 of the Constitution and 
later guaranteed as a separate and independent 
Funda mental Right under Article 10A of the 
Constitution.  
 
(ii)   The Constitution and the law do not provide a 
mechanism to set aside the judgment whereby Mr. 
Bhutto was convicted and sentenced; the said 
judgment attained finality after the dismissal of the 
review petition by this Court.  
 Reference No. 1/2011.   10 
 
  Question (2)  
 
Whether the conviction leading to execution of 
Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto could be termed as a 
decision of the Supreme Court binding on all other 
courts being based upon or enunciating the principle 
of law in te rms of Article 189 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973? If not, its effect 
and consequences?  
 
Opinion  
 
Referenced questions do not specify the principle of 
law enunciated by this Court in the Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto 
case regarding whi ch our opinion is sought. Therefore, 
it cannot be answered whether any principle of law 
enunciated in the  Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto case  has already 
been dissented to or overruled.  
 
Questions (3) and (5)  
 
Whether in the peculiar circumstances of this case 
awardi ng and maintaining of the death sentence was 
justified or it could amount to deliberate murder 
keeping in view the glaring bias against Shaheed 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto?  
 
Whether on the basis of conclusions arrived at and 
inferences drawn from the evidence/mate rial in the 
case an order for conviction and sentence against 
Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto could have been 
recorded?  
 
Opinion  
 
In its advisory jurisdiction under Article 186 of the 
Constitution, this Court cannot reappraise the 
evidence and undo the decisio n of the case. However, 
in our detailed reasons, we shall identify the major 
constitutional and legal lapses that had occurred  with 
respect to fair trial and due process.  
 
Question (4)  
 
Whether the decision in the case of murder trial 
against Shaheed Zulf iqar Ali Bhutto fulfils the 
requirements of Islamic laws as codified in the Holy 
Quran and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (SAW)? If 
so, whether present case is covered by doctrine of 
repentance specifically mentioned in the following 
Suras of Holy Quran:  
 Reference No. 1/2011.   11 
 
  (a) Sura Al -Nisa, verses 17 and 18; Sura Al -
Baqara, verses 159, 160 and 222; Sura Al -
Maida, verse 39; Sura Al -Aaraaf, verse 153; 
Sura Al -Nahl, verse 119; Sura Al -Taha, verse 
82; as well as (b) Sunan Ibn -e-Maaja, Chapter 
171, Hadith No. 395.  
 
What are effec ts and consequences of doctrine – Re: 
Repentance  
 
Opinion  
 
We were not rendered any assistance on this question, 
therefore, it would be inappropriate to render an 
opinion. ’ 
 
Retirement of Senior Puisne Judge Sardar Tariq Masood  
7. Sardar Tariq Masood , J was the senior puisne judge when 
the Reference was heard and the above opinion was rendered , 
however, he retired on 10 March 2024.  It is commonsensical that, 
if a Judge has already signed a written opinion /short order, but 
then retires , he can sign/give the detailed reasons post-retirement. 
This also prevents the unnecessary wastage of public resources 
and Court time , which would happen if the Bench was to be 
reconstituted (after the retirement of a Judge) and the entire 
matter heard  again . A Supreme Court Be nch comprising of 
thirteen Judges13 held that Judges who had retired before signing 
the detailed reasons could do so after their retirement.  
 
Facts of the case  
8. On 1 1 November 1974 at 12.30 am Mr. Muhammad Ahmad 
Khan (‘Mr. Khan ’), his wife, his wife’s sis ter and his son Mr. 
Ahmad Raza Kasuri (‘ Mr. Kasuri ’) were returning home after 
having attended a wedding in a car driven by Mr. Kasuri when it 
was fired upon and a bullet struck Mr. Khan in the head, which 
resulted in his death.  The FIR14 was registered on the written 
complaint of Mr. Kasuri (‘ the Complainant ’), who  stated that he 
                                                             
13 Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v President of 
Pakistan , PLD 2016 Supreme Court 61, para 206, pp. 203 -4. 
14 First Information Report No. 402/74 was registered at Police Station Ichhra, 
Lahore on 11 November 1974 at 3.45 am under section 302 (murder, now qatl-i-
amd) and under section 307 (now section 324) – attempt to kill - of the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860.  Reference No. 1/2011.   12 
 
  suspected that he (and not his father ) was the intended target 
because he was vociferously opposed to the government party  
(Pakistan Peoples Party)  of Mr. Bhutto . Attributing motiv e to Mr. 
Bhutto , he stated that Mr. Bhutto  had addressed him in the 
National Assembly (of which both were members – MNAs) saying 
that he (Mr. Kasuri) had exhausted his patience (‘ ﺑﺮداﺷﺖ ﺳﮯ ﺑﺎﮨﺮ ﮨﻮﭼﮑﺎﮨﮯ )’ 
and that he (Mr. Bhutto ) had said that he had had enough of Mr. 
Kasuri (‘ﻣﯿﮟ اِس ﺷﺨﺺ ﺳﮯ ﺗﻨﮓ آﭼﮑﺎ ﮨﻮں.)’  
 
Police Investigation of the Crime  
9. The Police commenced its investigation15 of the crime but the 
perpetrators could not be unearthed. Therefore, the Senior 
Superintendent of Police (‘ SSP’) transferred t he investigation to a 
specialized investigation unit, that is, to the Crime Investigation 
Agency  (‘CIA’).16 However, the CIA also failed to trace the criminals, 
and after nine and a half months submitted its report 
recommending the closure of the investigat ion.17 
 
Closing the Investigation  
10. The Police could not make any progress in discovering those 
who had committed the crime which had killed Mr. Khan. The CIA 
too drew a blank. Therefore, a report was prepared by Inspector 
Abdul Hameed of CIA, Lahore whic h was also signed on 19 March 
1976 by the Deputy Superintendent of Police (‘ DSP’), Ichhra Circle , 
Lahore within the limits of which the crime was committed, and  
on 24 April 1976 by the Superintendent of Police (‘ SP’), 
Cantonment , Lahore, recommending that  the investigation be 
closed . The Magistrate ordered the closure of the investigation  on 3 
May 1976 . Neither Mr. Kasuri , nor the other legal heir s of the late 
Mr. Khan , nor anyone else objected to the closure of the 
                                                             
15 The investigation commenced on 11 November 1974 by Sub Inspector Abdul 
Hayee, who was the Station House Officer (SHO) of Police Station Ichhra, and 
continued till 14 December 1974.  
16 CIA’s Inspector Abdul Hameed took over the  investigation on 15 December 
1974.  
17 The closure report dated 1 October 1975 was prepared and submitted under 
rule 25.57 of the Police Rules, 1937, read with section 173 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898.  Reference No. 1/2011.   13 
 
  investigation. T he Magistrate ’s order closing the investigation  was 
never challenged . 
 
Tribunal of Inquiry  
11. The Government of Punjab appointed a Judge of the Lahore 
High Court as the Tribunal18 to inquire into : 
   ‘NOTIFICATION  
The 13th November 1974  
 
No. SOG -III-6-309/74  - Whereas the Governm ent of 
the Punjab is of the opinion that it is necessary to 
appoint a Tribunal for the purpose of making an 
inquiry into the incident which took place at 
Shadman -Shah Jamal Round -about, nearly four 
furlongs to the north of P. S. Ichhra, Lah ore on the 
night  between 10th and 11th November, 1974 at 12 -30 
a.m. (night):  
 
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred on 
him by S ection 3 of the West  Pakistan Tribunals of 
Inquiry Ordinance, 1969 (Ordinance II of 1969), the 
Governor of the Punjab is pleased to  appoint Mr. 
Justice Shafi -ur-Rehman, Judge, Lahore High Court 
as the Tribunal . 
 
2. The terms of reference of the Tribunal shall be - 
 
(i) To inquir e into the incident which took 
place on the night between 10th and 11th 
November, 1974 at Shadman -Shah Jamal 
Round -about, nearly four furlongs to the  
north of P.  S. Ichhra, Lahore leading to the 
death of Nawabzada Muhammad  Ahmed 
Khan, resident of 130 -J, Model Town, 
Lahore, father of Mr. Ahmed Raza  Khan 
Qasuri, MNA, in which connection FIR No.  
402/74 was recorded on 11th November 
1974 at P.  S. Icahra, Lahore  
 
(ii) To examine the investigations conducted 
by the Police in the case and give such 
directions as may be appropriate.  
 
3. The Tribunal will finalize the inquiry and submit 
his report within one month.  
F. K. B ANDIAL  
Chief Secretary. ’ 
                                                             
18 Inquiry Tribunal comprising of Justice Sha fi-ur-Rehman was constituted 
under the West Pakistan Tribunals of Inquiry Ordinance, 1969 vide Notification 
No.SOG -III-6-309/74, dated 13 November 1974, published in the Punjab 
Gazette on 11 December 1974.  Reference No. 1/2011.   14 
 
   
12. The Tribunal submitted Report of the Tribunal  on 22 
February 1975 , which found that : 
‘15. The only motive mentioned in the FIR 
accounting for the occurrence is the affiliations and 
the political activities of the complainant, Mr. Ahmed 
Reza Khan Kasuri, and the extreme exasperation and 
dislike for him of the Prime Minister publicly expressed 
on the floor of the National Assembly . In explaining the 
mention of such a motive in the FIR the complainant 
made it clear that it does no t necessarily mean that he 
was subjected to this and the precedent attacks 
directly at the bidding of the Prime Minister or that the 
attack was organized by someone in Government or 
Party. He said that on political differences, whatever 
their nature or ext ent, such a public condemnation by 
the Prime Minister, who happens to be, for the time 
being, the repository and source of all political and 
governmental powers, could prompt a die -hard, an 
over enthusiastic person, or a trigger happy individual, 
in the go vernment or outside, of the party or not, to 
accomplish his extermination from the scene. ’ 
 
The Tribunal issued the following directions : 
‘36. In short, the directions that I propose giving to 
the investigating agency are the following: - 
 
(i)  A more thoro ugh and expert examination of the 
spot.  
 
(ii) Preservation of property connected with the 
crime, already recovered or recoverable from the 
spot.  
 
(iii) Expert examinatio n of all the recovered articles 
together, with a view to narrow down the class of 
weapo n used in the commission of the crime.  
 
(iv) Natural witnesses to the occurrence i.e. 
residents of the area, invitees at the house of 
Bashir Shah, the Patrol Parties to be subjected 
to more purposive interrogation particularly for 
ascertaining the number o f shots fired, number 
of weapons used and the suspects.  
 
(v) The surviving occupants of the car should have 
been profitably interrogated on certain aspects of 
the investigation.  
 Reference No. 1/2011.   15 
 
  (vi) The material witnesses in the case and the 
suspects to be fully protecte d against physical 
harm. ’ 
 
However, nothing was unearthed about the perpetrator(s) of the 
crime.  
 
5 July 1977  
13. The Chief of Army Staff , General M ohammad Zia -ul-Haq, 
overthrew the democratic order  and imposed martial law  on 5 July 
1977 . The investigation  of the murder of Mr. Khan on 11 November 
1974 , which was closed on 3 May 1976 , was reopened on the 
verbal orders of the Director of the Federal Investigation Agency 
(‘FIA’).19 The prosecution never explain ed how and why an 
investigation into a thirty -two m onth old case, which was closed 
fourteen months  earlier , was reopened. It was also not explained 
how and why the investigation was transferred to the FIA. Both of 
these actions ( the reopening of the investigation and its transfer to 
FIA) were taken immedia tely after  General Zia -ul-Haq’s coup d’etat 
overthr owing Mr. Bhutto’s government . The case was 
resurrected.20 
 
Post Coup Investigation  
14. The i nterim investigation report ( challan ) was submitted on 
11 September 1977 .21 In addition to section 302 (murder) of the 
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (‘ PPC’) and section 307 (attempt to 
murder)  mentioned in the FIR were added , section s 120B (criminal 
conspiracy to commit an offence) and 109 (abetment of an offence) . 
The following seven persons were nominated in the interim  
investigation report to having conspir ed to murder Mr. Kasuri  and 
for the murder of Mr. Khan : 
 Mr. Bhutto, Prime Minister  
 (Sheikh ) Masood Mahmoo d, Director -General FSF  
 Mian Muhammad Abbas, Director FSF  
                                                             
19 As per the testimony of Abdul Khaliq, Deputy Dir ector FIA (PW 41).  
20 The first entry in the case diary ( zimni ) by FIA is recorded by Abdul Khaliq, 
Deputy Director FIA, on 24 July 1977, though the file of the case was received 
by Inspector FIA Muhammad Boota on 8 August 1977.  
21 Section 173 of the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1898.  Reference No. 1/2011.   16 
 
   Mr. Ghulam Hussain, Inspector FSF  
 Mr. Ghulam Must afa, Inspector FSF  
 Mr. Arshad Iqbal, Sub Inspector FSF  
 (Rana) Iftikhar Ahmad, Assistant Sub Inspector FSF  
 
However, i n the final investigation report ( challan ) dated 18 
September 1977 Masood M ahmood and Mian Muhammad Abbas 
were shown as approvers . 
 
Trans fer of case to the Lahore High Court  
15. A murder case under section 302 PPC  can only be tried by a 
Court of Session . Therefore, t he investigation report , which was 
submitted to t he Magistrate , was forwarded to the Session s Judge , 
Lahore  on 12 September 19 77. After receipt of the report the trial 
would have commenced . However , on the very next day  (13 
September 1977 ) the case  (Criminal Original No.60/77, titled State 
v Z. A . Bhutto ) came up before Justice  Mushtaq Hussain , the 
Acting Chief Justice (‘ ACJ’), who the very same day ordered that, 
‘In view of submissions made in the petition the case is transferred 
to this Court for trial .’ This was done despite the fact that the 
Session s Judge , Lahore had already on 12 September 1977  taken 
cognizance of the case. It is inexplicable how then the case was 
listed for hearing before the ACJ.  Criminal Original No.60/77  is 
untraceable, therefore, it cannot be ascertained what was recorded 
therein , and what had necessitated its immediate fixation in the 
High Court , and before Justice Mushtaq Hussain. The record 
(which is available) , however , show s that Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
immediately and on the same day 13 September 1977 granted the 
said petition , by passing  the following order:  
‘In view of the submissions made in the petition the 
case is transferred to this Court for trial. It shall be 
heard by a Full Bench consisting of  
 
1. Myself  
2. Zakiuddin Pal  
3. M.S.H. Qureshi  
4. Sheikh Aftab Hussain and  
5. Malik Gulbaz Khan, JJ.  Reference No. 1/2011.   17 
 
   
To be heard on 24.9.1977.  
 
Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain  
ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE ’ 
 
Commencement of the Trial  
16. On 24 September 1977  the trial of Mr. Bhutto and of the 
other co -accused commenced . The High Court  ordered that the 
evidence be summoned , however, even though  the accused were 
present in Court , the charge was not framed against them . The 
charge  was also not framed on the next date , that is, on 3 October 
1977 . Framing of charge  is a mandatory requirement ,22 and only 
after it is framed can a trial commence . The charge was finally 
framed on 11 October 1977  when all the accused pleaded  not 
guilty . From 11 October 1977 to 25 February 1978  the High Court 
(acting as the Trial Court) recorded the statements of forty -one 
prosecution witnesses (PWs) and of four defence witnesses (DWs) . 
On 2 March 1978  judgment was r eserved and it was announced on 
18 March  1978. Mr. Bhutto was convicted  for the following 
offences  of the PPC : (a) section 120 -B and sentenced to five years 
rigorous imprisonment, (b) section 302 read with sections 301 and 
111 and sentenced to death and (c ) under section 307 read with 
section 109 and sentenced to seven ye ars rigorous imprisonment 
for each offence . 
 
Appeal and Review  
17. Mr. Bhutto appealed his conviction before the Supreme 
Court,23 but his appeal was dismissed on 6 February 1979 by a 
majorit y of four to three.24 A review petition25 seeking review of the 
Judgment dismissing Mr. Bhutto’s criminal appeal  was filed , but it 
was unanimously dismissed  on 24 March 1979 . 
 
                                                             
22 Section 265 -D of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.  
23 Criminal Appeal No. 11 of 1978.  
24 S. Anwarul Haq, CJ, Muhammad Akram, Karam Elahi Chauhan and Nasim 
Hassan Shah, JJ, dismissing the appeal, while Dorab Patel, Muhammad Ha leem 
and G. Safdar Shah, JJ, allowing it.  
25 Review Petition No. 5/R of 1979.  Reference No. 1/2011.   18 
 
  Death Warrant and Execution  
18. Mr. Bhutto’s  ‘Warrant of Execution on Sentence of  Death ’ (‘the 
death  warrant ’) was signed by Mushtaq Hussain , J, who by now 
had become the Chief Justice  of the Lahore High Court . The death 
warrant  concluded in the following words : ‘Given under my hand 
and the seal of the Court this 25th day of March 1979 ’, and it 
directed the Superintendent District Jail at Rawalpindi to execute 
the sentence on ‘ the Second day of April 1979 ’. The execution date 
was later changed to ‘the Fourth day of April 1979 ’. Mr. Bhutto was 
executed and the Superintendent District Jai l Rawalpindi issued a 
certificate stating  that he was ‘ hanged by the neck till he was dead 
at Rawalpindi on Wednesday the 4th day of April, 1979; that the 
body remained suspended for a full hour and was not taken down 
until life was ascertained by a medica l officer to be extinct… ’. 
 
The Constitutional scope of this matter  
19. We want to clarify, and emphasize, that we are not hear ing a 
petition, an appeal or a review  petition. Neither t he Constitution 
nor the law provide s a mechanism whereby Mr. Bhutto’s co nviction 
could be set aside. Mr. Bhutto’s conviction attained finality after 
the dismissal of the review petition by the Supreme Court . In our 
advisory jurisdiction , under Article 186 of the Constitution , the 
decision  cannot be undone . 
 
Detailed Reasons  
20. With regard to the conviction and sentence of Mr. Bhutto , on 
6 March 2024  we had recorded that, ‘in our detailed reasons, we 
shall identify the major constitutional and legal lapses that had 
occurred with respect to fair trial and due process ’. The follo wing are 
the detailed reasons.  
 
Reopening of the Investigation  
21. The investigation of the murderous attack that took place on 
11 November 1974 was undertaken by the Police , however, as no 
progress could be made it was transferred to the CI A, but still the 
perpetrator (s) could not be discovered . A Tribunal  comprising  of a 
High Court Judge was then constituted who issued certain Reference No. 1/2011.   19 
 
  directions but it did not help in unearthing the criminal (s). The 
recommendation  to close the investigation was then made, which 
was accepted by the Magistrate and the investigation was officially 
closed on 3 May 1976. No one objected  to the closure of the 
investigation . No application was submitted to reopen the 
investigation , and n o Court order ed that the investigation be 
reopen ed. The complainant , who  was a lawyer of some standing , 
also did not object to the closure of the investigation nor did he 
take the objection that its closure was premature .  
 
22. Within a few days of General Zia’s take over those, who were 
made the accused, were arrested, the crime, which was declared to 
be untraced and the investigation of which had been closed, was 
reopened (without authorization) and FIA re -investigated it 
(without aurthorization). Everyone who was made a co -accused 
with Mr. Bhutto had sur prisingly confessed to the crime. And, the 
High Court unilaterally and without hearing the accused elected to 
itself conduct a murder  trial, which was wholly unprecedented. Mr. 
Bhutto had appointed General Zia -ul-Haq as the Army Chief26 who 
by his actions o f 5 July 1977 had clearly violated Article 6 of the 
Constitution and  committed the offence of high treason , the 
prescribed punishment for which is imprisonment for life or death. 
General Zia , therefore had a motive to proceed against Mr. Bhutto , 
because had he not done so,  Mr. Bhutto  may have proceeded 
against him for committing high treason .  
 
Reinvestigation by FIA  
23. The Federal Investigation Agency Act, 1974 (‘ the FIA Act ’) 
constitute d the FIA, and empower ed the FIA to investigate the 
offences listed in the Schedule to the FIA Act, but it  does not 
permit the reinvestigation of a crime which has already been 
investigat ed by the Police  and the investigation whereof was 
ordered to be closed . Significantly, no judicial order was issued 
directing that the in vestigation be reopen ed or the crime 
reinvestigat ed by the FIA . The FIA had received the case file on 8 
                                                             
26 On 1 March 1976.  Reference No. 1/2011.   20 
 
  August 1977, but it had already commenced reinvestigation  on 24 
July 1977 , as per case diary recorded by Abdul Khaliq, Deputy 
Director , FIA. Th is sugges ts that the re was  a preconceived 
objective . This  transgression escaped the attention of the Trial 
Court Judges and also of the majority of the Appellate Court 
Judges . 
 
Transfer of Case to the High Court  
24. The reinvestigation report was submitted to the S ession s 
Judge , Lahore27 on 12 September 1977  who sought a report from 
the Public Prosecutor . However , the very next day  (on 13 
September 1977 ) the case was placed before  a single Judge of the 
Laho re High Court, namely, Justice Mushtaq Hussain, who did 
somet hing most unusual . Without issuing notice s to Mr. Bhutto 
and to the other accused , without providing them an opportunity 
of a hearing  and without enabling them to acquire legal 
representation , he ordered that, ‘ In view of the submissions made 
in the petiti on the case is transferred to this Court for trial. ’ 
 
25. Section 526 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (‘ the 
Code ’) empowers the High Court to transfer a criminal case to 
itself if : (a) a fair trial  is not possible, (b) the case involves some 
questi ons of law of unusual difficulty , (c) if the place in or near 
which any offence has been committed  needs to be viewed , (d) it 
will be to the general convenience of the parties or witnesses  or (e) 
to secure the ends of justice . However, Justice Mushtaq Huss ain, 
ACJ did not cite any reason , let alone any of those mentioned in 
the law necessitating the transfer of case to the High Court  and for 
it to conduct the trial itself. 
 
Prejudice Caused to the Accused/Convict  
26. A murder trial is conducted by a Court o f Session .28 Appeal 
against conviction lies before the High Court.29 Article 185(2)(b) of 
the Constitution and sections 411 -A and 526 of the Code  permit 
                                                             
27 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, section 190(2) read with section 346(2).  
28 Ibid., sections 190(2) and 265 -A. 
29 Ibid., section 410.  Reference No. 1/2011.   21 
 
  trials to be conducted by the High Court , but these provisions do 
not provide for a High Court to conduct  a murder  trial. There was 
not a single preceden t of a High Court conducting  a murder trial. 
Mr. Bhutto’s murder trial by the High Court made history;  never 
before nor since has this happened . In other countries of the 
Indian subcontinent , where there are similar legal provisions , a 
High Court has never conduct ed a murder  trial. 
 
27. By conducting the murder trial itself, the High Court made 
redundant a number of provisions of the Constitution and Chapter 
XXVII of the Code . Section 374 requires that e very s entence of 
death is required to be confirm ed by the High Court ; a vitally 
important safeguard against faulty convictions and hasty 
hangings.  The sentence of death which is confirmed by the High 
Court  must also be signed by two judges.30 When a sentence of 
death is passed, the High Court to which the matter is sent for 
confirmation of the conviction and sentence is also empowered to 
pass any other sentence warranted by law  or acquit the accused 
person .31 In this case the trial was conducted by the High Court  as 
the Trial Court , therefore,  the death sentences  passed by the Trial 
Court had to be confirmed  by the  Appellate Court.  The mandatory 
requirement of  section 376 of the Code , reproduced hereunder, 
was not complied with:  
‘Power of High Court to confirm sente nces or annul 
conviction : In any case submitted under Section 374 
the High Court : 
 
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any 
other sentence warranted by law ; or 
 
(b) may annul the conviction and convict the 
accused of any offence of which the 
Sessions Cour t might have convicted him 
or order a new trial on the same or an 
amended charge ; or 
 
(c) may acquit the accused person ; 
 
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be 
made under this section until the period allowed for 
                                                             
30 Ibid., section 377.  
31 Ibid., section 376.  Reference No. 1/2011.   22 
 
  preferring an appeal has expired,  or, if an appeal is 
presented within such period, until such appeal is 
disposed of. ’ 
 
28. If for argument’s sake  it be accepted that the High Court 
could have conducted a murder trial, this it then did as a Trial 
Court , and as death sentences were passed these had to be 
confirmed by submitting the case to the High Court . Any two 
Judges of the High Court , who had not conduct ed the trial , could 
have done so in terms of section 376 of the Code . But, this was not 
done.  Without c onfirming the sentence s of death  they could not 
have been executed . The Code , and its section 376, which provides 
essential protection to those sentenced to death,  was enacted in 
1898 , but this provision has only once been disregarded , which 
was in this case.  
 
Constitutional Safeguards w ere Disregarded  
29. The Constitution mandates that, ‘ To enjoy the protection of 
law and to be treated in accordance with law is the inalienable right 
of every citizen. ’32 And, ‘ In particular no action detrimental to the life, 
liberty, body, reputation or pr operty of any person shall be taken 
except in accordance with law .’33 The law (section 376 of the Code)  
requir ing the confirmation of death sentence s was violated and this 
inalienable right  was contravened. Article 9 of the Constitution 
stipulates that, ‘ No person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in 
accordance with law ,’ and this fundamental right too was violated, 
regrettably , by those mandated to ensure the laws  compliance.  
 
Right of appeal  lost 
30. An appeal against the conviction and sentence of a Court of 
Session lies to the High Court.34 However, since the trial was 
conducted by the High Court itself, Mr. Bhutto and the other 
accused were deprived of one right of appeal . Article 4(1) of the 
Constitution which requir es that all be treated in acco rdance with 
law, and Article 9 of the Constitution which prohibit s anyone to be 
                                                             
32 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 4(1).  
33 Ibid, Article 4(2) (a).   
34 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, section 410.  Reference No. 1/2011.   23 
 
  deprived of life  save in accordance with law  were vitiated. The 
convicts were deprived of one right of appeal , which Articles 4(1) 
and 9 guaranteed , and these rights can not be undone or 
disregarded , even during the proclamation of emergency .35 
 
Right to Fair Trial and Due Process  
31. The right to due process and a fair trial is part of the 
jurisprudence of Pakistan . These rights subsisted  even before ‘the 
right to fair trial and  due process ’ were specifically incorporated in 
the Constitution , through Article 10A in the year 2010 as 
Fundamental Rights .36 In the case of Abul A’la Moudoodi v 
Government of West Pakistan37 a five -Member Bench of the 
Supreme Court had stated (in 1964) that the necessity of due 
process  ‘is an element of justice which forms part of the British 
Common Law ’, that is inherited by Pakistan. In the case of Benazir 
Bhutto v Federation of Pakistan38 (1988) the Fundamental Right to 
life (Article 9 of the Constitutio n) was held , by an eleven -Member 
Bench of the Supreme Court , to include access to justice , which 
incorporates fair trial  and due process : 
‘The right of “access to justice to all”  is a well -
recognised inviolable right enshrined in Article 9 of the 
Constitut ion. This right is equally found in the 
doctrine of “due process of law ”. The right of access to 
justice includes the right to be treated according to 
law, the right to have a fair and proper trial and a right 
to have an impartial Court or Tribunal. This 
conclusion finds support from the observation of 
Willoughby in Constitution of United States, Second 
Edition, Vol. II at page 1709 where the term “due 
process of law ” has been summarised as follows:  
 
“(1) He shall have due notice of proceedings which 
affect  his rights.  
 
(2) He shall be given reasonable opportunity to 
defend.  
 
(3) That the Tribunal or Court before which his 
rights are adjudicated is so constituted as to give 
                                                             
35 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Part X.  
36 Article 10A was inserted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 
2010.  
37 PLD 1964 Supreme Court 673, p. 710.  
38 PLD 1988 Supreme Court 416.  Reference No. 1/2011.   24 
 
  reasonable assurance of his honesty and 
impartiality, and  
 
(4) That it is a Court of competent jurisdiction. ” 
 
It therefore follows that in terms of Article 9 of the 
Constitution a person is entitled to have an impartial 
Court and tribunal. Unless an impartial and 
independent Court is established the right to have a 
fair trial according to  law cannot be achieved. ’ 
 
The above principle was reiterated (in 1993) in the case of 
Government of Balochistan v Azizullah Memon :39 
‘The right of access to justice is internationally well -
recognised human right and is now being implemented 
and executed by  granting relief under the 
Constitutional provisions. Article 10 of Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and Article 14 of the 
United Nations Convention on Criminal Political 
Rights40 recognize the right of fair tria l by an 
independent and impartial Tribun al established by 
law.’ 
 
‘The right of access to justice does not only mean that 
the law may provide remedies for the violation of 
rights, but it also means that every citizen should have 
equal opportunity and right to approach the Courts 
without any discr imination. It also envisages that 
normally the Courts established by law shall be open 
for all citizens alike. Where the jurisdiction of the 
ordinary Courts established under the ordinary law is 
excluded or barred and certain class of cases or class 
of per sons or inhabitants of an area are not allowed to 
approach such Courts and are to be tried or rights 
adjudicated by special Courts, then a fair, rational and 
reasonable classification must be made which have 
nexus with the object of the legislation.’  
 
 Al-Jehad Trust v Federation of Pakistan41 was decided by a 
five-Member Bench (in 1996)  and it reiterated the earlier (1994) 
decision in the case of Government of Sindh v Sharaf Faridi ,42 in 
which the due process of law  requirement had been stressed .43 
 
                                                             
39 PLD 1993 Supreme Court 341.  
40 Incorrectly mentioned, as it is the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights .   
41 PLD 1996 Suprem e Court 324.  
42 PLD 1994 Supreme Court 105.  
43 PLD 1996 Supreme Court 324, p. 423YY.  Reference No. 1/2011.   25 
 
   In the above mentioned cases , and in many others record ing 
similar opinions , the jurisprudence of fair trial and due process  
stood established as  a fundamental right well before the insertion 
of Article 10A44 in the Constitution in 2010 . The safeguards to 
ensure th at an accused is fairly and justly treated and that 
essential requirements of a fair trial and due process are met were 
disregarded  in the case of Mr. Bhutto . 
 
Basis of Conviction  
32. The foremost basis for the conviction of Mr. B hutto was the 
testimony  of an accused, who turned approver , namely, (Sheikh) 
Masood Mahmood, the then Director -General of the Federal 
Security Force (‘ FSF’). After the coup d’etat of 5 July 1977 Masood 
Mahmood was arrested, nominated as an accused and pleaded 
that he would make disclosure  of the crime , provided he is 
pardoned . His plea  was accepted and he was made an approver.45 
 
Masood Mahmood the Approver  
33. After Masood Mahmood ’s arrest he wrote to the District 
Magistrate, Lahore on 7 September 1977, stating he had , ‘simply 
carried out orders of the former Prime Minister of Pakistan, Mr. 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, to cause the death of Mr. Ahmad Raza Kasuri. ’ 
And, ‘ in case I am granted pardon… I would be able to disclose 
material facts regarding the conspiracy leading to the murder… ’. He 
did so because, to use his own words, ‘ the commission of this 
heinous crime has haunted my conscience. ’ Incarceration had 
revived his flagging conscience. The crime was committed three 
years earlier and Masood Mahmood’s conscience remained 
dormant and on ly awoke when he was arrest ed. A conscience 
which first wanted to secure a pardon  for himself . A conscience 
which consider ed that to order a n assassination was ‘simply ’ a 
matter of ‘carrying out orders ’, as was stated by this most senior 
police officer . The Additional District Magistrate accepted Masood 
                                                             
44 Article 10A was inserted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 
2010.  
45 Under section 337 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.  Reference No. 1/2011.   26 
 
  Mahmood’s plea on 14 September 1977, seven days after he had 
written to him offering ‘to disclose material facts. ’ 
 
Statement of Masood Mahmood  
34. Masood Mahmood was made an approver on 14 September 
1977 , and his statement was recorded  the same day . He waxed 
eloquent and m ost of what he said was irrelevant . The first four 
pages mention the various positions that he had held and how he 
reached grade 21.  ‘My selection to the Indian Police was made 
against a wa r reserved vacancy as I had served briefly in the Royal 
Indian Air Force. ’ And, ‘ I resumed duty on 18th September 1948 as 
Assistant Superintendent Police. ’ This was followed by saying that 
Prime Minister Mr. Bhutto had sent for him on 12 April 1974 , had 
praised him  and noted the ‘ good work ’ he had done and 
acknowledg ed his ‘estab lished reputation for integrity, honesty and 
hard work. ’ It is questionable whether integrity  and honesty  would 
be the qualities  to look for in a henchman . Masood Mahmood 
stated that after an hour of Mr. Bhutto persuading  him he 
condescended  to ‘take-over as D.G. (FSF) to  re-organis e and train 
the force .’ He then proceeded to reveal his vulnerability , stating  
that his ex-colleague  Saeed Ahmad Khan, Chief Security Officer of 
the Prime  Minister , and his Assistant , Abdul Hamid Bajwa , told 
him that if he did not do as Mr. Bhutto asked , ‘your wife and 
children may see no more of you. ’ Saeed Ahmed Khan was not 
produced as a witness and Abdul Hamid Bajwa had died , 
therefore, anything alleged ly said by them constitute d hearsay. 
Masood Mahmood then disclosed his cowardice, stating that Mr. 
Bhutto  had told him, ‘You do not want Waqar chasing you …?’ 
Waqar was also not produced as a wit ness. Another name which 
Masood Mahmood dropped was of M.  R. Welch, Director FSF in 
Quetta , who he ‘ instructed  to take care of him  [Mr. Kasuri] if 
possible in Quetta ’. Masood Mahmood stated ‘that Mian Abbas had 
previously been asked under his orders through Mr. Haq Nawaz 
Tiwana  do away with Ahmad Raza Kasuri. He dire cted me to tell 
Mian Abbas to get on with the job and tell Mian Abbas to produce 
either Ahmad Raza Kasuri’s dead -body or his body totally Reference No. 1/2011.   27 
 
  bandaged all over. ’ Mian Muhammad Abbas , however,  retracted his 
statement  before the Trial Court  and Haq Nawaz Tiwana,  the 
previous Director -General of FSF, was not produced to testify. 
Masood Mahmood stated that Mr. Bhutto had wanted Mr. Kasuri 
to be killed for quite some time and had already directed Mian 
Abbas to do so, but to no effect . However, only when Masood 
Mahmo od directed him to do so was Mr. Kasuri fired upon, which 
instead killed Mr. Khan . 
 
Masood Mahmood Def iance of the Prohibition to Kill  
35. Masood Mahmood put himself forward as a man having faith 
(اﯾﻣﺎن) in God and knew that ordering someone ’s murder was 
‘against the dictates of God ’, but since he was given ‘ specific orders ’ 
from Mr. Bhutto  he became ‘ instrumental in defying God Almighty 
(May He forgive me) for taking a valuable human life. ’ The reason 
cited by Masood Mahmood for defying God was his marital  status – 
‘I would have chuck ed the job and walked down on the street, had I 
been a bachelor. ’ 
 
Masood Mahmood’s Credibility  
36. Masood Mahmood ’s credibility was accepted and he was 
believed without demur by the Trial and Appellate Courts.  
However, there w ere a number of factors which prudence should 
have alerted and shown that he was self -serving, self -preserving, 
morally bankrupt, and a false witness : 
(1) Masood Mahmood testified that Mr. Bhutto had 
appointed him as the Director General of FSF because 
of his integrity  and honesty , but would those be the 
qualities that would be sought in one appointed to 
fulfill a criminal agenda and carry out nefarious 
activities.  
(2) Masood Mahmood stated that ‘ his father and the 
deceased were great friend s’ yet he had no  qualms to 
order the assassination of the son of his father’s great 
friend . Reference No. 1/2011.   28 
 
  (3) Mr. Bhutto had already instructed Mian Muhammad 
Abbas to assassinate Mr. Kasuri , according to Masood 
Mahmood, therefore, it is inexplicable why he would 
then also tell Masood M ahmood to do so.  
(4) Masood Mahmood  stated that Mian Muhammad Abbas 
did not follow Mr. Bhutto ’s directions to kill Mr. 
Kasuri, but offered no explanation why he disobeyed 
and suffered no consequences fo r such disobedience.  
(5) However, Masood Mahmood’s ord ers were  followed by 
Mian Muhammad Abbas , who had earlier disobeyed 
the Prime Minister . 
(6) As stated by Masood Mahmood i t was accept able to 
Mr. Bhutto if Mr. Kasuri was given a thorough beating  
yet he directed that Mr. Kasuri be killed . 
(7) In order ing an assassination , and not a beating, 
Masood Mahmood  alone  would be responsible for it. 
(8) Masood Mahmood stated that the following were 
complicit and  were informed about the conspiracy to 
kill Mr. Kasuri: (1) Haq Nawaz Tiwana, the first 
Director -General of FSF, (2) Mian Muhammad Abbas, 
Director FSF, (3) M. R. Welch, Director FSF, Quetta, (4) 
Saeed Ahmed Khan, Prime Minister’s Chief Security 
Officer, (5) Abdul Hamid Bajwa, Assistant Chief 
Security Officer  and (6) himself . This number of 
persons knowing about a heinous conspiracy show ed 
complete reckless ness and disregard of detection, 
which any reasonable person would find hard to 
accept.  
(9) The conspiracy theory put forward by Masood 
Mahmood was believed without a shred of supporting 
evidence.  
(10) After Mr.  Khan’s murder Masood Mahmood continued 
to hold the position of DG of FSF , however, he was 
never again asked by Mr. Bhutto to do anything 
nefarious, let alone to kill. Did t his mean that Mr. 
Bhutto had only one enemy , and the FSF comprising Reference No. 1/2011.   29 
 
  of thousands  of personnel , was established for this  
sole purpose . 
(11) Masood Mahmood s ecured his freedom and a passage 
out of the country  by sacrificing Mr. Bhutto . A prudent 
person  would be alerted to the conduct of such a 
person, yet  Masood Mahmood ’s credibility  was not 
questioned by those whose judicial duty it was to 
satisfy themselves of it.  
 
Conscience and Convenience  
37. Masood Mahmood repeatedly referred to his conscience . ‘My 
conscience haunted me ’ and ‘ that this action  [murder] would be 
against my conscience. ’ However, his conscience , lay dormant 
throughout his tenure as the Director -General of the FSF; it 
surfaced when he had spent only a few days in custody , and, his 
resurgent conscience was pr emised on first extricating himself and 
securing for himself a pard on. His convenience and safety trump ed 
his conscience , which begs the question, was he truthful or an 
opportunist? Confessions must be voluntary and must not have 
‘been obtained from him by fear of prejudice or hope or advantage ’.46 
And, ‘ If the confession directly or indirectly is the result of 
inducement, threat or promise from a person in authority, it would 
be treated as not voluntary ’.47 It must be ‘ ensure [d] that the 
confessional statement should be absolutely free from the slightest 
tinge or taint of e xtraneous influence such as threat, promise or 
inducement and the Courts are placed under an obligation to 
affirmatively satisfy themselves that it is free and voluntary ’.48 
Masood Mahmood obtained for himself freedom from captivity  by 
his self -serving stat ement . Masood Mahmood melodramatic ally put 
forward his faith by overlook ing Islam’s most fundamental 
teaching, and prohibition : to kill a human , and that killing one 
person was like the killing of all of humanity and saving one 
person was like the saving o f all of humanity.49 This type of person 
                                                             
46 Ibrahim v King , (1975) 3 AllE R 175.  
47 Muhammad Amjad v State , PLD 2003 Supreme Court 704, 717.  
48 Dhani Bakhsh v State , PLD 1975 Supreme Court 187, 191B.  
49 Al-Qur’an, surat Al -Maidah  (5) verse 32.  Reference No. 1/2011.   30 
 
  the Federal Court had perceptively categorized as ‘a moral 
wretch ’.50 
 
Lack of Evidence  
38. With regard to the three offences attracting death sentences , 
section 302 (murder), section 307 ( attempted murder ) and sectio n 
111 (abetment) , there was no direct evidence against Mr. Bhutto , 
there wasn’t even circumstantial evidence, which would exclude 
any reasonable hypothesis of innocence. The entire prosecution 
case was built on the statements of Masood Mahmood and Mian 
Muhammad Abbas, however, Mian Muhammad Abbas retracted 
his confession and testified to the contrary.  Haq Nawaz Tiwana and 
Abdul Hamid Bajwa had died. M. R. Welch and Saeed Ahmed 
Khan , without being made approvers, were produced as 
prosecution witnesses.  
 
Negative Forensic Report  
39. The spent bullet casings, ejected from the firearm(s) that 
were used in the attack, did not match any of the weapons in use 
of the FSF. The prosecution contended that they were substituted, 
but without producing any positive eviden ce to substantiate this. 
Nonetheless, this contention of the prosecution was accepted, and 
it was further presumed that the purported substitution was done 
at the behest of Mr. Bhutto.  
 
Unsubstantiated Inferences  
40. Certain notings in some file/document, statedly made by 
Abdul Ahad, DSP, and Abdul Hamid Bajwa (exhibits 3/2 -A and 
3/2-A/1), were brought on record. And, Mr. Bhutto was sought to 
be implicated by relying on them purely on the basis of 
assumptions and his ‘ subsequent conduct ’, with out stating wh at 
this was and how it incriminated him.  The Trial Court held that, 
‘These documents corroborate the evidence of these witnesses on 
this point ,’ but without stating the said point. The judgment follows 
this with another vague sentence – ‘These documents fu rther show 
                                                             
50 Ishaq v Crown , PLD 1954 Federal Court 335, 343.  Reference No. 1/2011.   31 
 
  that the principal accused as well as P.W.3 agreed to this 
suggestion ’, without expounding on what was this suggestion  and 
to what had they agreed . Neither Abdul Ahad nor Abdul Hamid 
Bajwa were produced as witnesses (Abdul Hamid Bajwa had died),  
therefore, they could not be subjected to cross -examination. 
Extraordinary effort was made to draw arbitrary connections, 
derive meanings therefrom and then use them against the accused. 
This eroded the fundamental principle of establishing guilt beyond 
reasonable doubt . The manner in which the trial was conducted 
was antithetical to a fair trial and due process.  
 
Motive - Corroboration  
41. Section 114 of the Evidence Act, 187251 in its illustration (b) 
states, ‘that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unl ess he is 
corroborated in material particulars. ’ In criminal jurisprudence it is 
well settled that motive cannot corroborat e an approver’s 
testimony.52 However, the Trial Court was of the opinion that 
motive  could be used as corroboration as expressed in pa ragraph 
584 of its judgment , comprising of 627 paragraphs. Respectfully, it 
was also incorrect to say  that, ‘The principle laid down is not so 
wide’, which was in complete negation of the said statutory 
provision. Only in paragraph 584 of the judgment was there a 
fleeting reference to motive  yet the Trial Court proceeded on an 
incorrect assumption  that the motive stood established, even 
though the facts did not suggest this.  
 
42. The Appellate  Court’s majority judgment ,53 which comprised 
of 963 paragraphs, probably the longest judgment in any criminal 
case, upheld the High Court’s judgment . The majority of the 
Judges of the Appellate Court  took an even more novel approach , 
by first holding that the four co -accused and two approvers were 
not accomplices but w itnesses, and then holding (on this entirely 
incorrect assumption) that  they did not require corroboration . 
                                                             
51 Illustration (b) of Article 129 of th e Qanun -e- Shahadat, 1984.  
52 Qabil Shah v State , PLD 1960 Karachi 697.  
53 The majority judgment was authored by Anwarul Haq, CJ, and was agreed by 
Mohammad Akram, Karam Elahee Chauhan and Nasim Hassan Shah, JJ.  Reference No. 1/2011.   32 
 
  Corroboration of accomplices was categorized as an artificial 
requirement . ‘Without introducing an artificial requirement of 
corroboration of his ev idence by applying the rule contained in 
illustration (b) to section 114 of the Evidence Act. ’ Disregarding a 
statutory provision and declar ing it to be an artificial requirement  
did not behove judges, and all the more so when the object of the 
law is to prevent wrong convictions.  
 
The Asserted Motive - Constitutional Protection  
43. The motive cited by Mr. Kasuri for targeting him  was his 
political differences with Mr. Bhutto. Mr. Kasuri cited Mr. Bhutto ’s 
speech of 3 June 1974 in the National Assembly and the exchange 
of words between them as the motive  for the crime . Other speeches 
in the National Assembly were also referred to, and relied upon, to 
support  motive . The proceedings of the National Assembly were 
also relied upon by the Courts . This was not pe rmissible . The 
Constitution stipulates that, ‘no member shall be liable to any 
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said ’54 in 
Parliament . This constitutional provision , and protection accorded 
to the Members of Parliament , was not even considere d. 
 
44. Mr. Kasuri  stated  that he was an opponent of Mr. Bhutto  yet 
whatever he said was believed. The possibility of others having a 
motive, which were mentioned in Report of the Tribunal  was not 
explored. Mr. Khan was shot at and died;  the investigators also did 
not consider the possibility that Mr. Khan may have been the 
intended target. There were also two ladies in the ill -fated car but , 
surprisingly , neither of them, nor any of the other children of Mr. 
Khan were examined to consider whether someone else may have 
had a motive . Mr. Bhutto ’s enmity with Mr. Kasuri was cited by 
Mr. Kasuri as the motive , however,  it was not even considered that 
such enmity could equally be a reason to falsely implicate Mr. 
Bhutto.  
 
                                                             
54 Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan , Article 66(1).  Reference No. 1/2011.   33 
 
  Did Mr. Bhutto or Mr. Kasuri have Motive ? 
45. The entire prosecution case was premised on  the motive 
which Mr. Kasuri asserted . However, this at best was an 
expression of suspicion; he could not  say that he had personal 
knowledge of any specific conspiracy on Mr. Bhutto’s part. When 
Mr. Kasuri t estified in Court he undermined his own credibility, 
and consequently the suspicion he harboured  that Mr. Bhutto was 
behind the attack . Mr. Kasuri had successfully contested on the 
Pakistan Peoples Party (‘ PPP’) ticket from Kasur (NA 63) in the 
general ele ctions held in 1970 . He stated that Mr. Bhutto  had 
‘suspended my primary membership of PPP ’ on 2 May 1971. And 
the very next day, ‘ On 3.5.1971, in a Press Conference I floated my 
own group in the PPP, which was known all over the country as PPP 
(Raza Progr essive Group). ’ Mr. Kasuri stated that he then ‘ made a 
temporary peace with Mr. Bhutto as a matter of political strategy … 
in the year 1972. ’  But, ‘ Immediately after the lifting of the Martial 
Law on 21st April, 1972, I showed my teeth against Mr. Bhutto a nd 
revived my old role of criticising him both outside and inside the 
National Assembly of Pakistan. ’ He continued , ‘Mr. Bhutto formally 
expelled me from the PPP in October, 1972. In June, 1973 I joined 
Tehrik -I-Istiqlal and I re -joined PPP on 6th April 19 76. I joined the 
PPP because of instinct of self -preservation, because I knew I was a 
marked man. ’ The inconsistencies in Mr. Kasuri’s testimony 
abound.  
 
46. Mr. Kasuri attributed the killing of his father to Mr. Bhutto 
but had no qualms  apply ing to him fo r a PPP ticket to contest the 
1977 general elections  - ‘I did apply for a PPP ticket for election to 
the National Assembly this year,  … The ticket was not awarded. ’ 
Surely, self-preservation  could not be a reason for applying for a 
PPP ticket in the coming  election s. Mr. Kasuri was confronted in 
cross -examination with his letter (P.W. 1/19) through which he 
had request ed for an interview with Mr. Bhutto, and he stated,  
‘This request for seeking an interview pertains to the period from 8th 
of January to 30th of January, 1977, because in this period the Reference No. 1/2011.   34 
 
  tickets had to be decided and I was seeking an interview in relation 
to that. ’  
 
Motive Vitiated by Mr. Kasuri  
47. Mr. Kasuri undermined his own narrative and credibility. He 
rejoined the PPP, headed by Mr. Bhu tto, who he had earlier 
accused for the murderous attack on him, but which had killed his 
father. Mr. Kasuri tried to resolve this contradiction by saying that 
he did so for self-preservation . This explanation is difficult to 
accept , because it would mean that when his father was killed in 
1974 he had acted bravely  and nominated the Prime Minister for 
conspiracy and murder but later coward ice awashed over him . It is 
inexplicable why he would solicit the PPP ticket from the 
nominated accused  after the murder  of his father . The justification 
he offered was irreconcilable and unbelievable. It was imperative 
for the Trial Court to have scrutinized Mr. Kasuri’s vacillating 
explanations and for the Appellate Court to have analyzed his 
recorded testimony in this re gard, but unfortunately this was not 
done. The entire prosecution case was premised on Mr. Bhutto 
having the motive to have Mr. Kasuri  killed . A motive which  Mr. 
Kasuri himself vitiated.  
 
48. The Trial Court and the Appellate Court gave credence to the 
motive theory , however, Mr. Kasuri’s testimony could be equally 
treated to be that of a person wanting to settle personal scores. His 
testimony had created more than reasonable doubt about the 
alleged motive  and it was equally suggest ive of his anim us towards  
Mr. Bhutto and to falsely implicate  him. The prosecution is 
required to establish the guilt of an accused beyond reasonable 
doubt , which in the case of Mr. Bhutto with regard to motive , the 
attendant conspiracy and resultant killing it had not done.  
 
Failure to Establish Motive  
49. The matter of motive in this case , unlike other criminal 
cases, was very significant  also because of the charge of 
conspiracy . It is also well established that in criminal cases the 
prosecution need not set up a motive but if it elects to do so and Reference No. 1/2011.   35 
 
  then fails to establish it the prosecution suffers its consequences.55 
The motive’s  absence , or failure to establish it  is also consequential  
in a murder case in which the guilt of the offender is established 
but the asserted motive is not. In such cases the accused 
invariably is not given capital punishment, but instead 
imprisonment for life.56 
 
Either Kill or Beat Mr. Kasuri  
50. Masood Mahmood had confessed , and testified in Court , that 
Mr. Bhutto wanted one of two outcomes; either that Mr. Kasuri is 
killed or that he be severely beaten up . In his confessional 
statement57 Masood Mahmood said, ‘He [Mr. Bhutto] then ordered 
me to tell Mian Abbas to get on with it and produce either Ahmed 
Raza Kasuri dead body or his body totally bandaged a ll over …’. 
And, that , ‘After giving orders to Mian Abbas I carried on normal 
work ….’ In his testimony (recorded before the five -Member Trial 
Court ) he said, ‘ The Prime Minister went on to instruct me that I 
should ask Mian Muhammad Abbas to get on with the  job and to 
produce the dead body of Mr. Ahmed Raza Kasuri or his body 
bandaged all over. ’ And, ‘ I repeated to  [Mian Muhammad Abbas]  
him the orders of the then Prime Minister verbatim. ’ He did not 
disclose the orders  that he gave to Mian Abbas. Masood Mahm ood 
(in following Mr. Bhutto’s stated orders) could have elected to 
direct that Mr. Kasuri be given a severe beating, however, he 
presumably elected to order that he be killed. This aspect neither 
the Trial Court nor the Appellate Court considered. Therefo re, 
Masood Mahmood , and not Mr. Bhutto, would be liable for the 
killing.   
 
First Information Report - FIR 
51. The crime was first reported to the police, not by Mr . Kasuri, 
but by his brother , as Mr. Kasuri himself  stated . ‘My brother, Maj. 
Ali Raza rang u p S.S.P.  [Senior Superintendent of Police]  Lahore 
                                                             
55 Hakim Ali v State , 1971 SCMR 432, 445C, Habibullah v State , PLD 1969 
Supreme Court 127, 130A.  
56 Hakim Ali v State , 1971 SCMR 432.  
57 Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, section 164.  Reference No. 1/2011.   36 
 
  and told him about this incident on the telephone. S.S.P., Lahore at 
that time was Mr. Asghar Khan, who after , receiving this message 
on the telephone arrived in the hospital  … alongwith others . A large 
contingent of Police also arrived on various kinds of vehicles. ’ S.S.P. 
Lahore (PW 12) also confirmed that the crime was first reported by 
‘Major Ali Raza son of Nawab Muhammad Khan Kasuri, after 
midnight. ’ Major Ali Raza , who first informed the police,  was also in 
the hos pital when the police reached it. However, the FIR did not 
mention Major Ali Raza as the informant  and the FIR’s 
complainant . 
 
52. Mr. Kasuri submitted a written complaint after almost three 
hours had elapsed since the crime, in which he ment ioned Mr. 
Bhutto . The FIR was registered at 3.45 am on 11 November 1974  
which show ed Mr. Kasuri (and not his brother) as the 
informant /complainant .  
 
53. Section 154 of the Code requires that when information of a 
cognizable offence is given to the police it is required to be recorded 
by the officer in charge of the concerned police station. The 
categorization of reporting of a crime and reducing it into writing 
as the first information report  (FIR), as its name suggests , is the 
very first information of a cognizable crime received by the police. 
An importan t object  of the FIR , which courts consider, is that the 
crime was promptly reported to the police without retrospection 
and embellishment.  
 
54. The first reporting of the crime to the police was by Major  Ali 
Raza, however, the FIR was not registered when he report ed the 
crime, nor was he cited as the informant /complainant in the FIR 
when it was registered. Surprisingly, Major Ali Raza was also not 
produced as a witness. This glaring anomaly went unnoticed  by 
the Trial Court as well as by the majority of the Appellate Court. 
On its own this may be inconsequential but since the courts had 
categorize d Mr. Kasuri as the informant , had assume d that the FIR 
was promptly recorded , without Mr. Kasuri having had ti me to 
embellish it and to falsely implicate Mr. Bhutto, and the Reference No. 1/2011.   37 
 
  prosecution had alleged that there was a conspiracy by basing it 
on the contents  of the FIR , all of which the courts had 
unquestioningly acc epted, it became most significant. This was yet 
another aspect showing that the law and the constitutional 
safeguards  to ensure a fair trial  had been disregarded . 
 
The Co -accused  
55. All the six co -accused were arrested after General Zia’s 
takeover and the imposition of Martial Law, and all of them had 
confessed to the crime. This remarkable coincidence neither the 
Trial Court nor the Appellate Court considered to be unusual nor 
was it ever considered whether these confessions could have been 
induced. Two of the accused were pardoned and made approvers. 
One retracted his confession before the Trial Court but reiterated it 
before the Appellate Court. The remaining three co -accused did not 
even engage a counsel and the Trial Court appointed a counsel (at 
State expense) to represent all three of them, however, t heir 
counsel58 at every juncture wanted to implicate, rather than 
extricate, his clients and was at pains to reinforce the prosecution 
case to prove Mr. Bhutto’s guilt and thus of his own clients. It was 
the duty of the counsel, and of the Trial Court, to e xplain to these 
three co -accused that to abide by the command of a superior is not 
a defence to the charge of murder, but this was not done.  
 
Supreme Court Bench Reconstituted  
56. Nine Judges commenced hearing the appeal filed by Mr. 
Bhutto ,59 and hea rd it till 30 July 1978 , where -after seven Judges 
heard it on 21 August 1978 and they announced the ir judgment 
on 6 February 1979. One of the nine Judges was Qaiser Khan , J 
who had retired on 30 July 1978 , on his sixty -fifth birthday.60 The 
Constitution envisages  that an adhoc Judge may be appointed 
within three years of his retirement,61 but he was not appointed , 
despite having heard the appeal ; the appellant’s request in this 
                                                             
58 Mr. Irshad Ahmed Qureshi, Advocate.  
59 Criminal Appeal No . 11 of 1978.  
60 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 179.  
61 Ibid., Article 182.  Reference No. 1/2011.   38 
 
  regard was not heeded. Another Judge , Waheeduddin Ahmed , J, 
fell ill when the appeal was  in its final stages of hearing and 
required about six weeks to recuperate, but rather than adjourning 
the case and await ing for him to resume work the appeal  was 
heard and was concluded in his absence . Considering that the 
appellant had been convicted and  was incarcerated it is not 
understandable why Qaiser Khan, J was not appointed as an 
adhoc Judge after his retirement nor why the Appellate Court 
could not wait for Waheeduddin Ahmed, J to rejoin the Bench. 
This may have been inconsequential if the Appell ate Court’s 
decision was unanimous, but when four Judges had upheld the 
conviction and three had acquitted Mr. Bhutto it was a matter of 
great concern.  
 
President’s Power to Grant Pardon  
57. Fazal Ellahi Chaudhry was elected as the first President of 
Pakis tan under the new Constitution.62 General Zia -ul-Haq took 
over the office of President on 16 September 1978, without being 
elected to it. The Constitution grants to the President the power to 
pardon, remit, suspend or commute any sentence passed by any 
court.63 President Fazal Ellahi Chaudhry had (on his own volition) 
written to General Zia -ul-Haq ‘ spelling out extra -judicial 
considerations which would weigh with the Executive in taking a 
decision in this matter. ’64 However, the High Court took inexplicable 
umbrage with Mr. Bhutto’s counsel referring to this letter . ‘In these 
circumstances, the introduction of this letter in the present 
proceedings is nothing but an attempt to politicise the matter … We 
deprecate such an attempt. ’65 What, however, is of significa nce is 
that Mr. Bh utto was not dealt with in accordance with Article 45 of 
the Constitution , despite the reasons mentioned by President Fazal 
Ellahi Chaudhry in his letter . This was yet another transgression 
                                                             
62 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973.  
63 Ibid., Article 45.  
64 Order dated 24 February 1978 in Cr. Misc. Petition No. 16 -R/79 in Criminal  
Review Petition No. 5 -R/79.  
65 Ibid., authored by S. Anwarul Haq, CJ.  Reference No. 1/2011.   39 
 
  of due process , and to enjoy the protection of l aw and to be treated 
in accordance with law.66 
 
Judges who Headed the Benches  
58. Justice Mushtaq Hussain , in his capacity as the Acting Chief 
Justice , headed the Bench of the Lahore High Court which had 
convicted Mr. Bhutto , and Justice Anwarul Haq  was the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court and headed the Bench which had 
upheld the conviction. The assumption of offices by both th ese 
Judges was somewhat unusual.  
(a) Lahore High Court : Justice Mushtaq Hussain was appointed 
as the Acting Chief Justice of the L ahore High Court on 13 July 
1977, when Justice Aslam Riaz Hussain was holding the position 
of the Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court. However, Chief 
Justice Aslam Riaz Hussain was appointed as the Acting Governor 
of Punjab , and had relinquished the pos ition of the Chief Justice of 
the Lahore High Court on 16 July 1977, and on the same day 
administered oath to Justice Mushtaq Hussain as the Acting Chief 
Justice of the Lahore High Court. The Chief Justice of the Lahore 
High Court became the Acting Governo r of Punjab, who gave oath 
to an Acting Chief Justice who continued in his acting  position for 
six months ; he was given oath as Chief Justice on 16 January 
1978. The Constitution does not permit the constitutional office of 
the Chief Justice to be kept vac ant for such a long duration. A 
High Court consists of a Chief Justice and Judges67 and an Acting 
Chief Justice is appointed temporarily and only under certain 
circumstances.68 An Acting Chief Justice , who later was made the 
Chief Justice, had transferred a murder case to the High Court 
and had himself presided over the trial, which under the afore said 
circumstances gave rise to justifiable misgivings.  
(b) Supreme Court : Justice Muhammad Yaqub Ali was the Chief 
Justice of Pakistan who, ‘relinquished charge of  the office of Chief 
Justice of Pakistan ’ on 22 September 1977. A Judge retire s or may 
                                                             
66 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 4.  
67 Ibid., Article 192(1).  
68 Ibid., mentioned in Article 196.  Reference No. 1/2011.   40 
 
  resign .69 Relinquishment of charge  is alien to the Constitution.  
General Zia -ul-Haq, promulgated Martial Law Order 6 of 197770 
which compelled Justice Muhammad Yaqub Ali t o relinquish  the 
office of Chief Justice of Pakistan and enabled the appointment of 
another. Consequently, Justice Anwarul Haq was appointed as the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan on 23 September 1977, ‘ In pursuance of 
the Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977, read with the Laws 
(Continuance in Force) Order, 1977 (C.M.L.A Order No. 1 of 1977), 
and in exercise of all powers enabling him in that behalf  … .’ The 
General who had overthrown the democratic order, cast aside the 
Constitution, pushed aside the Chi ef Justice of Pakistan and 
appointed another in his place , one who presided over the Bench 
which had heard Mr. Bhutto ’s appeal. And, crucially, Prime 
Minister Mr. Bhutto was deposed by General Zia -ul-Haq, who had 
appointed himself as the President of Pakis tan by issuing 
President’s Succession Order 1978 .71  These are the facts, 
historical irony notwithstanding.  
 
Bias of Justice Mushtaq Hussain  
59. Mr. Bhutto had repeatedly claimed that Justice Mushtaq 
Hussain , who was the Acting Chief Justice (later Chief Ju stice) of 
the Lahore High Court , was prejudiced against him and was 
motivated by bias, and that he should not conduct the trial, let 
alone head the Bench conducting the trial , but this objection was 
cast aside by the Court.  
 
60. The mere allegation or app rehension of prejudice or bias is 
not sufficient to sustain it. There must be something tangible and 
credible which exhibits bias. However, where there is b ias it 
corrodes impartiality, and impartiality is necessary for correct 
decision -making and also to engender the acceptance of decisions. 
‘It is not merely of some importance but is of fundamental 
                                                             
69 Ibid., Article 179.  
70 Laws (Continuance in Force) (Fifth Amen dment) Order, 1977, Gazette of 
Pakistan, Extraordinary, Part I, 22 September 1977, PLD 1977 Federal Statutes 
441.  
71 Gazette of Pakistan, Extraordinary, Part I, 16 September 1978, PLD 1978 
Federal Statutes 156.  Reference No. 1/2011.   41 
 
  importance that justice should not only be done, but should 
manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done. ’72  
 
61. Martial law was imposed on 5 July 1977 and M r. Bhutto was 
arrested on 3 September 1977 , in a three year old criminal case 
which had been closed as untraced . Despite having been granted 
bail by the High Court Mr. Bhutto was arrested on 16 September 
1977 under Martial Law Order No. 12.73 Mr. Bhutto had  obtained 
bail on 13 September 1977 on the very same day (13 September 
1977) Justice Mushtaq Hussain constituted a Bench headed by 
himself to try Mr. Bhutto and also himself heard the petition 
seeking cancellation of his bail.  
 
62. The five -Member Bench co nstituted by Justice Mushtaq 
Hussain issued a show cau se notice on 21 September 1977 to Mr. 
Bhutto , and gave him all of two days to state why the bail granted 
to him by the High Court should not be cancelled. The show cause 
notice also paradoxically direct ed him to appear before the five -
Member Bench on 24 September 1977 despite the fact that Mr. 
Bhutto was incarcerated. On 21 September 1977 Mr. Bhutto 
challenged the transfer of the case to the High Court by Justice 
Mushtaq Hussain and placing it before a Bench which he headed.  
 
63. Mr. Bhutto submitted a petition before the Supreme Court 
stating that Justice Mushtaq Hussain was prejudicial towards him 
and also had a bias against him . On 24 September 1977 t he 
Supreme Court dismissed the application stating that the same 
should first be filed before the Trial Court.  
 
64. Mr. Bhutto , pursuant to the Supreme Court order,  filed 
applications seeking Justice Mushtaq Hussain’s recusal on a 
number of grounds, including that: (1) Justice Mushtaq Hussain 
‘was prejudic ed and partial against the Pakistan Peoples Party ’ and 
in this regard his statements (published in newspapers) were 
                                                             
72 Rex v Sussex , [1924] 1 KB 256, per Lord Hew art, Chief Justice of England. 
The aphorism – ‘justice is not only done, but is also seen to be done’ – is a part 
of the Code of Conduct to be observed by Judges of the Supreme Court and of the 
High Courts of Pakistan . 
73 PLJ 1977 Federal Statutes 276.  Reference No. 1/2011.   42 
 
  referred to. (2) The application see king cancellation  of bail, which 
was granted on 13 September 1977 by K.M.A. Samdani, J of the 
High Court , was placed before a five-Member Trial Court, 
constituted by Justice Mushtaq Hussain , and bail was cancelled 
on 8 October 1977, which could not be done by the Trial Court  
(because bail had been granted by the High Court) , and that too 
without giving suffi cient notice . (3) Upon acceptance of the office of 
Chief Election Commissioner Justice Mushtaq Hussain ceased to 
be Acting Chief Justice/Chief Justice because the Constitution 
stipulate d that the Chief Election Commissioner could not hold 
another office.74 (4) Specific instances of prejudicial conduct and 
bias during the conduct of the case were also mentioned. (5) The 
transfer of the trial from the Court of Session  to the High Court , 
without notice to the accused , further confirmed the prejudice and 
the bias of Justice Mushtaq Hussain . (6) Private complaint case, on 
the same facts , was fixed for hearing before a Bench of the High 
Court ,75 however, Justice Mushtaq Hussain got it placed before the 
Bench he constituted and headed . (7) And, that Justice Mushtaq 
Hussain had not taken the oath prescribed under the Constitution 
but one crafted by the Chief Martial Law Administrator, therefore, 
he could not be considered to be the Acting Chief Justice or the 
Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court  under the Constitutio n. 
 
Bias of Trial Court  
65. The five -Member Trial Court Bench unanimously dismissed 
the application s76 filed by Mr. Bhutto . Request for recusal of a 
Judge is to be attended by the Judge whose recusal is sought. 
However, the Bench gave detailed findings on t he objections which 
had been raised  by Mr. Bhutto with regard to Justice Mushtaq 
Hussain . Justice Aftab Hussain77 wrote the order through which 
Mr. Bhutto’s applications (seeking recusal ) were dismissed . Justice 
Mushtaq Hussain simply wr ote two words – ‘I agree’ – on the order . 
The Hon’ble Judges signing this order justified taking oath under 
                                                             
74 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 216.  
75 K.M.A. Samdani and Mazharul Haq, JJ.  
76 Order dated 9 October 1977 authored by Aftab Hussain, J.  
77 Ibid. Reference No. 1/2011.   43 
 
  Martial Law78 (and not under the Constitution ) because  if they did 
not do so  ‘it will lead to the result that there is no superior Court in 
Pakistan. ’ The expression of such nihilism was wholly unjustified, 
and unnecessary when attending to a request for the recusal of a 
Judge.  The Judges forg ot that ‘ Obedience to the Constitution ’ was 
their ‘ basic obligation ’, like it is of every person in Pakistan.79 And, 
that they had a lso taken the oath to ‘ preserve, protect and defend 
the Constitution .’80 Such anomie expressed by the Judges 
undermined the Constitution , and the necessity to abide by it . The 
order had a devastating effect on citizens and the body politic . 
Inculcating acce ptance of autocratic rule and making it difficult to 
shake off the yolk of servitude.  
 
66. The order dated 9 October 1977 also gave a  definite finding 
with regard to Justice Mushtaq Hussain simultaneously holding 
the office s of Acting Chief Justice and of the Chief Election 
Commissioner by s taggeringly extraordinary reasoning  - ‘The Acting 
Chief Justice cannot be said to have been appointed as Chief 
Election Commissioner under the Constitution.  His appointment is 
regulated by Election Commission of Order, 1 977 (President’s Post 
Proclamation Order 4 of 1977). ’ The applicable constitutional 
provisions with regard to the Chief Election Commissioner81 were 
disregarded in preference to the proclamation of one man, who had 
assumed power  unconstitutionally . Incongru ity mocked when the 
Chief Election Commissioner could not even ensure that the stated 
‘forthcoming General Elections ’ were held, for which he was chosen 
and given the office of the Chief Election Commissioner . Scorching 
irony  replaced unconvincing reasonin g. 
 
67. With regard to Justice Mushtaq Hussain’s transfer of the 
trial from the Court of Session to the High Court , without issu ing 
                                                             
78 High Court Judges (Oath of Office) Order, 1977, President’s Order (Post 
Proclamation) N o. 1 of 1977, High Court (Appointment of Acting Chief Justices). 
Order, 1977 and Supreme Court Judges (Oath of Office) Order, 1977.  
79 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 5. This Article 
originally used the word ‘basic’. It was replace d with the word ‘inviolable’ 
through President’s Order No. 14 of 1985.  
80 Ibid., Third Schedule.  
81 Articles 213, 214, 215 and 216.  Reference No. 1/2011.   44 
 
  notice to Mr. Bhutto, the order disregarded the age old wisdom 
that a party is entitled to an opportunity of a hearing .82 It held 
that, ‘ No such notice was required in the present case. ’ This 
flagrant ly disregard ed the due process  principle which is firmly 
embedded in our jurisprudence.  
 
68. Mr. Bhutto’s objection to the assumption of jurisdiction by 
the five -Member Bench and also that of the complaint case (filed by 
Mr. Kasuri ) after it was listed for hearing  before ‘a Division Bench 
consisting of K.M.A. Samdani, J and Mazharul Haq, J ’ was brushed 
aside by expressing surprise . ‘It looks rather strange that the 
accused petitioner  should prefer to be tried by a Bench of two 
Judges and not a larger Bench of five Judges bound by their oath of 
office to impart justice without fear or favour. ’  The learned Judges 
of the Trial Court referr ed to their oath, but forgot that they had 
also taken one under General Zia -ul-Haq’s dispensation. In any 
event the two Judges of the Division Bench were as bound by their 
oath of office to impart justice  as were the five. Stressing that they 
were bound by their oath  and to state that the ‘ constitution of such 
a Bench [of five Judges]  should inspire more confidence rather than 
create any apprehension in the mind of any party ’ was quite 
unnecessary.83 In any event, and with hindsight, the apprehension 
of Mr. Bhutto proved to be correct.  
 
69. In Justice Mus htaq Hussain transferring the trial to the High 
Court , taking away the pending complaint case from the Division 
Bench of the High Court and fixing it before the Trial Court, which 
he himself headed , was e xtraordinary. T he law was not followed 
and settled m ethodology departed from . 
 
70. Bias was on display in a number of paragraphs of the Trial 
Court judgment. Gratis observations were made which had 
absolutely nothing to do with the case before the Court, which was , 
whether Mr. Bhutto had conspired to order the assassination of 
                                                             
82 In Latin – audi alteram partem . 
83 Reverberating the famous line from William Shakespeare’s play Hamlet  – ‘The 
lady doth protest too much, methinks. ’ Reference No. 1/2011.   45 
 
  Mr. Kasuri. Extraneous paragraphs were written to dishonour and 
disgrace Mr. Bhutto by five Hon’ble Judges who deemed it 
necessary to  state that , before Mr. Bhutto sought ‘election to the 
office of the Chief Executive of the Federation  he would order his 
own life in accordance with the injunctions and teachings of Holy 
Qur’an and Sunnah. ’ The priggish sanctimony , with respect,  did 
not stop here. The moralizing continued : 
‘Before undertaking to observe the principles of 
democracy, freedo m, equality, tolerance and social 
justice, as enunciated by Islam he should inculcate 
these qualities in himself. Before a person embarks 
upon swearing to strive to preserve the Islamic 
ideology he would bring himself to believe in that 
ideology and test h is firmness in that belief. Before 
presuming his ability to guarantee to the citizens the 
enjoyment of the protection of law and their treatment 
in accordance with law he would be a believer and a 
true adherent of law. He would consider himself to be 
as mu ch subject to law as he would wish others to be. 
A person who considers the Constitution and the law 
as the handmaid of his polity is neither qualified to be 
elected to the high office of the Prime Minister nor can 
ever be true to his Oath.’  
 
71. Mr. Bhutt o was neither on trial for corruption nor for 
violating the Constitution, however, the Hon’ble Judges made 
gratuitous  rema rks about these matter s too. And, he ‘treat[ed] the 
Constitution and the law as a source of unlimited power for himself 
which may sati sfy his own inane craving f or self -aggrandisement 
and perpetuation of his rule. Such a person, in all probabilities, 
would destroy the very basis of the Constitution and the law which 
he is sworn to uphold. ’ Such pontification , however, overlooked the 
overthrow of the constitutional order and democra tic rule on 5 July 
1977 , and of the unabated and continuous savagery of the 
Constitution . 
 
72. Another discordant note in the order of the Hon’ble Judges of 
the Trial Court was expounding the virtues of equality : 
‘Islam does not believe in the creation of privileged 
classes. It believes in the equality before law of all  - 
ruler and governed alike. It is opposed to all types of 
class distinction. Even the Caliph, the King, the Prime 
Minister or the President, by w hatever name the ruler Reference No. 1/2011.   46 
 
  may be called, is as much subject to the law of the 
land as any ordinary citizen.’     
 
 But no  attention was paid to the exceptionalism , and 
untouchability of General Zia -ul-Haq, the Chief Martial Law 
Administrator, who had gathered , in himself, all the powers of an 
absolute monarch.  
 
73. The Appellate Court could not stomach the aforesaid 
‘gratuitous observations  in paragraphs 610 to 611 of its judgment 
regarding the personal beliefs of the appellant, delivering a sermon 
as to the m ode of conduct prescribed by Islam for a Muslim ruler. ’ 
The Appellate Court, however, considered that justice would be 
served if these paragraphs were expunged  from the judgment of 
the Trial Court .84 It overlooked what was glaringly obvious – the 
self-expre ssed prejudice and bias  of the Trial Court.  
 
Adulation and Praise for a Dictator  
74. The Trial Court, which had tried and convicted Mr. Bhutto, 
and the Appellate Court, which had dismissed his appeal, were 
operating when there was no constitutional rule in  the country and 
one man’s will (and whim) became legislation  and his person had 
replaced the entire democratic order. Unfortunately, the Chief 
Martial Law Administrator was adulated  in another case .85 He was 
stated  to have ‘ stepped in to save the country. ’86 The expression of 
such incredulous admiration undermined the credibility of the 
Appellate Court. Was it not obvious that General Zia -ul-Haq would 
be the direct beneficiary of a guilty verdict.  If Mr. Bhutto was 
acquitted he may have proceeded to prosecut e General Zia -ul-Haq 
for the crime of high treason.  General Zia -ul-Haq’s personal 
survival depended on Mr. Bhutto being found guilty . The 
continuation of usurped power required Mr. Bhutto to be 
convicted . 
 
                                                             
84 Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto v State , PLD 1979 Supreme Court 53 , paragraph 935.  
85 Begum Nusrat Bhutto v Chief of Army Staff , PLD 1977 Supreme Court 657 . 
86 Ibid., 723AA.  Reference No. 1/2011.   47 
 
  People’s Mandate  
75. General Zia -ul-Haq’s unconst itutional act was ‘ construed in 
the nature of a mandate from the people of Pakistan. ’87 It was not at 
all necessary, nor desirable, to state how popular he was. It was 
not for the Supreme Court to measure populism, nor what it 
entail ed. 
 
Absence of Fair Tri al and Due Process  
 
76. The Supreme Court, including the three Hon’ble Judges of 
the Supreme Court who acquitted Mr. Bhutto,88 had also declared , 
‘that the Fundamental Rights stand validly suspended since 5th of 
July 1977. ’89 Therefore, and admittedly, the t rial was conducted 
and the appeal heard without Mr. Bhutto having the constitutional 
protection of the Fundamental Rights and other rights guaranteed 
in the Constitution . Any single one of the aforesaid noted 
transgressions may have vitiated the trial  and the conviction , 
however, cumulative ly they destroyed any semblance of due 
process and fair trial, and revealed that innocent men were rushed 
to the gallows.  
 
The Courts  
77. The Trial and Appellate Courts, which conducted the trial 
and heard the appeal , were not true courts under the Constitution . 
The country was captive to Martial Law and so too were its courts.  
When Judges take oath of allegiance to dictator s, the courts  are no 
longer of the people.  
 
78. In conclusion we want to acknowledge the assistance 
provided by all the learned counsel and by the learned amici . 
However, the painstaking work undertaken by our retired 
colleague, Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik, and by his team 
deserves special mention. The expertise , the depth of knowledge 
                                                             
87 Ibid. 
88 Dorab Patel, Muhammad Haleem and G. Safda r Shah, JJ.  
89 Begum Nusrat Bhutto v Chief of Army Staff , PLD 1977 Supreme Court 657, pp. 
721, 763.  Reference No. 1/2011.   48 
 
  and insightfulness  of criminal jurisprudence provided by Justice 
Manzoor Ahmad Malik was most valuable and helpful . 
 
 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . 
 
 
 
Justice Sardar Tariq Masood , J. 
 
I will be attaching my additional note.  
 
Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah , J. 
 
 I will be attach ing my additional note.  
 
Justice Yahya Afridi , J. 
 
 
 
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan , J. 
 
 
 
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail , J. 
 
I will contribute my opinion also in support of opinion dated 
6.3.2024.  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar , J. 
 
I will attach my separate addit ional note in support of our 
opinion dated 6.3.2024.  
Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi , J. 
 
 
 
Justice Musarrat Hilali , J. 
Islamabad  
5 July 2024.  
(Farrukh)  
Approved for Reporting  