IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Faisal Arab  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 464 of 2020  
(Against impugned judgment dated 
23.4.2020 passed by Peshawar  High Court 
Peshawar in Cr.M.(BA) No.843 -P/2020 ) 
 
 
Muhammad Hayat  
  …Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
 
 
The State  & another   
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner(s):  Mr. Mazullah Barkandi, ASC  
 Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
    
For the  State : Ms. Aysha Tasneem , ASC  
 along with Raza Raban SI, Peshawar  
 
For the Complainant:  Mr. Hasnain Ali, ASC  
 
 
Date of hearing:  05.06.2020.  
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Aurangezb along with 
his nephew Intikhab Alam was asleep  on 5.2.2020  in his Hujjra 
situated within t he precincts of Police Station  Mithra, Peshawar, when 
at 10:00 p.m. they were surprised  by armed intruders ; they  ostensibly 
demanded to search the premises  so as to  apprehend the  hiding  
Talbans  and seize their arms ; they  subdued the inmates  including the 
children  after tying  them   in different rooms and left the scene with the 
valuables comprising cash, gold ornaments and a vehicle.  The 
complainant e xtricate d himself and lodged report with the police at 
10:00 a.m. As the investigation progressed, the petiti oner was arrested  
alongside co -accused; he was  identified by the witnesses in a test 
identification parade; pursuant to disclosure, he led to the recovery of 
some of the robbed articles.  
 Criminal Petition No. 464 of 2020  2
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Alleged discrepancy in the actual nu mber of assailants, 
stressed at inordinate length is an issue that cannot be settled within 
the restricted scope of tentative assessment of the material collected by 
the investigating agency. Similarly, flaws attributed to the test 
identification parade ca nnot be attended without undertaking a 
journey into prohibited territory. These are the issues , essentially to be 
determined  by the trial Court, on the strength  of evidence , yet to be 
recorded . In the absence of any apparent  motive , suggestive of malice , 
identification of the accused coupled with recovery of  the looted articles 
from within the safety of a dwelling at an odd hour of night to the 
horrors of the inmates that included  children and women , we do not 
feel persuaded in our discretion to allow the r equest. Petition fails. 
Leave declined.   
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
5th June , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 