IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
Larger Bench  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
Ms. Justice Musarrat Hilali  
Mr. Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
 
Intra Court Appeals  No.1 and 2 /2024 in Constitutional  Petition  
No.19/2020 .  
On appeal from the judgment of this Court dated 27.06.2023 passed in 
Constitution Petition No. 19 of 2020.  
 
Federation of Pakistan through the Secretary, Ministry 
of Law and Justice , Islamabad  
(Intra Court Appeal No. 1/2024)  
Afiya Shehrbano Zia and others  
(Intra Court Appeal No. 2/2024)  
  
 
 
 
....Appellants  
Versus  
Supreme Judicial Council through its Secretary, 
Supreme Court Building, Islamabad and others  
 
  
.Responden ts 
 
For appellants  in ICA 
No.1/2024 and 
respondent No .5 in ICA 
No.2/2024 :  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For appellants in ICA 
No. 2/2024 and 
respondent Nos. 
3,4,6,7,8 and 10  in ICA 
No.1. 
 
 
 
Amici Curiae:  
  Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan , Attorney 
General for Pakistan assisted by Ms. 
Maryam Ali Abbasi, Advocate and Ms. 
Maryam Rashid, Advocate.  
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Additional Attorney 
General for Pakistan.  
Malik Javid Iqbal Wains, Additional 
Attorney General for Pakistan.  
Raja M. Shafqat Abbasi, Deputy Attorney 
General.  
Mr. Anis Muhammad Shahzad, AOR.  
 
 
Mr. Waqqas  Ahmad  Mir, ASC assisted by 
Mr. Hammad Hussain Shah, Advocate & 
Mr. Anas Irtiza, Advocate.  
(At Islamabad on 31.01.2024, 19.02.2024 
and 21.02.2024   and via video link from 
Lahore on 12.02.2024)  
Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR . 
 
Kh. Muhammad Haris, Sr.ASC assisted by 
Mr. Yaser Aman Khan, ASC.  
 
Mr. Faisal Siddiqi, ASC assisted by Mr. 
Muhammad Usman Mumtaz, Advocate (At 
Islamabad on 19.2.2024 and via video link 
from Karachi on 21.2.2024 .) 
 
Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr.ASC 
assisted by Mr. Abu Bakar Siddique, 
Advocate and Ms. Sehar Mahsud, 
Advocate.  
Mr. Abdul Moiz Jaferii, Advocate High 
Court (through video link from Karachi.)  
 ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               2 
 
Dates of Hearing:   31.01.2024, 12.02.2024, 19.02.2024 and 
21.02.2024  
JUDGMENT  
AMIN -UD-DIN KHAN, J . Through these appeals filed under section 
5 of the Supreme Court (Practice & Procedure) Act, 2023  read with Article 
184(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973  (‘the 
Constitution ’), appellants have challenged the judgment passed by the 
learned two member bench of this Court dated 27.06.2023 in 
Constitution Petition No. 19 of 2020 filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  by the appellant s of ICA No. 2 of 202 4 which was dismissed 
in limine .  
2. According to the brief facts of the case, appellant s of ICA No. 2 of 
2024 filed a petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution against the 
Supreme Judicial Council  (‘SJC’), Registrar of the Supreme Court, the 
President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan and Justice (R) Mian Saqib 
Nisar  with the following prayer:  
“In view of the above, the Petitioners most respectfully pray 
that this Honorable Court may graciously be pleased to:  
A. Direct the Honorable Council to take up References and 
to render its opinion on the allegations of misconduct 
contained therein and report its opinion to the 
President under Article 209(6) of the Constitution.  
 
B. Pass directions to structure the Honorable Council’s 
discretion in relation to the priority, listing and hearing 
of complaints/references and to ensure that the 
eventual findings of Honorable Council are publicly 
disclosed and direct the Honorable Council to amend 
the Supreme Judicial Council Procedure of Enquiry 
2005 accordingly.  
 
C. Give any other directions or pass any interim orders 
that are required and are necessary for the effective 
implementation of Article 209.”  
3. Office raised some objections on the petition filed under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution , which were contested and after the acceptance 
of Miscellaneous Chamber Appea l, the petition was numbered as 19 of 
2020, which was heard by the learned two member bench of this Court 
on 13.06.2023 and the judgment was announced as dismissed in limine  
on 27.06.2023 . Hence, these appeals, ICA No.2 of 2024 by the petitioner s 
of Constitution Petition  No.19 of 2020  and ICA No. 1 of 2024 by the 
Federation of Pakistan.  ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               3 
 
4. The office has noted that ICA No.1 /2024  is barred by 180 days 
whereas ICA No. 2 /2024  is barred by 187 days. On the first date of 
hearing before this Court on 31.01.2024 after hearing the learned 
counsel for the appellant s, notice was issued to the other side subject to 
limitation. As the case of Federation is that interpretation of an Article of 
the Constitution has been made through the impugned judgment and 
without any notice required under Order XXVII -A of the Code of C ivil 
Procedure, 1908 to the Atto rney General for Pakistan and even without 
any notice to the Federation or the respondents of the Constitution 
Petition , same was decided in limine , though the petition was dismissed 
but some interpretation of Article 209 of the Constitution was made, 
therefore, order impugned is not sustainable under the law. Notice was 
also issued in ICA No.2 of 2024 as both the appeals were  being  heard  
together . In CMA No. 555  of 2024 the case of the appellant is that without 
any notice the matter was decided, therefore, the appellant was having 
no knowledge of the impugned judgment holding the field and it was only 
after the SJC’s meeting dated 09.01.2024 when the impugned judgment 
dated 27.06.2023 was brought to the knowledge of the Attorney General 
for Pakistan and in consequence thereof the instant appeal was filed. It 
is further pleaded that as substantial questions pertaining to 
interpretation of the Constitution particula rly Article 209(6) are involved, 
therefore, it is imperative that delay in filing the instant appeal may be 
condoned to prevent the ends of justice being defeated.  
5. Learned counsel for the appellant s in ICA No. 2 of 2024 argued that 
after hearing of their petition, the judgment was reserved and their 
counsel fell seriously ill, therefore, the announcement of judgment could 
not be attended by her nor it was in her knowledge and even it was not 
conveyed to the appellants. It is further argued that  the Supreme Court 
(Practice &  Procedure) Act , 2023  came into force on 21.04.2023 and even 
before its enforcement it was suspended by the order of learned eight 
member bench of this Court through an injunctive o rder dated 
13.04.2023 while  hearing C onstitution Petition  Nos.6 of 2023 etc.  and 
subsequently the said petition s i.e. C onst. Petition  Nos. 6 of 2023 etc.  
were dismissed by the learned Full Bench of this Court  on 11.10.2023  
except the application of section 5 with retrospective effect was not 
approved by majority, therefore, actually the application of Act came into ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               4 
 
field from the announcement of the judgment of dismissal of C onstitution 
Petition s dated 11.10.2023  and further that if ICA No.1 of 2024 on the 
basis of the ground mentioned for condonation is heard on merits , their 
appeal be also heard on merits . In the above circumstances, we condone 
the delay in filing of both these appeals. CMA No. 555 of 2024 and CMA 
No.1695  of 2024  are allowed  and disposed of.   
6. The Secretary, SJC appeared and told the Court that SJC has 
received 15 complaints against Ex -CJP Mian Saqib Nisar on 12 October, 
2018 which were taken up by the Council on 14.2.2019 and dismissed 
for being infructuous because Justice Mian Saqib Nisar had retired on 
January 17, 2019.   
7. Now we come to the merits of the case. On 12.02.2024 , after 
hearing the learned counsel for the appellant s in ICA No. 2 /2024 , notice 
under Order XXVII -A of the CPC was issued to the Attorney General for 
Pakistan, who waived the issuance of formal notice and accepted the 
same. After hearing the learned counsel for the appellant s in ICA No. 2 
of 2024 as well as learned Attorney General for Pakistan we were of the 
view that both are on the same page and showing one side of the picture 
to this Court, therefo re, it was felt necessary to appoint some Amicus 
Curiae for assistance of the Court to show both the sides of the matter in 
issue and render their precious opinion about matter in issue and office 
was directed to send a letter of request along with copy of order to M/s. 
Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr.ASC, Khawaja Muhammad Haris, Sr.ASC, 
Khalid Javed Khan, ASC, Abdul Moiz Jaferii, Advocate High Court and 
Faisal Siddiqi, ASC on the following questions of law which were framed 
by the learned Attorney General for Pakist an and produced in the order 
dated 12.02.2024. Though the learned counsel for the appellant s in ICA 
No. 2 of 2024 also sent some questions of law through CMA No. 1221 of 
2024 but as the same were  received late, therefore, could not be 
incorporated in the said order. The questions of law  framed by the learned 
AGP are reproduced as under:  
A. Whether pending proceedings before the Supreme 
Judicial Council (the ‘SJC’) do not stand abated on 
account of retirement and resignation of a Judge?  ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               5 
 
B. Whether a Judge who retires or resigns during 
pendency of proceedings against him/her before the 
SJC should be allowed to escape the consequences of 
removal?  
C. Whether resignation by a Judge during pendency of 
proceedings against him/her before the SJC 
tantamount to circumvention/avoidance of 
accountability enshrined and envisaged under Article 
209 of the Constitu tion of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973?  
D.  Whether circumvention of proceedings under Article 
209 of the Constitution would result in erosion of public 
trust in the Judiciary?  
8. The learned Amicus Curiae appointed by the Court namely 
Makhdoom Ali Khan, Senior ASC and Mr. Khalid Javed Khan, ASC 
recused , therefore, Mr. Faisal Siddiq ui, ASC and Mr. Abdul Moiz Jafferii, 
AHC were heard. Learned  Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr.ASC also offered 
his assistance as Amicus Curiae, he was also heard.  
9. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan has reiterated his argument 
that the impugned order without notice under Order XXVII -A of the CPC 
to the Attorney General for Pakistan is defective one and not sustainable 
under the law ; that through the impugned judgment Article 209 has been 
interpreted in a way that the jurisdiction and powers of the SJC have 
been curtailed in case the Council has taken the cognizance of a 
complaint/reference/information against a Judge and started 
proceedings after notice to the J udge and on his resignation if it is 
declared that the power to proceed with the matter by the Council ends, 
will be to circumvent the powers of the Council which is not the correct 
interpretation of Article 209 , therefore, AGP has relied upon “Federal 
Government of Pakistan through the Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice 
and Parliamentary Affairs, Islamabad versus M.D.Tahir, Advocate and 12 
others ” (1989 SCMR 2069 ) to argue that question of public importance 
relating to the interpretation of the Constitution needed the consideration 
of this Court with regard to necessity of issuance of mandatory notice of 
Order XXVII -A of the CPC. He has also relied upon “Federal Government 
of Pakistan through  Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary 
Affairs, Islamabad and others versus Aftab Ahmad Khan Sherpao and 
others ” (PLD 1992 SC 723 ), “Federal Public Servic e Commission and others 
versus Syed Muhammad Afaq and others ” (PLD 2002 SC 167 ), “Pakistan ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               6 
 
Automobile Corporation Limited through Chairman versus Mansoor -ul-
Haque and 2 others ” (2004 SCMR 1308 ), “Superintendent Central Jail, 
Adyala, Rawalpindi versus Hammad Abbasi ” (PLD 2013 SC 223 ) and 
“Heman Santlal v. State of Bombay ” (AIR (38) 1951 Bombay 121 ). He has 
also argued in the light of legislative history/constitutional comparison , 
right from Government of India Act, 1935, Judicial Committee Act, 1833, 
Constitution of Pakistan, 1956, Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1962, Interim Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1972, Constitution of Pakistan (pre -18th Amendment), Constitution of 
Pakistan (Post -18th Amendment) and the Constitu tion of India. He has 
also referred the provisions of Code of Conduct to be observed by the 
Judges of th e Supreme Court and High Courts as notified on 02.09 .2009 
with regard to Judicial Accountability while relying upon “The State 
versus Mr. Justice Akhlaque Husain, Judge of the High Court of West 
Pakistan ” (PLD 1960 SC Pak. 26), “Justice Qazi Faez Isa and others versus 
The President of Pakistan and others ” (PLD 2021 SC 1 ), “Justice Qazi Faez 
Isa and others versus President of Pakistan and others ” (PLD 2022 SC 
119) and an American Jurisdiction Case titled “Johnson v. United States ” 
reported as 208 (Fed Cl.1948), p rayed that the appeal be allowed and in 
the instant case at least it be declared that during the proceedings by the 
SJC retirement as well as resignation by a Judge cannot circumvent the 
proceedings before the SJC. Learned AGP has further argued that tenor 
of the impugned judgment shows that it is the SJC to conduct its 
proceedings, no direction can be given by the Supreme Court by stating 
that SJC is independent to proceed with the matters. While referring 
paragraph No. 95 of Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui’s case f rom the judgment  of 
this Court  reported as PLD 2018 SC 538 the prayer of open proceeding 
by SJC was not acceded to, whereas the prayer made by Justice Mazahar 
Ali Akbar Naqvi in the misconduct proceedings against him  was accepted . 
Therefore, it is SJC to proceed with the matter as it wants is within its 
jurisdiction.    
10. Further stated that it is a case of first impression where 
Government is an aggrieved party, therefore, the appellant should have 
been heard in the petition. While referring Sections 16 and 16 -A of the 
Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges)  Ordinance, 1997 
with regard to payable pension and pension on re -employment etc. states 
that the retired Judge can be re -employed, therefore, as per the stance of 
the Federation it is necessary that once the proceedings by the Supreme 
Judicial Council s tart against a Judge on a complaint by any person or 
on its own or on a reference sent by the President, the proceedings shall ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               7 
 
reach to a logical end despite the fact the Judge resigns during those 
proceedings or retired after attaining the age of superannuation.  
11. Learned counsel for the appellants in ICA No.2 of 2024 while 
adopting the arguments advanced by the  learned  AGP has further stated 
that in fact the complaint was filed by the appellants when Mr. Justice 
Mian Saqib Nisar was Chief Justice of Supreme Court of Pakistan but 
unfortunately till his retirement the complaint/ reference was not taken 
up by the SJC, therefore, on his retirement the appellants were forced to 
file a petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, which has been 
decided by the two member bench of this Court which is under challenge  
in these appeals . Prays for acceptance of the appeal and s etting aside of 
the order passed by this Court while dismissing the petition of the 
appellants under Article 184(3) of the Constitution as well as the order of 
the SJC and prays even if the Judge has retired after superannuation or 
has resigned, the refere nce or complaint once filed cannot be consigned 
to record or dismissed on the ground that the Judge has been retired 
after superannuation or has resigned from his office.   
12. Learned Amicus Mr. Faisal Siddiqui has firstly stated that as the 
impugned judgment is defective on the basis that notice under Order 
XXVII -A of the CPC was not issued to Attorney General for Pakistan, 
therefore, matter be sent back for re -decision after requisite notice. In the 
alternate initially given his opinion that with the retirement on 
superannuation or resignation of a Judge, the proceedings of the SJC 
automatically come to an end and no complaint or reference can be 
proceeded with by the SJC a fter the retirement or resignation of a Judge 
either the proceedings started in his tenure  serving as a Judge or pending 
at that time. While concluding his submissions and opinion stated that 
to the extent of continuation of proceedings by the SJC in case the 
cognizance has been taken and proceedings started against a Judge who 
retires or resigns may continue for a logical end but for the  other 
questions stated that the very important questions of public importance 
as well as relating to independence of jud iciary are concerned, therefore, 
same may be decided in an appropriate matter  in future . The other 
learned Amicus Abdul Moiz Jafferii is of the view that the retirement as 
well as resignation by a Judge does not effect upon the pendency of any 
reference or complaint against a Judge  even if the SJC has not yet taken 
the cognizance of the matter. Just filing of complaint is sufficient before 
his/her retirement or resignation . It is the prerogative of the SJC to 
proceed with the matter.  ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               8 
 
13. On the other hand, Khawaja Muhammad Haris stated as he is 
representing a Judge before SJC against whom proceedings are going on 
despite the fact that Judge has resigned, his opinion may not be 
considered as biased and not an independent opinion, therefore, he is 
before the Court to give his opinio n if it is taken as independent opinion, 
he was asked to give the opinion, as it is to assist the Court as friend of 
the Court. He has submitted lengthy arguments while relying upon the 
case La w reported  as “Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chau dhry versus President of Pakistan through Secretary and others ” 
(PLD 2010 SC 61 ), “The State versus Mr. Justice Akhlaque Husain, Judge 
of the High Court of West Pakistan ” (PLD 1960 SC Pak. 26) , “Justice 
Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui and others versus Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary Law and Justice, Islamabad and others ” (PLD 2018 SC 538 ), 
“The President versus Mr. Justice Shaukat Ali ” (PLD 1971 SC 585 ), 
“Muhammad Ikram Chaudhry and others versus Federation of Pakistan 
and others ” (PLD SC 1998 SC 103 ), “Syed Zafar Ali Shah and others 
versus General Pervez Musharraf, Chief Executive of Pakistan and others ” 
(PLD 2000 SC 869 ), “Al-Jehad Trust through Raeesul Mujahideen Habib -
ul-Wahabb -ul-Khairi and others versus Federation of Pakistan and others ” 
(PLD 1996 SC 324 ), “Justice Qazi Faez Isa and others versus President of 
Pakistan and others ” (PLD 2022 SC 119 ), “Justice Qazi Faez Isa and 
others versus The President of Pakistan and others ” (PLD 2021 SC 1) , “Mr. 
Justice Ghulam Hyder Lakho, High Court of Sindh, Karachi and others 
versus Federation of Pakistan through Law, Justice and Parliamentary 
Affairs, Islamabad and others ” (PLD 2000 SC 179 ), “Khan Asfandyar Wali 
and others versus Federation of Pakistan through Cabinet Division, 
Islamabad and others ” (PLD 2001 SC 607 ), “Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi 
versus Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Law and Justice 
Division, Islamabad and another ” (PLD 202 4 SC 102 ), Articles 209 -211 of 
the Constitution, Supreme Court Judges (Leave, Pension and Privileges) 
Order,  1997 , “K.Veeraswami vs. Union of India and others ” (1991) 3 SC 
Case 655, “Krishna Swami versus Union of India and others ”(1992) 4 
Supreme Court Cases 605, “Union of India etc. versus Gopal Chandra 
Misra and others, etc. ” (AIR 1978 S upreme Court 694), Constitution of 
India 9th Edition, Constitution Law of India, Independence and 
Accountability of the Indian Higher Judiciary as well as with regard to 
constitutional history of various countries  and opined that as per his 
opinion the proceedings with the retirement or resignation of a Judge 
come to an end when the Council cannot recommend for removal of a 
Judge, therefore, as per his opinion it will be a futile exercise by the SJC.  ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               9 
 
14. The other learned Amicus Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh has 
addressed the Court and has given the opinion that as per his opinion 
the resignation or retirement of a Judge does not effect the proceedings 
pending before the SJC and he has given his opinion that f or 
independence of judiciary and in accordance with the Islamic principles 
it is necessary that an effective  method of accountability of a Judge which 
is available in the shape of SJC should be effective as well as without any 
clog even from any judgme nt of this Court that the SJC may have 
independence to proceed with the matter in accordance with law. As per 
his opinion the resignation or retirement does not effect the proceedings 
pending as well as reference or complaints available with the SJC.  
15. We have considered the arguments advanced by learned counsel 
for the appellants as well as opinion rendered by the learned Amicus 
Curiae.  
16. The first and foremost consideration before us is that as SJC is an 
independent constitutional body, it is the prerogative of the Council to 
proceed with the matter in accordance with the Constitution and the law. 
In the instant case the basic question is whether Article 209 envisages 
that by resignation of a Judge or retirement on superannuation the 
proceedings which are pending before the SJC will automatically come to 
end or it is the prerogative of the SJC to pr oceed with the matter.  The 
Amicus Curiae w ho are of the opinion that with the resignation of a 
Judge, proceedings automatically end or become infructuous have 
banked upon their opinion or argument that when the misconduct 
proceedings are underway and the Judge resigns or is retired, his removal 
cannot be reported to the President, therefore, there is no need to 
continue the proceedings whereas the view of the learned AGP and 
learned counsel for the appellants in ICA No. 2 of 2024 as well as Mr. 
Muhammad Akram Sheikh and Abdul Moiz Jaffarii  is on th e basis that 
there is no  clog available in Article 209 that the Council will be having no 
jurisdiction to proceed with the matter , when the judge retires on 
superannuation or resigns . Even reference is made to Sub Article 6(a) 
read with Sections 16 and 16 -A of the Supreme Court Judges (Leave, 
Pension and Privileges) Order, 1997 to state that if the proceedings on 
the retirement or resignation of a Judge are automatically drop then eve n 
a complaint of serious misconduct which was underway and visibly 
proven,  the SJC having a solid material with it , if cannot proceed further 
upon resignation or retirement of a Judge, the proceeding as well as the 
question will remain incomplete and unanswered in case the proceedings 
are not completed and the opinion of the Council is not reported to the ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               10 
 
President, it will be on record and while dealing with the matters section 
16 and 16 -A will be effected. We posed a question to the Amicus Curiae , 
who were having  the view that the proceedings end with the 
superannuation or resignation of a Judge , if there are any proceedings of 
misconduct pending against a Judge of the High Court and he resigns in 
order to avoid the proceedings , whether he can be appointed/elevated as 
a Judge of the Supreme Court or Federal Shariat Court etc. thereafter, 
the answer of this  query was ‘yes’, he can be appointed . The further 
question was , if upon completion of proceedings there is a report of 
misconduct with the President whether in that case the Judge of a High 
Court who resigns can be appointed as Judge of Supreme Court or 
Federal Shariat Court etc., the answer was that if the matter is b rought 
in the knowledge of the Judicial Commission constituted under Article 
175-A then he may not be appointed as Judge of the Supreme Court or 
the Federal Shariat Court.  
17. We have noted that at the time of hearing of petition filed by the 
appellants of ICA No. 2 of 2024, the Judge had already been retired 
against whom complaints filed by the said appellants were pressed, 
though the complaint was filed against the Judge when he was a Chief 
Justice but unfortunately the complaint could not be placed before the 
SJC and after the retirement of said Judge when it was placed before the 
SJC same was dismissed as having become infructuous. The main 
consideration before the learned tw o member Bench of this Court while 
hearing the C onstitution Petition  was that the SJC has declared the 
complaint as having become infructuous, therefore, mainly the emphasis 
of the Court was upon the said point whereas it was not a case before the 
Court that after considering the complaint some steps were taken in the 
comp laint i.e. issuance of notice to the Judge against whom complaint 
was filed or any reply or the response to the complaint, not it was the 
question before the Court that during the pendency  of the complaint after 
issuance of notice by the SJC the effect of retirement of a Judge or 
resignation but the effect of the impugned judgment is that even if the 
complaint is pending after taking cognizance by the SJC, it abates on 
retirement of a Judge  or resignation, therefore, Federal Government was 
aggrieved and filed the instant appeal , on which point we agree with the 
appellant. So far as other prayers like passing of direction to the SJC as 
prayer B in the original petition and prayer C are concer ned, we are of 
the view that the SJC can consider all these points or same may be taken 
in any other suitable case as we are dealing with the matter in appeal 
when without any notice the original Constitutional Petition was 
dismissed by the learned two mem ber Bench of this Court  in limine .   ICAs Nos.1 and 2 of 2024.                                                                                               11 
 
18. In this view of the matter, we partially allow both the appeals, we 
are of the view that it is the prerogative of the SJC to proceed with the 
matter and the proceedings pending before the SJC which are initiated 
after issuance of notice to a Judge do not automatically drop or become 
infructuous on superannuation or resi gnation of a Judge. These are the 
reasons of our short order announced on 21.02.2024, which is 
reproduced:  
“For the reasons to be recorded later, the delay in filing both 
the appeals is condoned. Both the appeals are partially 
allowed to the extent that if the proceedings have already 
been initiated by the Supreme Judicial Council (‘ SJC’) 
against a Judge, same shall not abate on his resignation or 
retirement, as the case may be, during such proceedings. It 
is the prerogative of the SJC to proceed with the matter 
accordingly. The impugned judgment is modified to that 
extent. This order is with the majority of four by one 
disagreeing (S yed Hasan Azhar Rizvi, J.) on the point of 
limitation as well as on merits. ” 
19. These appeals are partially allowed in the above terms.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad   
21 February 2024.   
(Mazhar Javed Bhatti )   I have also gone through the additional note 
added by Mr. J. Jamal Khan Mandokhail.  I 
agree with the additional note.   
Judge  
 
I agree. However, I have appended my 
additional note.  
Judge  
 
I am dis agree d and will file my separate note.  
Judge  
 
I agree  with the findings of this judgment . 
Judge  
 
I agree  with the findings recorded by my 
brothers namely Aminuddin Khan J. and 
Jamal Khan Mandokhail J.  
Judge  
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  1 
 
 Jamal Khan Mandokhail, J. -I have had the privilege of going through 
the judgment authored by my learned brother Amin -un-Din Khan, J. 
Although, I fully subscribe to the conclusions drawn in the judgment, 
however, I feel it appropriate to add my own opinion to further supplement 
the resolution of is sues involved in these appeals.  
Facts:  
2. Detailed facts of the instant case have already been given in the m ain 
judgment, however, at the expense of repetition , I would like to reiterate 
some facts of the case. The private appellants (in ICA No. 02 of 2024) filed a 
complaint on 10 October 2018, before the Supreme Judicial Council (“ SJC”) 
against  Mr Justice Mian Saqib Nisar, the Hon’ble Chief Justice (“ HCJ”) of this 
Court, as he then was.  The complaint was unattended and subsequently 
was dismissed on 08.03.2019 for having become infructuous  on account of 
retirement of the HCJ on 17 January 2019 . Feeling aggrieved, the private 
appellants filed a petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“ Constitution ”) against the respondents  
and the former HCJ , but, by the order of this Court, the name of former HCJ 
was deleted . The petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of this Court 
on 27.06.2023 . The Fede ration of Pakistan assailed the said judgment 
through ICA No 01 of 2024 and so by the private appellants through ICA No. 
02 of 2024 . In the impugned judgement, a two member Bench of this Court 
has held as under:  
“5. Therefore, it is our conclusion that on any view of the 
matter Article 209 does not apply to a person who has retired 
or resigned from the office of a Judge of this Court or a High 
Court.”  
Objection of Limitation:  
3. An objection regarding delay in filing of appeals has been discussed 
by his lordship Amin -ud-Din Khan, J. - in detail, however, I would like to add 
in support of the reasoning in the main judgment. It is a fact that the petition 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution was filed by the private appellants, 2 
 
but the Federal Government was not arrayed as party to the proceedings. 
Through the said petition, interpretation of Article 209 of the Constitution 
was required, therefore, it was mandatory for the Court to have had issued 
a notice to the Attorney General for  Pakistan (“AG”) as required by Order 
XXVII -A Rule 1 CPC. The ground mentioned in the application by the 
Federation of Pakistan is that the impugned judgment was not within the 
knowledge of the Federation of Pakistan; and that the learned AG  came to 
know about the said judgment for the first time on 9 January 2024 during 
the proceedings of the Supreme Judicial Council. The AG states that even 
otherwise, the question of public importance relating to interpretation of 
Constitution is involved, therefore, the delay in filing of appeal may be 
condoned. He relied upon the case reported as  Federal Govt. of Pakistan  vs. 
M.D.Tahir Adovcate1. I have no doubt in my mind that the matter involved 
in these appeals  is of great public importance and has great significance. 
The reasoning advanced by the learned AG is reasonable. Since neither the 
Federal Government was arrayed as party to the proceedings nor 
mandatory notice required under Order XXVII -A Rule 1 CPC was issued to 
the AG, therefore, there is no reason to disbelieve his contention regarding 
his unawareness of the date of the pronouncement of the impugned 
judgment. Even otherwise, a Ten Member Bench of this Court through the 
referred judgment has condoned the delay of 257 days in filing of petition 
solely on the ground of public importance, therefore, I concur with Amin -
ud-Din Khan, J. for condoning the delay in filing of these appeals.  
Independence of Judiciary:  
4. Judiciary is one of the fundamental pillars of the State , comprising of 
judges , vested with the authority to preside over, hear , determine legal 
matters  and safeguard the fundamental rights of citizens. The judges also 
serve to protect the Constitution and democracy and deal with politically 
sensitive cases, thereby , are exposed to the general public. In order to 
 
1 1989 SCMR 2069  3 
 
perform its judicial functions and deliver justice, an independent , impartial 
and strong judiciary is essential , without which, the fundamental rights of 
the citizens guaranteed by the Constitution and the democracy cannot be 
safeguarded . Preamble of the Constitution, therefore, explicitly  states and 
guarantees that independence of judiciary shall be fully secured . Reliance is 
placed in the case of Muhammad Aslam Awan2, relevant portion whereof is 
reproduced herein below:  
“Judicial independence both of the individual judge and of the 
judiciary as an institution is essential so that those who bring 
their causes/cases before the Judges and the public in general 
have confidence that their cases would be decided justly and 
in ac cordance with law. Judicial independence is one of the 
foundational values of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan which is based on trichotomy of powers in which the 
functions of each organ of the State have been constitutionally 
delineated. T he very Preamble of the Constitution pledges 
“wherein the independence of judiciary shall be fully secured.” 
The Constitution makers conferred this independence because 
they wanted the Judges to “do right to all manner of people” 
according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill -will.” 
(Oath of office of Judges). The fundamental rights guaranteed 
under the Constitution cannot be secured unless Judiciary is 
independent because the enforcement of these rights has 
been left to Judiciary in terms of Ar ticles 184(3) and 199 of the 
Constitution and the relevant law.  Judiciary has not been 
made part of the Executive or the Legislature (Article 7). The 
separation of judiciary from the Executive was made a 
Constitutional mandate (Article 175(3)).” ( Emphasis supplied ) 
 
5. To ensure independence of judiciary, the judges require protection  
of their judicial work . Though, the Islamic Law and our Constitution requires 
absolute equality between men, between the ruler and the ruled, between 
the rich and the poor and so on, but judicial immunity i s the only exception 
for judges  in performance of their judicial work, in order to protect and 
shield them from any external pressure, harm or from prosecution . Article 
68 of the Constitution provides that the conduct of any judge of the 
 
2 2014 SCMR 1289  4 
 
Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties  is immune  
from discussion in the Parliament . Similarly, section 77 of the Pakistan Penal 
Code (“ PPC”) protects judges from criminal liability for the act, performed 
during their judicial work. Such protection extended to the judges is not 
harmful for others. It is not a favour to the judges nor is it for their personal 
benefit , rather it is essential so that judges could perform their judicial 
functions independently , freely , without fear or fa vour,  and with peace of 
mind . The sole purpose of an independent and impartial judiciary as an 
institution and of a judge is to provide justice to the citizens and to pr otect 
their fundamental rights, guaranteed by the Constitution, in order to enjoy 
the confidence of citizens.  
Accountability of Judges:  
6. A person who chooses to become a judge has a notion in mind that 
upon his elevation, he must be God fearing, trustworthy, honest; he has to 
maintain and e nforce high moral and professional standard s of conduct, in 
order to preserve his integrity and ensure independence  to serve justice . 
The public has a right to expect that of him and if he does not choose to 
impose such a standard on himself, he should not accept judicial 
appointment. The Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) said that Judges are of three 
types, one of whom will go to Paradise and two to Hell. The one who will go 
to Paradise is a man who knows what is right and gives judgment 
accordingly; but a man who knows what is right and acts tyrannically in his 
judgment will go to Hell; and a man who gives judgment for people when he 
is ignorant will go to Hell3. Basing on such principle of higher morality, a 
reference is also made to a situation where in the year 763 AD, Abu Jafar 
Abdullah ibn Mohammad Al-Mansur , the ruler/Khalifa at that time, offered 
a renowned Muslim Jurist and Scholar Imam Abu Hanifa , the post of Chief 
Justice of the State, “but the Imam declined the offer because he knew that 
on becoming a judge, the ruler/Khalifa would pressur e him into passing 
 
3 Sunan Abu -Dawud:  The Office of the Judge (Kitab Al -Aqdiyah), Book 18, Number 3566  5 
 
judgments according to his own desire. He refused the offer saying that he 
would never be able to pass fair judgment according to his conscience ”. This 
regarded the position of a judge so sacred , because  justice is one of the 
most important moral concepts that individuals are to be treated in a 
manner that is equitable and fair. On becoming a judge, the following Oath 
is administered to him : 
 
7. An Oath is a public pledge under “Allah Almighty” (God), in presence 
of witnesses that  a person will perform his duty honestly and truthfully ; to 
maintain and restore public confidence in the integrity, independence and 
impartiality  of judiciary . Holding such a prestigious post, a judge is expected 
to abide strictly by each and every word of the Oath  and is supposed to 
follow  the Constitution , law and the Code of Conduct issued by the Council . 
In this way, a person who becomes a judge  imposes a mechanism of self -
6 
 
accountability. Rule of law is a principle under which all persons, institutions 
and entities are accountable . In holding the judges of the Supreme Court 
and a High Court accountable for guilty of misconduct, Article 209 of the 
Constitution has bestowed upon the Council being the only forum , the 
power to investigate and inquire into the ir capacity or conduct . The 
formation and functions of the Council are as under : 
“209.  (1) There shall be a Supreme Judicial Council of 
Pakistan, in this Chapter referred to as the Council.  
(2) The Council shall consist of ----- 
(a) the Chief Justice of Pakistan;  
(b) the two next most senior Judges of the 
Supreme Court; and  
(c) the two most senior Chief Justices of High 
Courts.  
 Explanation. ---For the purpose of this clause, 
the inter se seniority of the Chief Justices of the High 
Courts shall be determined with reference to their 
dates of appointment as Chief Justice [otherwise than 
as acting Chief J ustice], and in case the dates of such 
appointment are the same, with reference to their 
dates of appointment as Judges of any of the High 
Courts.  
(3) If at any time the Council is inquiring into the 
capacity or conduct of a Judge who is a member of the 
Council, or a member of the Council is absent or is 
unable to act due to illness or any other cause, then ---
- 
(a) if such member is the Chief Justice of the 
Supreme Court, the Judge of the 
Supreme Court who is next in seniority 
below the Judges referred to in 
paragraph (b) of clause (2), and  
(b) if such member is the Chief Justice of a 
High Court, the Chief Justice of another 
High Court who is next in seniority 
amongst the Chief Justices of the 
remaining High Courts,  7 
 
shall act as a member of the Council in his place.  
 (4) If, upon any matter inquired into by the 
Council, there is a difference of opinion amongst its 
members, the opinion of the majority shall prevail, and 
the report of the Council to the President shall be 
expressed in terms of the view of the majority.  
 (5) If, on information from any source, the 
Council or the President is of the opinion that a Judge 
of the Supreme Court or of a High Court ---- 
(a) may be incapable of properly performing 
the duties of his office by reason of 
physical or mental incapacity; or  
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct,  
 
the President shall direct the Council to, or the 
Council may, on its own motion, inquire into the 
matter.  
 
(6) If, after inquiring into the matter, the Council 
reports to the President that it is of the opinion --- 
 
(a) that the Judge is incapable of performing 
the duties of his office or has been guilty 
of misconduct, and  
(b) that he should be removed from office,  
the President may remove the Judge from 
office.  
(7) A Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court shall not be removed from office except as 
provided by this Article.  
(8) The Council shall issue a code of conduct to 
be observed by Judges of the Supreme Court and of the 
High Courts.”  
 
8. The members of the Council are the highest adjudicators of the 
country , who are independent from legislature  and executive, and are 
under Oath, to perform  functions of accountability  of their brother judges , 
honestly, independently and without fear or favour. The concept of 8 
 
assigning power to the Council to inquire into the capacity or conduct of a 
judge , is to eliminate a slightest possibility of external interference , or 
pressure and undue influence from within the judiciary,  and to protect  
judges from frivolous and malicious prosecution  to guarantee their 
independence . Reliance is placed in the case of Justice Shaukat Ali, wherein 
this Court has determined as under:  
Moreover, an inquiry into the conduct of a Judge is neither a 
criminal indictment nor even a quasi -criminal proceeding but 
it is mainly an administrative proceeding conducted by a 
domestic forum to examine the professional fitness of a Judge. 
The subject - matter of these proceedings is neither civil rights 
and duties nor criminal liabilities. It is simply the conduct of a 
Judge which is to be properly reviewed in the interest of the 
purity and honour of the judiciary. The forum consists of 
Judges of superio r Courts who also belong to the same 
profession. To be tried by one's peers is a protection because 
they understand one's difficulties, problems and the situation 
in which one was. Doctors, architects, accountants and 
lawyers aim at having and have their d omestic tribunals, that 
is to say, the tribunals which judge their conduct are manned 
by their  own  peers4.” (Emphasis supplied ). 
 
Even otherwise, If the task of inquiring into the conduct of judges is assigned 
to any institution , other than the Council,  it would put the judges in fear of 
repercussions that co uld hinder delivery of justice, and  independence of 
judiciary would be undermined . Self-regulating method of supervising 
judges conferred upon the Council by the Constitution is on account of 
separation of judiciary from the legislature and executive, as provided by 
Article 175 of the Constitution.  It also reflects the confidence of Constitution 
makers in the highest constitutional disciplinary body.  
 
Jurisdiction and Power of the Council:  
 
4 THE PRESIDENT versus MR. JUSTICE SHAUKAT ALI  P L D 1971 Supreme  Court  585, reaffirmed in 
CHIEF JUSTICE OF PAKISTAN IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY Versus PRESIDENT OF PAKISTAN 
through Secretary and others P L D 2010 Supreme  Court  61 9 
 
9. The moot question before this Court is to consider as to whether the 
Council can inquire into the capacity or conduct of a judge , who has retired 
or has resigned from his office ? And whether the Council can continue to 
inquire into the conduct or capacity of a judge, who during the pendency of 
the inquiry proceedings, ret ires or resigns from his office? Sub-Article (5) of 
Article 209 of the Constitution provides the following mechanism to inquire 
into the matter as under:   
Article 209 (5) If, on information from any source, the Council 
or] the President is of the opinion that a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or of a High Court --- 
(a) may be incapable of properly performing the 
duties of his office by reason of physical or mental 
incapacity; or  
(b) may have been guilty of misconduct,  
the President shall direct the Council to, or the Council may, 
on its own motion,] inquire into the matter.  
 
10. A plain reading of the said provision of the Constitution makes it clear 
that the Constitution has mandated the President that on information from 
any source, he shall direct the Council to inquire into the matter. The 
phrase, ‘ the President  Shall direct the Council’ used in this provision of the 
Constitution makes it mandatory upon the Council that  it has no option, but 
to initiate inquiry against the judge accordingly  in a case the reference is 
received from the president.  Similarly, if the Council deems it appropriate , 
may on its own motion inquire into the matter. After a preliminary inquiry, 
the Council may dismiss the complaint for lack of evidence or untrue 
information. In both circumstances , once the Council invokes its 
constitutional ju risdiction by initiating inquiry into the matter  against a 
judge , it has to take the proceedings to its logical conclusion. Sub-Article (6) 
of Article 209 of the Constitution starts with words  if, after inquiring into 
the matter,  that further shows the intent of the Legislature that before 10 
 
invoking the said provisions of the Constitution, the Council has to comply 
the mandate of sub -Article (5) of Article 209 of the Constitution, pursuant 
to which, it has to conclude inquiry initiated against a judge. Upon 
completion of the inquiry proceedings, the Council can form its opinion  
pursuant to sub -Article  (6). If, the Council is of the opinion that the judge is 
incapable of properly perfor ming the duties of his office by  reason of 
physical or mental incapacity or has been guilty of misconduct, shall report 
to the President with a recommendation that he should be removed from 
his office;  the President may then remove the judge from the office. 
However, if , after inquiring into the matter upon a reference from the 
President,  the Council opines that nothing adverse was found against the 
judge, it has to close the proceedings and report to the President with its 
opinion accordingly. Moreover, upon completion of inquiry  initiated by th e 
Council on its own motion  on information from any source , nothing adverse 
could be found against the judge, the Council has to close the inquiry with 
an observation in this behalf, without report to the President . 
11. Without prejudice to above, even otherwise, a  judge is appointed for 
the int erest of general public  and his judicial conduct is a matter of great 
public interest.  Without the trust and confidence of people, judiciary cannot 
exist. Therefore, t he purpose of inquiring into the conduct of a judge while 
in office , is to ensure accountability, to preserve the integrity of judicial 
process , maintain public trust and confidence in the judiciary. As a general 
rule, the Authority inquiring into the conduct of a judge loses its jurisdiction 
to initi ate proceedings against a person who retires or resigns from his 
office, before initiation of inquiry proceedings. Whereas, w hen an inquiry 
about the conduct of a judge in office is initiated by the Council, it is the 
constitutional obligation of the Council to conclude the proceedings, form 
its opinion and report to the President with recommendation s. In this 
provision of the Constitution, the wor d ‘inquiry’ has been used.  The primary 
purpose of inquiry is to gather information in order to address a specif ic 
issue of public interest and to make recommendations  for improvement 11 
 
and prevention of future occurrences . It is not to focus on enforcing laws or 
prosecuting individuals  as is mandated in investigation , rather to inquire 
into the ethical violations and misconduct of a judge. It promote s 
accountability and trust in the process by the public. Reliance is placed in 
the case of In re Proceedings before the Common. On Judicial Tenure & 
Discipline ,5 relevant portion whereof is reproduced herein below:  
“This statutory scheme enables the commission to regulate 
the conduct of judges. The regulation of judges is necessary to 
ensure that judges behave properly and to preserve the 
public’s confidence in the judiciary. The public’s confidence in 
the judiciary and the commission would be shaken if the 
system for the regulation of the conduct of the judiciary could 
be frustrated simply by the resignation of the judge under 
investigation. Hence I do not believe that the Legislature 
intended to allow the frustratio n of the statutory scheme by 
denying the commission’s jurisdiction over a judge who has 
resigned.”  
 
It is for good reason in the public interest that citizens having fundamental 
right to know about the fate of the proceedings.  When an inquiry into 
conduct of a judge initiated by the Council is terminated with out an opinion, 
on account of retirement or resignation of a judge from his office, it would 
render Article 209 (5) & (6) of the Constitution redundant and would also 
give an authority to the judge to make the constitutional body abandoned.  
12. Termination of inquiry proceedings upon retirement of a judge 
would otherwise give an impression that the Council is dependent on the 
will of the judge, who can overpower the control of the constitutional body. 
It may create a perception that the judges are above the law. After his 
retirement  or resignation , prior to inquiry initiated, a judge enjoys a status 
of a retired judge, with lucrative post -retirement benefits from public ex -
chequer . He is also eligible for his re -appointment against some important 
constitutional , quasi -judicial and  administrative posts , for which evaluation 
 
5 In re Proceedings before the Commn. on Judicial Tenure & Discipline, 578 A.2d 1387  12 
 
of his conduct and reputation is essential . The jurisdiction of the Council to 
inquire into the matter pertaining to misconduct of a judge is a 
constitutional mandate. In absence of express words or an enactment, 
preventing the Council from inquiring into the matter upon resignation or 
retirement of  a judge, jurisdiction of the Council cannot be abolished, 
ousted or terminated. Since there is no express provision in the 
Constitution , nor is there any enactment, preventing the Council from 
continuing its proceedings of inquiry  in a situation where a judge is retired 
or resigns before conclusion of the inquiry , it is the constitutional obligation 
of the Council to conclude the inquiry initiated against a judge and form an 
opinion regarding his conduct. If after inquiring into the matter, the Council 
is of the opinion that the judge has been guilty of  misconduct, under such 
circumstances , he shall not be eligible for post -retirement benefits . The 
purpose of removal of a judge is not a punishmen t, rather a judge may only 
be removed in the larger interest of the people. His Removal is to protect 
the public from an unfit judge  and to appoint a better one6. It would also be 
an appropriate way to di scourage others from violating o ath of office and 
will be a precedent for the judges . . Reliance is placed on Steensland v. Ala. 
Judicial Inquiry Comm'n7. Relevant portion whereof is reproduced herein 
below:  
"Once the jurisdiction of a court or administrative agency 
attaches, the general rule is that it will not be ousted by 
subsequent events." In re Peoples, 296 N.C. 109, 146, 250 
S.E.2d 890, 911 (1978). The jurisdiction of the court or 
administrative agency, thus invoked, continues until the 
process is completed. See In re Marriage of Clark, 232 Ill. Ap p. 
3d 342, 347, 597 N.E.2d 240, 243, 173 Ill. Dec. 532 (1992) ("It 
is clear that once jurisdiction attaches in a cause, it continues 
until all issues of fact and law have been finally determined."). 
Indeed, HN8 the COJ is constitutionally required to conve ne 
and to entertain the charges brought by the JIC.4 See In re 
Fuyat, 578 A.2d 1387, 1388 -89 (R.I. 1990)  [**19] (HN9 "[A] 
judge ... who has removed himself or herself from judicial 
office by resignation [during the pendency of an investigation 
 
6 In re Seaman, 627 A. 2d 106, 121 (N.J 1993)  And In re Nowell, 293 N.C. 235  
7  Steensland v. Ala. Judicial Inquiry Comm'n 87 So. 3d 535  13 
 
commenced by the 'Commission on Judicial Tenure and 
Discipline' ('the commission'), but before the 'institution of 
formal proceedings,'] is not by that fact immune from action 
by the commission, which may recommend some sanction 
other than removal."). In s hort, we hold that Judge 
Steensland's retirement during the JIC's pending investigation 
of the complaints filed against him did not deprive the JIC or 
the COJ of jurisdiction to adjudicate the charges 
in the complaint.”  
 
Impact of Resignation of a Judge : 
13. The person who wishes to resign from his office is mostly on the basis 
of his personal reasons, including health issues, or on account of instances 
where he wishes an honourable exit , before initiation of any proceedings 
regarding his conduct . But, when a judge who is facing inquiry  on the 
allegations of misconduct, initiated by the Council by invoking Article 209 of 
the Constitution , if sense s an adverse outcome of the proceedings , resigns 
and leaves the Bench in response to credible allegations, it would be an 
attempt to escape the consequence of inquiry proceedings  and bad faith . If 
the proceedings are made dependent upon the will of the judge on account 
of his resignation, at any stage before conclusion  of inquiry , it would let the 
judge, who is guilty  of misconduct, to go Scott  free by defeating the process 
of accountability . This would damage rule of law norms and public trust in 
the role of judges and the judiciary . In a situation, where inquiry into the 
matter in respect of misconduct of a judge is underway, and he considers 
himself innocent, he would not opt for resignation, rather would like to face 
the proceedings even after his retirement, to get rid of the baseless and 
frivolous reference of complaint. He will naturally want to secure his 
integrity and would prefer to not live with stigma . For these reasons, it is 
imperative that once the Council in exercise of its constitutional authority, 
initiates inquiry into conduct of a judge, it cannot terminate or abate upon 
retirement or resignatio n of the judge from his office.  The citizens have a 
right to know about the outcome of the complaints.  14 
 
 
Procedure for Inquiry : 
14. For effective performance of functions and proceedings to give effect 
to Article 209 of the Constitution, the Council ha s laid down a procedure 
called ‘ the Supreme Judicial Cou ncil Procedure of Inquiry, 2005’  
(“Procedure  of 2005 ”). Paragraph 7(1) whereof provides that once 
information in respect of inquiry into the capacity or conduct of a judge is 
received by any member of the Council, it shall be presented to the 
Chairman of the Council for further action . Under Article 209 of the 
Constitution , if a reference/complaint  is received against any of the 
member, who is a judge of the Supreme Court, the judge of the Supreme 
Court who is next in seniority shall become a member of the Council  in his 
place . In the present case , admittedly, the complaint was filed by the private 
appellants against the former HCJ, but he sat upon the same and did not 
refer the matter to the Counc il by recusing himself, rather held the Council 
hostage  by not convening a meeting . It was not only his constitutional 
obligation, but was also moral and ethical responsibility to have had 
referred the matter to the Council and asked a judge of the Supreme Court 
who was next in seniority below him  to become a member , with further 
request to the Council to proceed against him accordingly . As a Chief Justice, 
he was burdened with more responsibility to maintain a high moral and 
ethical standard by placing himself before the Council for his accountability , 
but he failed to do so, what was expect ed from him. Failure to refer his 
matter to the Council by the former HCJ , not only resulted into undermining 
the constitutional provisions , but also amounts to preventing the Council 
from performing its constitutional function . It is a fact that during his 
tenure, under his chairmanship, the Council conducted proceedings against 
some other judges , but withholding the complaint filed against him, is a 
violation of principle of equality  regarding accountability amongst the 
judges . It is important to mention here that it was equally the responsibility 
of other Hon’ble Members of the Council to have had inquired about 15 
 
pendency of references or complaints against judges of the Supreme Court 
or a High Court(s) , but unfortunately they a lso did not vigilantly perform  
their constitutional duty , which rendered several complaint s, including the 
one against former HCJ as infructuous  on account of retirement or 
resignation of judges . It had shattered the confidence of the appellants and 
many more, which had a negative impact upon  the mechanism and 
procedure of inquiry proceedings into the conduct of judges. Had that 
complaint and many more filed against other judges been taken up and 
decided in time  by the Council, before the retirement of the former HCJ and 
other judges , there would not have been any violation of the relevant 
provision of the Constitution nor would have created any doubt regarding 
the working of the Council and integrity of its Chairman and members. The 
private appellants and the public could have been satisfied and thereby 
their confidence and trust in the working of the Council would not have 
been shattered.  In any case, it was necessary for the Council to have decided 
the fate of the complaint  before retirement of the former HCJ , but the 
needful was not done, therefore, after his retirement, the Council cannot 
proceed.  
15. We have observed that in the past, the Hon’ble Members of the 
Council did not take pain to convene its meeting in time and on regular 
basis . The complaints remained unattended and institution of new ones was  
going on, which  resulted in to increase in the number of complaints 
manifold. During this period, several judges were retired or resigned from 
their offices. The petition filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution by 
the private appellan ts and the present appeals poses  a valid question on the 
mechanism of initiating inquiry and working of the Council . The appellants 
presume that the Council by not taking action on the complaints has 
facilitated the judges  to retire or resign , who were required to be subjected 
to disciplinary proceedings. No doubt, majority of the complaints against 
the judges are frivolous and baseless, but still , it is the constitutional 
obligation of the Council to decide fate of the same  as early as possible. The 16 
 
Procedure of 2005 has empowered the Chief Justice being Chairman of the 
Council to convene a meeting for the purpose of inquiring into the matter . 
Empowering the Chairman of the Council alone to convene a meeting would 
make the Council subservient the Chairman, hence, undermines the 
independence and authority of the Council . In order to ensure 
independence  of the Council , it is imperative that the Procedure of 2005 is 
suitably  amended in line with the provisions of Article 209 of the 
Constitution, to introd uce a regular vigilant mechanism for convening a 
meeting of the Council on a regular interval, for initiating and concluding 
the inquiry proceedings upon a reference or a complaint  by the Council 
before retirement  or resignation of a judge . Independent , effective and 
vigilant Council will strengthen the trust and confidence of the citizens of 
Pakistan in the disciplinary proceedings, involving judges of the Supreme 
Court, the Federal Shariat Court and of the High Court s. It will also enable 
the judges to perform their judicial functions with p eace of mind, freely , 
without any fear or favour and without any external or internal pressure. 
However, disciplinary proceedings against judges must be based on the rule 
of law and in accordance with the basic principles of justice and internal 
safeguards, to ensure judicial independence.  
Result:  
16. On the basis of what has been discussed herein above, the questions  
framed by this Court on 12.02.2024  are answered as under:  
A. Whether pending proceedings before the Supreme Judicial 
Council (the ‘Council’) do not stand abated on account of 
retirement and resignation of a Judge?  
 
Answer : My answer to this question is “No”. Proceedings, once 
initiated by the Council, shall not abate upon the retirement and 
resignation of a judge .8 
 
 
8 See Para 10, 11 & 12 of instant note.  17 
 
B. Whether a Judge who retires or resigns during pendency of 
proceedings against him/her before the Council should be 
allowed to escape the consequences of removal?  
 
Answer :  My answer to this question is also in negative .9 
 
C. Whether resignation by a Judge during pendency of proceedings 
against him/her before the Council tantamount to 
circumvention/avoidance of accountability enshrined and 
envisaged under Article 209 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973?  
 
Answer : This question is easily answered as “Yes”10. 
 
D. Whether circumvention of proceedings under Article 209 of the 
Constitution would result in erosion of public trust in the 
Judiciary?  
 
Answer : This question is also answered in affirmative .11 
 
 
 (Jamal Khan Mandokhail ) 
 Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD  
K.Anees and Waqas Ahmad, L.C.  
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 
9 See Para 12 & 13 ibid.  
10 ibid 
11 See Para 4,5,6,7 & 12 ibid.  