IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 1146 of 2021   
(Against the order dated 24.09.2021 passed by the P eshawar 
High Court Peshawar in Crl.M.BA  No.2378 -P/2021 ) 
 
 
Yasar Khattak  
  …..Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State &  another  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir, ASC  
        
For the State :              Mr. Shumail Aziz, Addl. A.G. K P 
 
For Respondent No.2 :              Mr. Iltaf Samad, ASC  
  
Date of Hearing           24.01.2022. 
 
ORDER  
 
 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - In the backdrop of a n 
ongoing  feud over property, Qaimullah complainant and his 
brother Hanifullah  were assaulted  at 9:0 0 hours on 28.5.2020 
within the precincts of Police Station Lound Khurd District 
Mardan , jointly by Yasir, Anwar Shaheen, Fakhar Alam and 
Zahir Shah , real brothers inter se . Complainant survived the 
assault whereas his b rother succumbed to the injury . As the 
investigation progressed, Zahir Shah co -accused was exonerated 
whereas nothing was recovered from the co -accused except the 
present petitioner , who pursuant to a disclosure , led to the 
recovery of  a pistol, forensically wedded with  two casings 
secured f rom the spot. A three member Bench of this Court  vide 
order dated 15.04.2021  admitted co -accused to post arrest bail  
on the basis whereof , principle of requirement of consistency is 
being invoked  for an identical treatment .  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.   It would be advantageous to reproduce the relevant Criminal Petition No.1146 of 2021  
portion of  the order ibid:- 
“…… It has further been observed by us that the 
instant case was registered against four persons 
including the petitioners, out of whom co -accused Zahir 
Shah with similar allega tion has been found innocent 
during the course of investigation and his name was 
placed in column No.2 of the report under Section 173, 
Code of Criminal Procedure. So far as the petitioners 
are concerned, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
State has co nfirmed that during the course of 
investigation nothing was recovered at their instance or 
from their possession. He further  confirms under 
instructions that co -accused Yasir got recovered a 
pistol and two out of eight empties secured from the 
spot matched  with that pistol. All these circumstances 
make the case of petitioners one of further inquiry 
falling within ambit of Section 497(2), Code of Criminal 
Procedure. ” 
The above findings clearly suggest  that accusation, 
notwithstanding,  investigative conclusio ns drawn by the 
Investigating Officer,  weighed with the Court to favourably  
receive the  bail plea  of the co -accused for their distinctly placed 
in a distinguishable position , that independently called  for 
further probe  vis-à-vis the role assigned to them , an anal ysis 
that hardly furnishes  a ground  to invoke principle of consistency 
qua the petitioner , distinct ly saddled, a fact  duly noted in the 
order ibid  itself . Petition fails. Leave declined.  
   
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
24th January , 2022  
Azmat /- 