IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No .83-P of 2015  
(Against the judgment dated 06.03.2015 passed by the Peshawar  
High Court Pe shawar in Cr. A. No. 188-M/201 2) 
 
State through AG General KP, Peshawar  
 
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
 
 
 
Sabz Ali Khan  
 
 
 
…Res pondent (s) 
For the  Petitioner (s): Ms. Abida Safdar,  
    Assistant Advocate General, KPK  
    
For the  Respondent(s) : N.R. 
 
Date of  hearing:  26.07.2021  
 
    ORDER  
 
 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Indicted for homicide  
for committing Qatl-i-Amd of Sher Muhammad, within the precincts of 
Police Station  Changlay, District Bonair,  the respondent was convicted 
under clause (b) of section 30 2 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860  by a 
learned Additional Sessions Judge  vide judgment dated 10.10.2012 ; he 
was sentenced to death with a direction to pay compensation to the 
legal heirs of the deceased;  on the coordinate charge of murderous 
assault on Mushtaq PW, he was sentenced to 7 -years RI  with 
concomitant monetary compensation ; the High Court acquitted him 
from the charges vide impugned judgment dated 06.03.2015 , vires 
whereof, are being assailed on the ground s that there was no occasion 
for the High  Court  to take the impugned view inasmuch as the 
prosecution had successfully driven home charge  beyond a shadow of 
doubt on the strength of ocular account furnished by the witnesses  that 
included an injured with a massive injury . It is next argued that 
investigative conclusions drawn up pursuant to a prompt recourse to 
law, inexorably pointed towards respondent’s culpability , singularly 
arrayed in the crime report . According to the learned counsel, reference 
by the High Court to peripheral issues and state d durations of time are Criminal Petition No.  83-P/2015  
 
 2
too trivial to override the preponderance of evidence  that 
unambiguously excluded  every hypothesis other than respondent’s 
guilt; simi larly, according to her , stated lapses on part of the 
Investigating Officer , being inconsequential , certainly does not cast 
away prosecution ’s case , otherwise firmly structured on evidence 
furnished by the independent witnesses and, thus, the impugned view 
being artificial warrants interference by the Court in order to avoid 
miscarriage of justice . Con tentions merit consideration ; leave is granted 
to reappraise entire evidence  with a view to secure the ends of justice. 
Send for the respondent through bailable warrants in the sum of 
Rs.200,000/ -, returnable to the Assistant Registrar of this Court at 
Peshawar . Station House Officer shall execute the warrants within a 
fortnight.  
     
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Peshawar , the 
26th July, 2021  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 