IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 Present:  
  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
 
CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 213 OF 2013.  
 (On appeal from order dated 17.5.2013, 
passed by the Lahore High Court, Lahore, in 
Cr.Misc. No.701 -H/2013)  
 
 
Mst. Rasoolan w/o Muhammad Aslam.  
 Petitioner(s)  
 
VERSUS  
Station House Officer, Police Station,  
Head Marala, District Sialkot and 4 -others.   
Respondent(s)  
 
 
Petitioner(s)  : Nemo.  
   
For Respondents  No.1, 3 & 5  : Mr. Muha mmad Hanif Khtana,  
Additional A.G. Punjab  
 
Mr. Muhammad Gohar Nafees,  
DPO, Sialkot  
   
Respondents No.2 & 4  : N.R. 
   
Date of Hearing  : 17.07.2013.  
 
    O R D E R   
 
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ. - Mr. M uhammad 
Gohar Nafees, DPO, Sialkot, submitted a report and also 
informed that in his District approximate number of labourers 
working on the Bhatta  is 8250. To ascertain as to whether they Cr.P.213/2013.  2 
are subject to bonded labour or otherwise, he arranged a 
campaign through po lice parties and civil society , which  reveal ed 
that there were 379 such type of labourers, who were detained at 
Bhatta  because of receiving advance  amount of their labour 
charges were got released and against the Bhatta  owners, 150 
cases have been register ed and after conducting investigation, 
challan has been submitted for trial before the Courts. It is 
informed by the learned Advocate General, Punjab, that 
unfortunately the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1992, 
had not been applied strictly, inasmuc h as, the Vigilan ce 
Committees ha d not been formulated , as the Members of the 
Committees are 17 out of which 11 are the officials whereas 06 
are the private persons, including the Chairman, District Council, 
and as there is no local government in place, th erefore, the said 
Commi ttees could not start their function. We must insist that 
command of the Constitution in holding the elections  be fulfilled, 
as the elected M embers, including the Chairman, District Council, 
etc. shall be helpful in solving the probl ems of maintaining law 
and order as well as to control crime, as through cooperation by 
them, the police and the Law Enforcing Agencies would be more 
effective for bringing to book the culprits involved in different 
kinds of crimes . However , the Government  is directed to activate Cr.P.213/2013.  3 
the Vigilan ce Committees as early as possible. The DPO, Sialkot, 
has also pointed out that despite application of the Employees’ 
Social Security Ordinance, 1965, in the Province no registration  is 
obtained by the owners to avoid ma king the payment of the 
contribution.  
2.  The Chief Secretary of the Government of the Punjab, 
is directed to ensure that within two weeks of receipt of this 
Order , all the labourers working on the Bhattas , subject to 
fulfillment of the requirement of the law, be registered as a 
recipient of the Social Security and the owners be bound to pay 
their contribution to the Social Security Department. He shall 
submit a report and o n receipt of the report, final O rder shall be 
passed. As the report has been submitt ed and the DPO , Sialkot , 
has also taken interest to ensure that no labourer is detained on 
Bhatta  forcibly  in the name of the payment of the Peshgi  labour 
charges, we are of the opinion that no further proceedings are 
called for except perusal of the repor t from the Chief Secretary 
regarding the registration of the Bhatta  labourers under the 
Employees’ Social Security Ordinance, 1965, subject to the 
conditions laid down in the said Ordinance, therefore, the petition 
stands disposed of.  Cr.P.213/2013.  4 
3.  Copy of this Ord er be sent to the Inspector General of 
Police, Punjab , for the purpose of circulating among all the Law 
Enforcement Agencies and DPOs, etc. and to ensure that in future 
there shall not be any case of bonded labour and if such a 
complaint of habeas corpus  is received in future, the DPO 
concerned shall be held responsible for the same.  
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad  Judge  
 
 
 
17.7.2013  
‘NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ 
Mahtab/*  Judge  
 
 