IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice  Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal Petition No .445-L of 2020  
(Against the order dated 17.3.2020 passed by the 
Lahore High Court Lahore in T.A. No.161169 of 
2020)  
 
Akhtar Ali  
 
        …Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
The State   
     …Res pondent (s) 
For the  Petitioner(s):  In person.  
 
For the  State : Mr. Khurram Khan , 
 Additional Prosecutor General Punjab  
For Respondent No.3 : In person.  
 
Date of hearing:  15.07.2020.  
     ORDER  
 
       Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Akhtar Ali, petitioner, is 
engaged in litigation with his estranged wife Tania Kousar; he is also 
accused in a criminal case registered at the instance of one Mst. 
Ghazala Bibi ; he has arrayed both of them in his quest for transfer of 
cases  pending adjudication before a learned Judicial Magistrate at 
Sheikhupura  to a Court at Gojra District  Nankana Sahib . After his 
failure before the learned District & Sessions Judge Sheikhupura , his 
request before a learned Judge -in-Chamber of the Lahore High Court 
Lahore  met with no better fate and the learned Judge having found t he 
motion scandalous and  frivolous,  burden ed him with a cost of 
Rs.50,000/ -. It is in this backdrop that he has resigned  before us as a 
last resort.  
2.  In his move before the Courts below, we have found his 
accusations  directed  against the learned Judges  as outrageous as well 
as scandalous ; he h as also targeted the members and office bearers of 
the local Bar, apparently having no axe to grind in his trivial contest s 
wherein we have found the respondents equally  reckless and abrasive . 
We view the repugnant course adopted by the parties before the learned 
Courts with disdain . It is fundamentally important for the peaceful 
preservation of any society that its Judges attend call of their office  
fearlessly  with dignity, respect and independ ence so as to sit on the 
judgment  between the contestants , regardless of their status or station,  
without let or hindrance. A society cannot countenance obstruction or Criminal Petition No.445 -L of 2020  
 
  
 2
interference with the administration of justice without incurring 
disastrous  consequences , therefore, to ensure freedom to a Judge within 
the remits of law is a  duty cast upon all and sundry with out exception 
and immunity,  
3.  The petitioner  while hurling accusations  threw both caution 
as well as courtesy  to the wind and the learned Judge -in-Chamber was 
well within the bounds of law to saddle  him with a substantial cost . The 
petitioner , however, before us  has expressed remorse and regret , 
throwing himself at the mercy of the Court ; he pledged  profound respect 
and courtesy that appertains to a tri bunal  with an undertaking to be 
extremely careful in  the future.  
4.  Restraint  is a better part of judicial calling ; we would never 
exercise coerci ve authority of the State vesting  in us  since time 
immemorial  in order to wreak vengeance or  as a means to  uphold our 
dignity or respect that  we solemnly believe  ‘must rest on surer 
foundations ’, nonetheless, given the gravity of petitioner’s reckless 
behavior we would not let him off without a  tag.  With a stern  warning  
and while exercising restraint , we reduce the cost imposed by the High 
Court to a sum of Rs.2000/ - as a symbolic  reminder to the petitioner for 
his mischief . 
5.  We entertain no manner of doubt that the learned 
Magistrate , conscious of his calling as a tryst with  divinity , uninfluenced 
by the  scandalous conduct of the parties , would dispose  of the pending 
matters  in accordance with law , in the fullness of time with all 
convenient dispatch . The petitioner shall dep osit Rs.2000/ - as cost  with 
the District Nazir Sheikhupura within a fortnight. Petition fails. Leave 
declined.   
   
 
                  Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Lahore , the 
15th July, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 
 