IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal  Petition No. 1280  of 2019  
(Against order dated 22.10.2019 
passed by Lahore High Court in Crl. 
P. NO.54210 -B/2019 ) 
 
 
Zaka Ullah  
   …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State & another  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Babar Awan, Sr. ASC 
 Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah , AOR  
    
For the State:  Mr. Abid Majeed Mirza,  
 Deputy Prosecutor General Punjab   
 with Pervez, I.O.  
 
For the Respondent(s):  Mr. Shahid Azeem, ASC  
 
 Date of hearing:  15.1.20 20. 
 
ORDER  
 
                 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Behind bars since 
17.5.2019, Zaka Ullah, petitioner seeks admission to bail in a case 
of homicide;  on the fateful day, he allegedly drove and whisked 
away co-accused Usman Ashraf on a motorbike  after the deceased , 
on a motorbike as well,  was dealt with multiple fire shots, 
including one by him . Motive for the crime is a runaway marriage . 
The deceased s uccumbed to the injuries after a brief struggle at 
the hospital ; before the Medical Officer , amongst other s, he 
accused Farooq and Waqas  for having mounted the assault , 
however, First Information Report recorded on the statement of 
Ikram Aslam  specifically name d the petitioner with a role, 
nonetheless, belied by the Investigating Officer .  
2.  Heard.  Record perused.  Criminal  Petition No. 1280  of 201 9 
 2
3.  According to the crime report, the deceased was 
repeatedly shot initially by Muhammad Ashraf co -accused  by a  
.30 caliber pistol, subsequently taken over by the petitioner to 
conclude the occurrence with the last shot, a role conspicuously 
omitted alongside the name in the last declaration , an apparent 
dichotomy to be best settled after recording of evidence . 
Investigating suggests petitioner’s presence at the spot, albeit with 
no role, a circumstance additionally calling for further probe  in the 
alleged culpability ; a case for release on bail stands made out . The 
petitioner shall be released upon furnishing bond s in the sum of 
Rs.500,000/ - with two sureties  each in the like amount to the 
satisfacti on of the learned trial Court. The petition is converted into 
appeal  and allowed.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad   
15th January , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 