IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
 
Constitution Petition No.35 of 2013  
(Multi Billion Scam in the EOBI)  
 
Applicant :   Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, ASC  
(in CMA -4855/13)  
 
    Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
(in CMA -4319/13)  
 
    Dr. Shafique ur  Rehman, i n person.  
(in CMA -4891/13)  
 
    Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi, in person  
(in CMA -4870/13)  
On Court Notice:  Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG  
For M/o OP & HRD:  Mr. Munir Qureshi, Secretary  
For EOBI:    Mr. M. Bilal, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Babar Bilal, ASC  
    Syed Safdar Hussain, AOR  
    Mr. Ayub Sheikh, Chairman  
    Mr. Javed Iqbal, DG (HR & GAD)  
    Mr. Parvez Ahmed, Director General (Audit)  
    Mr. Asif Azad, Director (Investment)  
    Mr. Abdul Latif, Director (Law)  
    Mr. Ahad Ahmed, AD (Law)  
 
For FIA:    Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Addl. D.G.  
    Mr. Qudrat Ullah Khan, Director, Punjab  
  
For DHA, Ibd /Rwp: Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC with  
Mr. Mehr Khan Mali k, AOR  
For Pak -Arab Housing   
Scheme & M/s Vital   
Enterprizes Pvt. Ltd: Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR   
 
For Vision Developer  
Pvt. Ltd.    Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
 
For Eden Housing  
Scheme :   Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC  
 Const. P.35 of 2013  2
For CDA:    Ms. Misbah Gulnar Sharif, ASC  
    Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
Date of hearing   26.7.2013  
 
O R D E R  
 In response to CMA No. 4855/13  Ms. Misbah Gulnar Sharif, 
learned counsel for CDA requested for  time to file reply after 
ascertaining correct po sition from the record of CDA.  
2.  Mr. Irfan Qadir, learned ASC appeared on behalf of DHA s 
Islamabad / Rawalpindi and stated that he has prepared the reply which 
he intends to file during course of the day.  He further stated that he is 
to raise some preliminary objections with the request that the ord er of 
freezing the accounts  may be withdrawn.  
3.  Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Addl. Director General (Law), 
FIA submitted a CMA No.4892/13 stating therein the progress made by 
FIA towards inquiries in the matters where FIRs have been registered. 
Relevant port ion of the CMA have been read out by him in the Court. He 
stated that in respect of enquiry No.25/13 about purchase of plots 
Nos.4 and 8 in Muslim Cooperative Housing Society, Military Road, 
Sukkur, owners ha s made an offer to return the amounts.  
4.  Mr. Tariq Mehmood, learned Sr. ASC stated that M/s Eden 
Housing Scheme had furnished a post -dated cheque in the sum of 
Rs.22.295 billion on the last date of hearing which has been returned. It 
has been informed to him that the case of Eden Housing Scheme was 
treated differently in view of the statement made in the Court giving 
impression that if the amount received from EOBI is being deposited  but 
by handing over a post dated cheque it has failed to prove it s 
commitment . Learned counsel  contended that the Eden Housing Const. P.35 of 2013  3
Scheme is distinguishable from the other cases , as its deal with EOBI is 
based on registered sale deeds.   
5.  Mr. Munir Qureshi, Secretary , M/o OP  HRD stated that he 
has taken up the matter for reconstitution of the Board of Trustees and 
on comple tion of procedural formalities new Board shall start its 
functioning accordingly.  
6.  Let learned counsel for CDA and DHAs shall file their 
respective replies. Additional Director General (Law) FIA  shall supply 
reports to all the learned counsel appearing  for the parties as well as to 
the learned Attorney General so they may all go through the same  to 
prepare their case.  
7.  This Court vide order dated 19.07.2013 has directed with 
regard to accounts of DHA Islamabad Rawalpindi as under: - 
“2. Therefore, un der the circumstances, we direct that all 
the amounts lying in the accounts of DHA Islamabad 
Rawalpindi respectively shall stand frozen henceforth till the 
amount of Rs. 22.295 is deposited with the Registrar…”.   
8.  As the Eden Housing Scheme has not honoured its 
commitment with regard to payment of amounts, therefore, in similar 
manner order dated 19.7.2013 shall be applicable on  it and on the case 
of Enquiry No.25/13 about purchase of plot Nos.4 and 8, Muslim 
Cooperative Housing Society, Military Road, S ukkur to the extent of 
freezing their accounts  as it has been ordered against DHAs and others .  
9.  It has been mentioned in the report that FIA is undertaking 
an exercise of getting evaluated the property which was purchased from 
DHA Islamabad/Rawalpindi.  In same sequel it is directed that let the Const. P.35 of 2013  4
FIA ascertain the value of the property purchased by EOBI in all the 
cases at the time when parties entered into t ransaction and prevailing 
rates, through a qualified and independent property evaluator.   
10.  Mian Abdul Rauf, learned ASC appeared in (CMA -4319/13) 
seeking extension of certain facilities  to the accused involved in case . 
He has been asked to approach the Court at Karachi seized of the 
matter . If the applicant makes such request in the said Court, th e same 
shall be considered accordingly.  
11.  To be re -listed for hearing on 31st July, 2013 at Sr. No.1.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
Islamabad, the  
26th July, 2013.         
M. Azhar Malik *  