IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
   
   
                    PRESENT:   
   
                    Mr.Justice Sh.Riaz Ahmed, HCJ  
                    Mr.Justice Munir A.Sheikh  
                    Mr.Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry  
                    Mr.Justice Qazi Muhammad Farooq  
                    Mr.Justice Mian Muhammad Ajmal  
                    Mr.Justice Syed Deedar Hussain Shah  
                    Mr.Justice Hamid Ali Mirza  
                    Mr.Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar  
                    Mr.Justice Muhammad Nawaz Abbasi  
   
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.15 OF 2002  
Qazi Hussain Ahmed, Ameer Jamaat-e-Islami Pakistan  
Mansoora, Multan Road, Lahore  
                                                                             …          PETITIONER  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
Chief Executive & another                                    …     RESPONDENTS  
      
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.17 OF 2002  
High Court Bar Association Rawalpindi            …       PETITIONER  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
Chief Executive & others                                      …       RESPONDENTS  
   
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.18 OF 2002  
Supreme Court Bar Asso ciation of Pakistan  
                                                                             …            PETITIONER  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
Chief of the Army Staff &  
Chief Executive & others                                      …       RESPONDENTS  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.19 OF 2002  
Nawabzada Nasrullah Khan,  
President, Alliance for Restoration of Democracy  
                                                                             …           PETITIONER  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   The Federation of Pakistan through  
Secretary to the Gove rnment of Pakistan  
Establishment Division, Islamabad & others           
                                                                              …            RESPONDENTS  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.20 OF 2002  
Shahid Orakzai                                                       …         PETITIONER  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
President of Pakistan & others                             …       RESPONDENTS  
   
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.21 OF 2002  
Adal Trust through its Managing Trustee  
Shaikh Mushtaq Ali,  Advocate & another  
                                                                             …           PETITIONERS  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
Chief Executive of Pakistan  
& others                                                                …        RESPONDENTS  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.22 OF 2002  
Syed Zafar Ali Shah                                             …       PETITIONER     
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
Chief Executive & others                                      …     RESPONDENTS  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.23 OF 2002  
Engr. Muhammad Saleem Ullah Khan  
President, Jamiat Ulema-e-Pakistan  
(Nifaze Shariat) Lahore.                                              …  PETITIONER  
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
Federation of Pakistan  through Secretary  
Establishment Division, Islamabad  
& others                                                                …        RESPONDENTS  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.24 OF 2002  
Wasim Rehan                                                         …        PETITIONER  
                                       VERSUS  
   
General Pervez Musharraf,  
Chief Executive of Pakistan                                   …       RESPONDENT  
   
CIVIL PETITION NO.512 OF 2002  
Awami Himayat Tehrik (Pakistan)  
Through its Founder Chairman  Moulvie Syed Iqbal Haider                                      …      PETITIONER
   
                                       VERSUS  
   
Federation of Pakistan  through Secretary  
Ministry of Law, Jus tice and H.R. Division  
Govt. of Pakistan, Islamabad                                …         RESPONDENT  
   
   
For the petitioner          :                   Dr.Farooq Hasan, Sr.ASC  
(CP 15/2002)                             Rai Muhammad Nawaz Kharal, ASC  
                                                Mr.Ejaz Muhammad Khan, AOR  
   
For the petitioner          :                   Mr.Muhammad Ikram Ch., ASC  
(CP 17/2002)                             Ch.Muhammad Akram, AOR  
   
For the petitioner          :                   Mr.Hamid Khan, ASC  
(CP 18/2002)                             Mr.Ejaz Ahmed Khan, AOR (absent)  
   
For the petitioner    :                    Syed Sharif  Hussain Bokhari, ASC  
(CP 19/2002)                             Syed Abul Aasim Jafri, AOR (absent)  
   
For the petitioner          :                   In person  
(CP 20/2002)                       
   
For the petitioner          :                   In person  
(CP 21/2002)                          
For the petitioner          :                   Mr.A.K.Dogar, ASC  
(CP 22/2002)                             Mr.Ejaz Muhammad Khan, AOR  
   
For the petitioner          :                   Mr.Hashmat Ali Habib, ASC  
(CP 23/2002)                             Mr.M.S.Khattak, AOR  
   
For the petitioner          :                   In person  
(CP 24/2002)                             
                                                
For the petitioner          :                   In person  
(CP 512/02)                             
          
On Court notice                    :          Mr.Makhdoom Ali Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr.Amir Hani Muslim, DAG  
Mr.Muhammad Ashraf Tanoli, Ad vocate General, Balochistan  
   
For respondents/                          Syed Shar ifuddin Pirzada, Sr.ASC  
Federation                               Mr.Maqbool Ellahi Malik, Sr.ASC  
(In CP 15/02)                             Ch.Naseer Ahmed, ASC  
Rana Waqar Ahmed, Advocate with  
Mr.Mehr Khan  Malik, AOR  
   
For respondents/                             Mr.Maqbool Ellahi Malik, Sr.ASC  
Federation                               Mr.Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
(In CP 17, 21, 23  
24 & 512/02)     
For respondents/                             Syed If tikhar Hussain Gillani, ASC  
Federation                              assisted by Mr.Muneeb Zia, Adv.  
(In CP 18/02)                             Mr.Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
    
For respondents/                             Mr.Ab dul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr.ASC  
Federation                               assisted by  
(In CP 19 & 22/02)                  M/S Miangul Hassan Aurangzeb,  
Mian Feroze Jamal Shah Kakakhell &  
Sardar Qasim Ahmad Ali  
Advocates High Court &  
Mr.Mehr Khan  Malik, AOR  
                   
For respondents/                             Mr.Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
Federation  
(In CP 20/02)  
   
Date of hearing                 :          22-4-2002 to 27-4-2002  
   
  
 JUDGMENT
SH. RIAZ AHMED, C. J . - The above petitions were disposed of on 27th April, 2002 through a Shor t
Order. The concluding portion of th e Short Order is worded thus: -  
“8. The above Constitution Petitions have been filed in 
this Court under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution 
challenging the legality and vires  of the Referendum 
Order on the constitutional plane as well as on the 
touchstone of the verd ict of this Court in Syed Zafar 
Ali Shah's case . Dr. Farooq Hasan, learned ASC 
appearing in support of Constitution Petition No. 
15/2002 vehemently conte nded that despite the 
validation of the Proclama tion of Emergency and the 
Provisional Constitution Or der No. 1 of 1999, the 1973 
Constitution still remains th e supreme law of the land 
as laid down in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case  and the 
powers of the present gove rnment are strictly 
circumscribed in the afores aid case. According to the 
learned counsel, at present the grund norm of the 
country being the 1973 Consti tution and the judgment 
of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case , the vires  of 
the Referendum Order have to be examined on the 
touchstone of the rele vant provisions of the 
Constitution as well as the law laid down in Syed Zafar 
Ali Shah's case . In all these petitions, a common prayer 
has been made that the Re ferendum Order be declared 
illegal, ultra vires  the Constitution and violative of the 
law laid down in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case . 
9. In Constitution Petiti on No. 15/2002 filed by Qazi 
Hussain Ahmed, Amir Jamaat-i-Islami and 
Constitution Petition No. 22/2002 filed by Syed Zafar 
Ali Shah, a composite declar ation has been sought to 
the effect: -  
That the Chief Executive has unlawfully o ccupied and taken over the position of the 
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in violation of the judgment of this Court in 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case;  
That Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Tara r still continues to be the President notwithstanding the 
Chief Executive’s Order 3 of 2001;  
That writ in the nature of quo warranto  be issued against the Chief Executive; and  
That the holding of referendum for election to the office of the Pr esident be declared illegal, 
unconstitutional and violative of th e judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case . 
  10. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzad a, Sr. ASC, Mr. Abdul 
Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC and Syed Iftikhar Hussain 
Gillani, ASC, learned coun sel appearing on behalf of 
the Federation and Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan appearing on Court’s 
notice, have urged the following points: -  
  
(i) The controversy raised in 
these petitions has to be 
looked into with reference to a long history of the 
constitutional crises Pakistan 
has been going through ever 
since its coming into 
existence and the ground 
realities prevailing in the 
country particularly in the 
aftermath of the events of 
12th October 1999, as recognized and validated by 
this Court in Syed Zafar Ali 
Shah's case ; 
  
(ii) General Pervez Musharraf 
is firmly committed to and 
bound by the direction of this 
Court given in Syed Zafar Ali 
Shah's case  regarding holding 
of elections in October 2002, 
which is clearly established 
not only from his statements 
within and outside the 
country, but also from the 
provisions of Article 4 (2) of 
the Referendum Order;  
  
(iii) The holding of elections 
in October 2002 as promised 
and reiterated before this 
Court by the learned counsel 
for the Federation and the 
learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan is a step in aid of the 
transition or the transformation as it would 
lead to the road towards 
democracy and rebuilding the 
institutions of the State, 
which is a great need of the hour;  
(iv) Transition and 
transformation of an extra-
constitutional set up into a 
democratic dispensation is 
the most troubled path and 
the gap cannot just be 
covered with one jump;  
  
(v) General Pervez 
Musharraf, ever since the 
assumption of power, has 
been performing his 
functions and duties in 
accordance with the mandate 
given to him by this Court in 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case  
and has been striving to 
transform the Army rule into 
a democratic set up as 
envisaged in the aforesaid 
case;  
  
(vi) It has been explicitly 
stated in the Preamble to the 
Referendum Order that it has been made and promulgated 
in pursuance of the 
Proclamation of Emergency 
of the 14th day of October 
1999 and the PCO No. 1 of 
1999 and in exercise of all 
other powers enabling the 
Chief Executive and 
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in that 
behalf.;  
  (vii) In the peculiar 
constitutional history of 
Pakistan, referendum is a 
valid means of election to the 
office of President in 
Pakistan. It has also been 
resorted to in various other 
countries for the purpose. 
Referendum is nothing but an 
appeal to the people of 
Pakistan, who are the political sovereign of the country;  
  
(viii) Nexus between the law, 
i.e. the Referendum Order and 
the objects intended to be 
achieved through it, i.e. the 
declared objectives of the 
Chief Executives and 
transition and transformation to the democratic set up is 
clearly established in the 
present case. The Preamble to 
the Referendum Order, inter 
alia, provides as under: -  
  
AND WHEREAS, since at 
that juncture the institutions 
of State stood seriously weakened and the democratic 
and moral authority of the 
government of the day stood 
gravely eroded, the Chief 
Executive of Pakistan 
announced a 7 - Point Agenda 
on 17th October 1999, stating his objectives to rebuild 
national confidence and 
morale; strengthen the 
Federation, remove inter-
provincial disharmony and 
restore national cohesion; 
revive the economy and 
restore investor confidence; 
ensure law and order and dispense speedy justice; depoliticize state institution; 
devolution of power to the 
grass roots level; and ensure 
swift and across the board 
accountability;  
  
AND WHEREAS the Chief 
Executive of Pakistan has 
emphasised that, inter alia, appropriate measures will be 
taken for good governance, 
economic revival, poverty 
alleviation and political 
restructuring;  
  
AND WHEREAS it is 
imperative to consolidate the 
measures taken by the Chief Executive of Pakistan for the 
reconstruction of the 
institution of state for 
establishing genuine and 
sustainable democracy to 
ensure good governance for 
an irreversible transfer of power to the people of 
Pakistan;  
  
AND WHEREAS it is 
essential to combat 
extremism and sectarianism 
for the security of the State 
and tranquillit y of society;  
  
AND WHEREAS it is in the 
supreme national interest to 
obtain a democratic mandate 
from the people of Pakistan 
through referendum for 
General Pervez Musharraf to 
continue to be the President 
of Pakistan.”    
(ix) The reform agenda 
launched by the Chief 
Executive, being in the 
interest, welfare and 
prosperity of the people of 
Pakistan, its achievement and 
continuity are essential for the 
public good.  
  
(x) The Referendum Order 
does not, in any manner, 
derogate from the parameters 
of the extra-constitutional 
measure validated by this 
Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's 
case nor is it tantamount to 
converting the parliamentary 
system envisaged by the 
Constitution into presidential form of government in view 
of the fact that elections to the 
National and Provincial 
Assemblies and the Senate of 
Pakistan would be held in 
October 2002 in accordance 
with the constitutional scheme 
and governments at the 
federal and provincial levels would be formed accordingly. 
The Referendum Order is 
intra vires  the powers given 
to the Chief Executive by 
means of the judgment of this 
Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's 
case; 
  
(xi) The Referendum Order 
has not the effect of amending 
the 1973 Constitution, 
therefore, its legality and vires 
cannot be examined on the 
touchstone of the verdict of 
this Court in Syed Zafar Ali 
Shah's case and the constitutional provisions 
relating to holding of referendum;  
  
(xii) Mr. Muhammad Rafiq 
Tarar cannot be deemed to be 
continuing to hold the office 
of the President of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan and the 
relief in the nature of issuance 
of writ of quo warranto  
prayed for in Constitution 
Petitions No. 15 and 22 of 
2002 and against the 
assumption of office of 
President by General Pervez 
Musharraf under Chief 
Executive’s Order No. 3 of 2001, cannot be granted in 
these proceedings for the 
following reasons: -  
  
The outgoing 
President 
continued in 
office under the 
PCO 1 of 1999 and was part of 
the present 
government for 
nearly less than 
two years;  
He had been 
performing the 
functions and duties of the 
office of 
President on and 
in accordance 
with the advice of 
the Chief 
Executive of 
Pakistan under 
the new dispensation and was a party to 
various 
legislative and 
executive actions 
of the present 
government;  
He did not launch 
any protest when he ceased to hold 
office;  
After he ceased 
to hold the office 
of President, he 
accepted the 
retirement 
benefits of that office and thus 
acquiesced in his 
ceasing to hold 
the office;  
The petition 
suffers from 
laches  inasmuch 
as the former President left the 
office on 20th 
June 2001 
whereas Qazi 
Hussain Ahmed 
filed Constitution 
Petition No. 
15/2002 in this 
Court on 2nd April 2002, i.e. 
after a lapse of 
about 10 months;  
The issuance of 
writ of quo 
warranto  is 
discretionary in 
nature and as held in Sabir Ali 
Shah ’s case  (PLD 
1994 SC 738), 
such a writ 
cannot be issued 
in collateral proceedings.
  
11. We have heard the learne d counsel for the parties 
at great length. In view of  the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of the present case, we are not 
persuaded to hold that a cas e for issuing the writ of quo 
warranto  prayed for in Constitution Petitions No. 15 
and 22 of 2002 has been made  out. We, therefore, hold 
that the Chief Executive’s Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 
have been validly issued by the Chief Executive of 
Pakistan in exercise of his powers under the 
Proclamation of Emergency of  the 14th day of October 
1999 and the Provisional Cons titution Order No. 1 of 
1999 as validated by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali 
Shah's case . Consequently, these petitions qua the 
issuance of writ of quo warranto are dismissed.  
12. As far as the legal status of the Referendum Order 
is concerned, suffice it to say that it has been issued by 
the Chief Executive and the President of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan in exercise of the powers 
conferred upon him by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali 
Shah's case  while validating the Proclamation of 
Emergency of the 14th da y of October 1999 and the 
Provisional Constitution Or der No. 1 of 1999 and it 
has rightly been conceded by the learned counsel for 
the respondents that the said Order does not have the 
effect of amending the Constitution of Pakistan.  
13. As regards the grounds of challenge to the 
consequences flowing from the holding of referendum 
under the Referendum Orde r, apparently these 
questions are purely acad emic, hypothetical and 
presumptive in nature and are not capable of being 
determined at this juncture . Accordingly, we would not 
like to go into these questi ons at this stage and leave 
the same to be determined at a proper forum at the 
appropriate time. Since no relief can be granted in 
these proceedings at this stage, the Constitution 
Petitions are disposed of being premature.  
14. In view of our findings in the above petitions, no 
order is required to be pass ed in Civil Petition for 
Leave to Appeal No. 512/2002 , which is disposed of 
accordingly.”  
  We now propose to give hereinafter de tailed reasons for the above order.
2. Through these Constitution Petitions  jurisdiction of this Court ha s been invoked under Article 184(3 )
of the Constitution in the post-O ctober 1999 scenario. The petitions ar e primarily directed against th e
Chief Executive’s Order No. 12 of 2002 (hereinafter called th e Referendum Order) under which th e
Chief Executive/President of Paki stan has decided to hold a refere ndum seeking people’s democrati c
mandate to serve the nation as President of Pakist an for a period of five years to enable him, inter alia, to
consolidate the reforms and the rec onstruction of institutions of Stat e for the establishment of genuin e
and sustainable democracy includi ng the entrenchment of the loca l government system, to ensur e
continued good governance for the welfare of the people and to comb at extremism and sectarianism fo r
the security of the State and the tr anquillity of society. The validity of the Chief Executive’s Order No. 2
of 2001 and the Chief Execut ive’s Order No. 3 of 2001 (hereinafter re ferred to as “the CE Order No. 2 o f
2001” and “the CE Order No. 3 of  2001” respectively) has also b een challenged in two petition s
collaterally.  
3. Before proceeding further, we ar e constrained to mention that in the year 2002, i.e. after 54 years o f
the creation of our country, we are again at the crossroads. In fact , we must observe that we hav e
miserably failed to evolve a system  of governance, transfer of power an d to follow the constitutional pat h
for achieving the welfare of the pe ople and establishment of democratic  institutions as envisaged by th e
Constitution. This is not a crisis but a dilemma, th erefore, while deciding th ese petitions we have t o
recall the series of crises and turmoils which th is Court had to deal wi th on all those occasions
Unfortunately, ever since the di ssolution of the Constituent Asse mbly by Governor General Ghula m
Muhammad in 1954 till the takeover of the government by General Pe rvez Musharraf in October, 1999
all political questions which should have been dealt with and resolved elsewhere, have been brought t o
this Court. However, this Court ca nnot shirk its responsibility as an institution and being the apex Cour t
we proceed further to adjudicate the controversy arising in these petitions.  
4. From 1947 till 1954 the Constituent Assembly, wh ich was also the legislature of the country, failed t o
give a Constitution to the nation. Nothing was done  beyond the passing of the Objectives Resolution b y
the said Constituent Assembly. Fail ure to give a Constitution to the nation coupled with  palace intrigue s
and the musical chair game for power and with a view to having absolute  powers Governor Genera l
Ghulam Muhammad dissolved the Constituent Assembly. This act  of the Governor General wa s
challenged by Moulvi Tami zuddin Khan, President of the Assemb ly, in the Chief Court of Sindh. Th e
Sindh Chief Court allowed the petiti on and declared the dissolution of  the Assembly as illegal. Th e
judgment of the Sindh Chief Court was successfully ch allenged in the Federal Court and by virtue of th e
judgment reported as Federation of Pakistan  v. Moulvi Tamizudding Khan  (PLD 1955 FC 240), th e
Federal Court reversed the judgment of the Sindh Ch ief Court and held that assent of the Governo r
General was necessary to all the la ws and the amendments made in the Government of India Act, 1935
which was the interim Constitution. According to th e Court, section 223-A c onferring power on the Hig h
Courts to issue writs had not received assent of th e Governor General and the Chief Court could not hav e
issued writ holding the ac t of the Governor Genera l as invalid. Therefore, by means of the Emergenc y
Powers Ordinance, 1955 (Ordinance N o. IX of 1955) issued under secti on 42 of the Government of Indi a
Act, 1935 the Governor-Gener al sought to validate su ch Acts by indicating his assent with retrospectiv e
operation. The Federal Court in Usif Patel's ’ case (PLD 1955 FC 387), however, declared that the Act s
mentioned in the Schedule to th e aforesaid Ordinance could not be  validated under section 42 of th e
Government of India Act,  1935, nor could retrospec tive effect be given to them. A noteworthy fact wa s
that the Constituent Assembly had ceased to func tion, having been already dissolved by the Governor -
General by a Proclamation on 24th October, 1954 and no Legislature competent to validate these Act s
was in existence. The Governor-Gen eral made a Reference to the Fe deral Court under section 213 of th e
Government of India Act, 1935 asking for the C ourt’s opinion on the questi on whether there was an y
provision in the Constituti on or any rule of law applicable to  the situation by which the Governo r-General could, by order or otherwise, declare that all orders ma de, decisions taken, and other acts done
under those laws, should be valid and enforceable and those laws, which could not without danger to the
State be removed from the existing le gal system, should be treated as part  of the law of the land until the
question of their va lidation was determined by the new Const ituent Convention. The answer returned by
the Federal Court (by majority) to the Reference by H. E. The Governor General  (PLD 1955 FC 435) 
was that in the situation presented by the Referenc e, the Governor-General has, during the interim 
period, the power under the common law of civil or state necessity of retrospectively validating the laws
listed in the Schedule to the Emergency Powers Or dinance, 1955, and all those laws, until the question
of their validation was decided upon by the Constituent Assembly, we re, during the aforesaid period,
valid and enforceable in the same way as if they ha d been valid from the date on which they purported to
come into force.  
5. The Constituent Assembly, recons tituted as per the guidelines give n by the Federal C ourt, with great
efforts and pains, frame d the 1956 Constitution wherein Pakistan  was declared an Islamic Republic.
Unfortunately, the political stability could not be  achieved and frequent ch anges of the government,
apathy on the part of the legislators to the problems of the country, killing of the Deputy Speaker of the
East Pakistan Assembly, b eating up of the Speaker and desecration of national flag in Dacca led to the
abrogation of the 1956 Cons titution and imposition of fi rst Martial Law in the country in October, 1958.
The central and provincial governme nts were dismissed, the national and provincial assemblies were
dissolved, the political parties were abolished and General Muha mmad Ayub Khan, the Commander-in-
Chief of the Army, was appointed as the Chief Martial Law Administr ator, who later became the Field
Marshal. It was declared that a C onstitution more suitable to the ge nius of the Muslim people would be
devised.  
6. On 10th October, 1958, the Presid ent promulgated the Laws (Con tinuance in Force) Order, 1958
wherein it was, inter alia, provide d that notwithstanding the abroga tion of the Constitution, Pakistan
shall be governed, as near ly as may be, in accordance with the 1956 Constitution, all Courts in existence
immediately before the Proclamati on shall continue in being, the la w declared by the Supreme Court
shall be binding on all Courts in Pakistan, the Supr eme Court and the High Cour ts shall have power to
issue the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition , quo warranto  and certiorari , etc.  
7. Under Clause (7) of Ar ticle 2 of the Laws (Continuance in  Force) Order, 1958, all writ petitions
pending in the High Courts seeking enforcement of  Fundamental Rights stood abated. Interpretation o f
clause (7) of Article 2 was deba ted in the Supreme Co urt and in the famous case reported as State v. 
Dosso (PLD 1958 SC 533), th e Supreme Court held that if th e Constitution was destroyed by a 
successful revolution, the validity of the prevalent laws depended upon the will of the new law-creating 
organ. Therefore, if the new legal or der preserved any one or more laws  of the old legal order, then a
writ would lie for violat ion of the same. As regards pending appl ications for writs or writs already
issued but which were either sub judice  before the Supreme C ourt or required enforcement, the Court in 
the light of the Laws (Continuance in Force) Orde r, 1958 held that exceptin g the writs issued by the
Supreme Court after the Proclamation and before the Promulgation of th e Order, no writ or order for a
writ issued or made afte r the Proclamation shall have  any legal effect unless the writ wa s issued on the
ground that any one or more of the laws mentioned in Article 4 or a ny other right kept alive by the new
order had been contravened. To sum up, the Supreme Court, on the basis of the theory propounded by
Hans Kelsen, accorded legitimacy to the assu mption of power by General Muhammad Ayub Khan
holding that coup d’etat was a legitimate means to bring about change in the government an d
particularly so when the new order brought a bout by the change was accepted by the people.  
8. In 1959 the Basic Democracies Order was pr omulgated and 40,000 basic democrats from each
province, i.e. the West Pakistan and the East Pakist an were elected, who formed the electoral college fo r
election to the office of the President. Genera l Muhammad Ayub Khan sought referendum and morethan 94-95 percent of the basic de mocrats voted in his favour and t hus he assumed the office of the
President of Pakistan. The basic democrats were then  entrusted with the task of electing national and
provincial assemblies ultimately leading to the framing and promulgation of the 1962 Constitution.  
9. War between India and Pakistan  in 1965, the Tashkent Declarati on of 1966, dissatisfaction over the
tremendous Presidential powers as against the help lessness of the National Assembly and a clamour fo r
restoration of the Parliamentary system in which th e Government was controlled by the Legislature and
answerable to it, gave rise to ag itations by the political leaders in both wings of the country. Resultantly,
Field Marshal Ayub Khan had to descend from power. However, instead of transferring power to the
Speaker of the National Assembly in accordance with the 1962 Constitution, he called upon General
Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan to ta ke control of the affairs of th e country, who proclaimed Martial
Law, abrogated the  
  1962 Constitution and promulgated Provi sional Constitution Order, 1969 on 25th March, 1969. Thi s
was followed by the Legal Fr amework Order, 1970 under which general election was held in bot h
the wings of the country on the basis of adult franchise.  
10. As a result of the general election, Awami League led by Sh. Mujeebur Rehman swept polls i n
the East Pakistan while in two provinces, name ly, Sindh and Punjab, Paki stan Peoples Party wo n
majority of the seats but in the other two pr ovinces, namely, NWFP and Balochistan, Peoples Part y
could not secure majority seats.  Though it is not the subj ect of this judgment,  yet to complete th e
narration of the events, the transf er of power to the elected repr esentatives did not  take place an d
session of the Assembly summoned for 3rd of March, 1971 at Dacca was adjourned, which led t o
violent agitation in the East Pakistan. With a vi ew to controlling the situation, the Armed Force s
were deployed in the East Paki stan. The Government of India, taking advantage of the fragil e
situation in the East Pakistan, invaded Pakistan, which led to th e fall of Dacca on 16th Decembe r
1971 and consequently the East Pakistan became Bangladesh.  
11. It may be mentioned here that the imposition of Martia l Law by General Yahya Khan an d
assumption of the office of Chief Martial Law Administrator by hi m was challenged in Asma
Jillani ’s case  (PLD 1972 SC 139) wherein this Court held that the doctrine of legal positivis m
founded on Hans Kelsen’s theory and recognized in Dosso ’s case was inapplicable, General Yahy a
Khan was termed as a usurper a nd all actions taken by him except t hose in the welfare of the peopl e
were declared to be illegal.  
12. In December 1971, Yahya Khan resigned and hande d over the Government to Mr. Z. A. Bhutto
Chairman, Pakistan Peoples Part y, who had won majority seats in  two provinces. He assumed powe r
as the first civilian Chief Martial Law Administra tor, which was necessitated for transfer of powe r
from the military commander. On 14th April, 1972, Interim Constitution was passed by the Nationa l
Assembly and Martial Law was lifted. The Nationa l Assembly after painstaking efforts framed th e
1973 Constitution, which was prom ulgated on 14th August, 1973.  
13. In 1976 Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  announced general election in the country and after the poll s
were held in 1977 an agitation started alleging that the election had been rigged. There were large -
scale demonstrations, law and or der became worse and there wa s arson, loot a nd plunder. Th e
parleys between the ruling party a nd the opposition failed although it  was said that an understandin g
had been reached. At that junctu re, Article 96-A was inserted in the Constitution to provide for a
referendum for a vote of confidence in the Prime Minister. It may be adva ntageous to reproduce th e
said provision, which read as follows:-  
“96-A. Referendum as to confidence in Prime 
Minister .- (1) If at any time  the Prime Minister 
considers it necessary to obtain a vote of 
confidence of the people of Pakistan through a 
referendum, he may advise the President to cause 
the matter to be referred to a referendum in 
accordance with law made by Parliament.  
  
(2) The law referred to in  clause (1) shall provide 
for the constitution of a Referendum Commission 
and the manner and mode of holdin g a referendum.  
  
(3) On receipt of the advi ce of the Prime Minister 
under clause (1), the President shall call upon the 
Referendum Commission to conduct a referendum 
amongst the persons whose names appear on the 
electoral rolls for th e immediately preceding 
general election to the National Assembly as 
revised up-to-date  
  
(4) Any dispute arising in connection with the 
counting of votes at a re ferendum shall be finally 
determined by the Re ferendum Commission or a 
member thereof authoris ed by it and, save as 
aforesaid, no dispute aris ing in connection with a 
referendum or the result th ereof shall be raised or 
permitted to be raised be fore any Court or other 
authority whatsoever.  
  
(5) If, on the final count of  the votes cast at the 
referendum, the Prime Mini ster fails to secure 
majority of the total votes cast in the matter of the 
confidence of the people of  Pakistan, he shall be 
deemed to have tendere d his resignation within 
the meaning of Article 94.”  
  
  
However, no referendum could take  place because of  the volatile situation in the country and this
provision being time-specific ceased to be pa rt of the Constitution in September, 1977.  
14. Nevertheless, in the absence of agreement between the government and the opposition parties,
General Ziaul Haq, the then Chie f of Army Staff, on 5th July 1977 imposed Martial Law and hel d
the 1973 Constitution in abeyance.  
15. The imposition of the third Martial Law was challenged in Nusrat Bhutto ’s case  (PLD 1977 SC
657) wherein, keeping in view the ground realities and the objective conditions , this Court declare d
the imposition of Martia l Law as valid on the doctrine of State necessity , but this Court observe d
that the power of judicial review  was available to it to examine th e legality or otherwise of the
actions of the government and part icularly the Court would also s ee whether the necessity continue d
to exist or not. Notwithstanding the judgment of this Court in Begum Nusrat Bhutto's case ,Provisional Constitution Order, 1981 was promulga ted ousting the power and jurisdiction of the
Superior Courts to judicially review  actions of the Martial Law regime.  
16. The country continued to remain under Ma rtial Law and in 1984 in pursuance of the
Referendum Order, 1984 (P.O. 11 of 1984), General Muhammad Ziau l Haq held referendum where
the question posed was, ‘Whether the people of Pakistan endorse the process initiated by General
Muhammad Ziaul Haq, the President of Pakistan, for bringing the la ws of Pakistan in conformity
with the injunctions of Islam as  laid down in the Holy Qur’an  and Sunnah of the Holy Prophe t
(Peace be upon him) and fo r the preservation of the Ideology of  Pakistan, for the continuation an d
consolidation of that process and for the smoot h and orderly transfer of power to the electe d
representatives of the people’, a nd in case of answer “Yes”, Gene ral Muhammad Ziaul Haq shall be
deemed to have been duly elected Pr esident of Pakistan for a term of  five years from the day of the
first meeting of the Houses of  Parliament in joint sitting.  
17. In 1985 elections to the Nationa l Assembly, Provincial Assemblies and Senate were held and the
late Mr. Muhammad Khan Junejo  was invited by the President to  assume the office of Prime
Minister. The Constitution (E ighth Amendment) Act, 1985 was passed whereby the 1973
Constitution was revived and the Martial Law wa s lifted. Clause (3) of Article 41 of the
Constitution was substituted where by Provincial Assemblies became pa rt of the electoral college fo r
election to the office of the President. Unde r Article 58(2)(b) the Pr esident was empowered to
dissolve the National Assembly in  his discretion where, in his opinion, a situation had arisen i n
which the Government of the Fe deration cannot be carr ied on in accordance with the provisions o f
the Constitution and an appeal to the electorate was nece ssary. It may also be advantageous to refe r
to Article 270A of the Constitution, which was insert ed into the Constitution by means of P.O. 14 o f
1985 to facilitate transition of power  from military to the civilian authorities. Article 270A reads as
under: -  
“[[270A. - (1) The Proclamation of the fifth day of 
July, 1977, all President’ s Orders, Ordinances, 
Martial Law Regulations , Martial Law Orders, 
including the Referendum Order, 1984 (P.O. 
No.11 of 1984), under whic h, in consequence of 
the result of the referendum held on the nineteenth 
day of December, 1984, General Mohammad Zia-
ul-Haq became the Presid ent of Pakistan on the 
day of the first meeti ng of the Majlis-e-Shoora 
(Parliament) in joint sitti ng for the term specified 
in clause (7) of Articl e 41, the Revisal of the 
Constitution of 1973 Or der, 1985 (P.O.No.14 of 
1985), the Constitution (Second Amendment) 
Order, 1985 (P.O. No.20 of 1985), the 
Constitution (Third Amendment) Order, 1985 
(P.O. No.24 of 1985), and all other laws made 
between the fifth day of July, 1977, and the date 
on which this Article comes into force are hereby affirmed, adopted and declared, notwithstanding 
any judgment of any court, to have been validly 
made by competent authority and, 
notwithstanding any thing contained in the 
Constitution, shall not be called in question in any 
court on any ground whatsoever:  Provided that a Presiden t’s Order, Martial Law 
Regulations or Martial La w Order made after the 
thirtieth day of September, 1985, shall be 
confined only to maki ng such provisions as 
facilitate, or are incident al to, the revocation of 
the Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977.  
  
(2) All orders made, pr oceedings taken and acts 
done by authority or by any person, which were made, taken or done, or purported to have been 
made, taken or done, be tween the fifth day of 
1977, and the date on which this Article comes 
into force, in exercise of the powers derived from 
any Proclamation, Presiden t’s Orders, Ordinances, 
Martial Law Regulations , Martial Law Orders, 
enactments, notifications, rules, orders or bye-
laws, or in execution of or  in compliance with any 
order made or sentence passed by any authority in the exercise or purported exercise of powers as 
aforesaid, shall, notwith standing any judgment of 
any court, be deemed to be and always  to have 
been validly made, taken or done and shall not be 
called in question in  any court on any ground 
whatsoever.  
  
(3) All President’s Orders, Ordinances, Martial 
Law Regulations, Martial Law Orders, 
enactments, notifications, rules, orders or bye-
laws in force immediat ely before the date on 
which this Article comes into force shall continue 
to force until altered, repealed or amended by 
competent authority.  
  
Explanation .- In this clause, “competent 
authority” means,-  
  
(a) in respect 
of 
President’s 
Orders, 
Ordinances, 
Martial Law Regulations, 
Martial Law 
Orders and 
enactments, the 
appropriate 
Legislature; 
and 
  
(b) in 
respect of 
notifications, 
rules, orders and bye-
laws, the 
authority in 
which the 
power to 
make, alter, 
repeal or 
amend the 
same vests under the 
law. 
  
(4) No suit, prosecution or  other legal proceedings 
shall lie in any court agai nst any authority or any 
person, for or on account of  or in respect of any 
order made, proceedings  taken or act done 
whether in the exercise or purported exercise of 
the powers referred to in clause (2) or in execution 
of or in compliance with orders made or sentences 
passed in exercise or pur ported exercise of such 
powers.  
  
(5) For the purposes of clauses (1), (2) and (4), all 
orders made, proceedings taken, or purporting to 
be made, taken or done by any authority or person 
shall be deemed to have been made, taken or done 
in good faith and for th e purpose intended to be 
served thereby.  
  (6) Such of the President’ s Orders and Ordinances 
referred to in clause (1 ) as are specified in the 
Seventh Schedule may be amended in the manner 
provided for amendment of  the Constitution, and 
all other laws referred to in the said clause may be 
amended by the appropriate Legislature in the 
manner provided for amendment of such laws.  
  
Explanation .- In this Article “President’s Orders” 
includes “President an d Chief Martial Law 
Administrator’s Orders and “Chief Martial Law 
Administrator’s Orders.”]  
  
18. Ms Benazir Bhutto filed a pe tition under Article 184(3) of th e Constitution in this Cour t
challenging the vires  of the amendments made in the Poli tical parties Act, 1962 as violative o f
Articles 17 and 25 of the Constitution, the vires of the Freedom of Associ ation Order, 1978 and the
constitutionality of Ar ticle 270A in so far as it curtailed the power to judicially review its content o r
restricted the jurisdiction of th e Superior Courts to protect F undamental Rights of the citizens
including the right to form or be  a member of a politic al party under the Constitution as it existe d
before the 5th of July, 1977. The Suprem e Court in the judgment reported as Benazir Bhutto v.
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416) held that the C onstitution of Pakistan envisages
parliamentary democracy with a ca binet system based on party system as essentially it is compose d
of the representatives of a party, which is in majority and therefore the future election would be hel d
on party basis.  
19. On 29th May 1988, General M uhammad Ziaul Haq dissolved the National Assembly an d
dismissed the government of Mr . Muhammad Khan Junejo unde r Article 58(2)(b) of the
Constitution. The dissolution of the National A ssembly was challenged in the Lahore High Cour t
under its constituti onal jurisdiction and through the judgment reported as Kh. Muhammad Sharif v.
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 Lahore 725), the dissoluti on of the Assembly was declare d
illegal and the matter then came to this Court in app eal. On 17th August 1988, General Muhamma d
Ziaul Haq died in an air crash and Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the then Chairman of the Senate assume d
the office of the President of Pakista n. This Court vide judgment reported as Federation of Pakistan
v. Haji Saifullah Khan  (PLD 1989 SC 166), which was deli vered on 5th October, 1988, upheld the
judgment of the Lahore High Court but declined to grant the relief of  restoration of the Assembly o n
the ground that the whole nation had been geared up for elect ion scheduled for 16th and 19th
November, 1988.  
20. As a result of the 1988 election, Pakistan Peoples  Party led by Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto forme d
government at the centre while Islami Jamhuri Itte had (IJI) with Pakistan Muslim League being its
major component, led by Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif formed government in the Province o f
Punjab. Since the two leaders di d not see eye to eye with eac h other, a state of constan t
confrontation existed. The two of th em were not even ready to meet  each other, what to talk o f
negotiating or settling issues  and having consensus on questions of national importance.  
21. On 6th August, 1990, Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the then President of Pakistan, levelled variouscharges including corruption and ma l-administration, violations of the Constitution, etc., dissolve d
the National Assembly, dismissed the government of Mohtarma Be nazir Bhutto under Article 58(2 )
(b) of the Constitution and ordere d fresh election. The order of di ssolution was challenged before al l
the four High Courts. However, the cases from Balochistan and Sindh were consolidated and hear d
by the High Court of Si ndh. Likewise, the cases from NWFP and Lahore were consolidated an d
heard by the Lahore High Court. Bo th the High Courts in their se parate judgments , distinguishe d
Haji Saifullah Khan ’s case  and upheld the order of dissolution of assemblies and observed that th e
President was justified in form ing the opinion that the government  of the Federation was not bein g
carried on in accordance with the Constitution. The matter came to this Court in  appeal in the cas e
reported as Kh. Ahmed Tariq Rahim  v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1992 SC 646) but the Cour t
refused to grant leave to appeal  against the judgments of the High Courts and consequently th e
dissolution order was maintained.  
22. The general election held in 1990 returned Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif to power wit h
Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto sitti ng on the opposition benches. The two of them continued indulgin g
in confrontation. Differences ar ose between Mian Muhammad Nawa z Sharif and Mr. Ghulam Isha q
Khan, the then President of Paki stan. On 18th April, 1993 the then  President dissolved the Nationa l
Assembly and dismissed the government of Mi an Muhammad Nawaz Sharif under Article 58(2)(b )
of the Constitution. The matt er came before this Cour t in the case reported as Mian Muhamma d
Nawaz Sharif  v. President of Pakistan (PLD 1993 SC 473) and by majori ty of 10 to 1, this Cour t
held that the order of dissolution did not fall  within the ambit of the powers conferred on th e
President under Article 58(2)(b) of  the Constitution and other enab ling powers availa ble to him i n
that behalf and in consequenc e the National Assembly, Prime Minister and the Cabinet wer e
restored. However, in the peculiar situation th en obtaining, Mian Muhamm ad Nawaz Sharif advise d
the then President to dissolve the assemblies on 18th July, 1993.  
23. In the election held in Octobe r 1993, Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto wi th the help of allied partie s
again came to power and Mr. Fa rooq Ahmed Khan Leghari was elec ted as President of Pakista n
while Mian Muhammad Nawaz Shar if formed the opposition. The degree of tension between the tw o
old rivals rather increased. On 5th Nove mber, 1996, President Far ooq Ahmed Khan Leghar i
dissolved the National Assembly and dismissed the government of Mohtar ama Benazir Bhutto unde r
Article 58(2)(b) of the Constituti on. This dissolution was also challe nged in this Court in the cas e
reported as Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto  v. President of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 388), but it was hel d
that the action of the Presiden t was legal and constitutional.  
24. In the election held in February 1997, Mian M uhammad Nawaz Sharif returned to power with a
thumping majority in the Assembli es with Mohtarama Benazir Bhut to as the opposition leader. Mia n
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif continued his policies of confrontation not only with the opposition bu t
also with other institutio ns of the State including judiciary and the armed forces. The former Chief o f
Army Staff, General Je hangir Karamat suggested the formati on of National Security Council, whic h
was not taken in good taste by the Pr ime Minister and resultantly th e then Chief of  Army Staff ha d
to quit. With the Constitution (Thirteenth Ame ndment) Act, 1997, Article 58(2)(b) was repealed an d
the power to appoint Services Chiefs vested with the Prime Minister and thus Mian Muhamma d
Nawaz Sharif, after the resignation of General Jehangir Karamat, appointed General Perve z
Musharraf as the Chief of Army Staff.  
25. Differences between the Prime Minister and the Chief of Army  Staff General Pervez Musharra f
arose on the Kargil issue. At one poi nt of time, it seemed that the tension has come to an end whe n
General Pervez Musharraf was appoint ed as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. However, a
few days later, the Prime Minist er issued order of removal of General Pervez Musharraf when th e
latter was returning from an offi cial tour to Sri Lanka  and appointed Lt. Gene ral Ziauddin Butt as th eChief of Army Staff. This act of the Prime Minister was resent ed by the Pakistan Army and was
construed as interference in the Ar my affairs and an attempt to polit icize and destabilize it. The then
Prime Minister had direct ed that the plane carrying General Pervez Musharraf to Pakistan be no t
allowed to land at the Karachi Airport, but due to  the prompt action of th e Pakistan Army, the Prime
Minister could not achieve his obj ective. Consequently, the Pakistan Army took exception to the
action of the Prime Minister a nd Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif was removed and General Pervez
Musharraf, Chief of Army Staff took c ontrol of the affairs of the country.  26. After takeover of the government by General Pervez Musharraf, on 14th October 1999, a 
Proclamation of Emergency was issued in pursuan ce of the deliberations and decisions of the
Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces and the Corps Commanders  of the Pakistan Army. The
Proclamation of Emergency of th e 14th day of October, 1999 (herei nafter referred to as “the 
Proclamation of Emergenc y”) reads as under: -  
  
THE PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY  
  
“In pursuance of delibe rations and decisions 
of Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces and 
Corps Commanders of Pakistan Army, I, 
General Pervez Musharraf, Chairman, Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Committee and Chief of Army Staff proclaim Emergency throughout 
Pakistan and assume the office of the Chief 
Executive of the Is lamic Republic of 
Pakistan.  
  
“I hereby order and proclaim as follows:  
  
The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan shall remain in abeyance;  
  
The President of Pakistan shall continue in 
office;  
  
The National Assemb ly, the Provincial 
Assemblies and Senate shall stand 
suspended;  
  
The Chairman and Deput y Chairman  of the 
Senate the Speaker a nd Deputy Speaker of 
the National Assembly and the Provincial 
Assemblies shall stand suspended;  
The Prime Minister, the Federal Ministers, 
Ministers of State, Advisors to the Prime 
Minister, Parliamentar y Secretaries, the 
Provincial Governors, the Provincial Chief 
Ministers, the Provinc ial Ministers and the 
Advisors to the Chief Ministers shall cease 
to hold office;  
  
The whole of Pakistan  will come under the 
control of the Armed Forces of Pakistan.  
  
This Proclamation shall come into force at 
once and be deemed to have taken effect on 
and 12th day of October, 1999.”  
  
On the same day, i.e. 14th of  October 1999, the Provisional C onstitution Order No. 1 of 1999
(hereinafter referred to  as “the PCO No. 1 of  1999”) was issued, whic h reads as follows: -  
  
THE PCO NO. 1 OF 1999  
  
“In pursuance of Procla mation of the 14th 
day of October, 1999, and in exercise of all 
powers enabling him in that behalf, the Chairman Joint Chiefs  of Staff Committee 
and Chief of Army Staff and Chief 
Executive of the Is lamic Republic of 
Pakistan under the Proclamation of 
Emergency of 14th October 1999 
(hereinafter referred to as the Chief 
Executive) is pleas ed to make and 
promulgate the following Order-  
  
(1) This Order may be  called Provisional 
Constitution Order No. 1 of 1999.  (2) It extends to the whole of Pakistan.
(3) It shall come into force at once.  
  
(1) Notwithstanding the abeyance of the 
provisions of the Consti tution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, he reinafter referred to 
as the Constitution, Pakistan shall, subject 
to this Order and any other Orders made by 
the Chief Executive, be  governed, as nearly 
as may be, in accordance with the Constitution.  
  
(2) Subject as afores aid, all courts in 
existence immediately before the 
Commencement of this Order shall continue 
to function and to exer cise their respective 
powers and jurisdiction:  
  
Provided that the S upreme Court or High 
Courts and any other court shall not have 
the powers to make a ny order against the 
Chief Executive or any person exercising 
powers or jurisdiction under his authority.  
  
(3) The Fundamental rights conferred by 
Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution, not 
in conflict with the Proclamation of 
Emergency or any Order made thereunder from time to time shal l continue to be in 
force.  
  
3. (1) The President shall act on, and in 
accordance, with the advice of the Chief 
Executive.  
  
(2) The Governor of a Province shall act on, and in accordance with the instructions of 
the Chief Executive.  
  
4. (1) No Court, tribunal or other authority 
shall call or permit to be called in question 
the Proclamation of Emergency of 14th day 
of October, 1999 or any Order made in 
pursuance thereof.  
  
(2) No judgement, decr ee, writ, order or 
process whatsoever shall be made or issued 
by any court or tribunal against the Chief 
Executive or any aut hority designated by 
the Chief Executive.  
  
5. (1) Notwithstanding the abeyance of the 
provisions of the Constitution, but subject 
to the Orders of th e Chief Executive all 
laws other than the Constitution, all 
Ordinances, Orders, Rules, Bye laws, 
Regulations, Notificati ons and other legal 
instruments in force in any part of Pakistan 
whether made by the President or the 
Governor of a Province,  shall be inserted 
and shall be deemed to have always been so 
inserted, shall conti nue in force until 
altered, amended or repealed by the Chief 
Executive or any aut hority designated by 
him. 
(2) In all laws including all Acts, 
Ordinances, Orders, Rules, Bye-laws, 
Regulations, Notifica tions and all other 
legal instruments in fo rce in any part of 
Pakistan, whether made by the President or 
the Governor of a Province, the words, 
“Prime Minister”, and the words, “Chief 
Minister”, wherever occurring, shall be 
deemed substituted by the words, “Chief 
Executive of the Is lamic Republic of 
Pakistan”, and “Gove rnor” respectively.  
  5A. (1) An Ordinan ce promulgated by the 
President or by the Governor of a Province 
shall not be subject to the limitation as to its 
duration prescribed in the Constitution.  
  
(2) The provisions of Clause (1) shall also 
apply to an Ordinance issued by the 
President or by the Governor, which was in 
force immediately before the commencement of the proclamation Order 
of Chief Executive of the Fourteenth day of 
October 1999.  
  
Subject to the Procla mation Order of the 
Chief Executive of th e Fourteenth day of 
October, 1999 and the provisions of the 
Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 
1999 as amended, the President of the Islamic Republic of Pa kistan on the advice 
of the Chief Executive,  and the Governor of 
the Province on instructions of the Chief 
Executive, may issue and promulgate 
Ordinances which shall not be subject to the 
limitation as to their duration prescribed in 
the Constitution.  
  
6. The Proclamation of Emergency issued 
on 28th day of May 1998, shall continue but 
subject to the provisions  of Proclamation of 
Emergency dated 14th day of October 1999 
and this Provisional Constitution Order and 
any other Order made thereunder.  
  
7. All persons who, imme diately before the 
commencement of this Order, were in the 
service of Pakistan as  defined in Article 260 
of the Constitution and those persons who 
immediately before such commencement 
were in office as Judge of the Supreme 
Court, the Federal Shariat Court or a High 
Court or Auditor-Ge neral or Ombudsman 
and Chief Ehtesab Commissioner, shall continue in the said service on the same 
terms and conditions and shall enjoy the 
same privileges, if any.”  
  
The takeover by the Army was challenged in this  Court through several Constitution Petitions
and the same were disposed of with ce rtain guidelines through a unanimous judgmen t
authored by Irshad Hasan Khan, C.J. (as he then was) in Syed Zafar Ali Shah and others v.
General Pervez Musharraf, Chie f Executive of Pakistan and others (PLD 2000 SC 869). 
However, before dealing with the said judgment,  it is pertinent to mention that the forme r
President Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Tarar conti nued in office under the Proclamation o f
Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of  1999. On 20th June, 2001 the Chief Executive issued the
CE Order No. 2 of 2001 in purs uance of the Proclamation of Emergency (Amendment) Order,
2001. It came into force at once. It substituted clause (b) of para 2 of the Proclamation o f
Emergency. Clause (b) reads as follows: -  
“(b) The person holding the office of the 
President of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan immediately before the 
commencement of the Proclamation of Emergency (Amendm ent) Order, 2001, 
shall cease to hold the office with 
immediate effect.”  
  
Under the same Order, in  clause (c) of para 2 ibid, the word ‘suspended’ was substituted with
the words ‘dissolved with immediat e effect’. Clause (d) of para 2 ibid. was substituted as 
under: -  
“(d) The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of 
the Senate have already ceased to hold 
office; the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of 
the National Assembly and the Provincial 
Assemblies shall also cease to hold office 
with immediate effect.”  
  
On the same day, i.e. the 20th of June, 2001, the Chie f Executive issued the CE Order No. 3
of 2001. The Preamble to the sa id Order reads as under: -  
“Whereas it is expe dient to provide for 
succession to the office of the President of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and for 
matters connected therewith or ancillary 
thereto; Now, therefore, in pursuance of the 
Proclamation of Emergency of the 
fourteenth day of October 1999 and the Provisional Constitution Order 1 of 1999 
and in exercise of all powers enabling him 
in that behalf, the Ch ief Executive of the 
Islamic Republic of Pa kistan is pleased to 
make and promulgate the following Order.”  
  
The CE Order No. 3 of 2001 provi ded that it shall have effect notwithstanding anything
contained in the Constitution or  any other law. Under para 3( 1), it was provided that upon the
office of the President becoming vacant for any reason whatsoever , the Chief Executive of the
Islamic Republic of Pa kistan shall be the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan an d
shall perform all func tions assigned to the President by or under the Constitution or by o r
under any law. It was further pr ovided that the Chief Executive shall hold office as Presiden t
until his successor enters upon his office.  
27. Reverting to Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case we would like to repr oduce the Short Order date d
12th May, 2000 by which the Constitution Petitions chal lenging the taking over of the
government by General Pervez Mu sharraf, the Proclamation of  Emergency and the PCO No.
1 of 1999, as amended, were dispos ed of after hearing the lear ned counsel for the parties an d
the learned amicus curiae . It reads as follows: -  
  
“SHORT ORDER  
For detailed reasons to be recorded later, we 
intend to dispose of the above petitions 
under Article 184(3) of  the Constitution, 
directed against the Ar my take over of 12th 
October, 1999, the Proclamation of 
Emergency dated 14th  October, 1999, the 
Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 
1999 and the Oath Of Office (Judges) Order 
No. 1 of 2000, in the following terms: - 
  
INDEPENDENCE OF JUDICIARY  
  
Stability in the system, success of the 
Government, democr acy, good governance, 
economic stability, prosperity of the people, 
tranquillity, peace a nd maintenance of law 
and order depend to a considerable degree 
on the interpretation of Constitution and legislative instruments by the Superior Courts. It is, ther efore, of utmost 
importance that the Judiciary  is 
independent and no restraints are placed on 
its performance and ope ration. It claims and 
has always claimed that  it has the right to 
interpret the Constitution or any legislative 
instrument and to say as to what a particular 
provision of the Constitu tion or a legislative 
instrument means or doe s not mean, even if 
that particular provision is a provision 
seeking to oust the jurisdiction of this Court. Under the mandate of the 
Constitution, the Courts exercise their 
jurisdiction as conferred upon them by the 
Constitution or the law.  Therefore, so long 
as the Superior Courts exist, they shall 
continue to exercise powers and functions 
within the domain of their jurisdiction and 
shall also continue to exercise power of 
judicial review in re spect of any law or 
provision of law, which comes for 
examination before the superior Courts to 
ensure that all persons are able to live 
securely under the rule of law; to promote, 
within the proper li mits of judicial 
functions, the observance and the 
attainment of human and Fundamental Rights; and to administ er justice impartially 
among persons and between the persons and 
the State, which is a sine qua non  for the 
maintenance of independence of Judiciary  
and encouragement of public confidence in 
the judicial system.  
  
TAKING OF OATH UNDER PCO NO. 
1 OF 1999  
  
Fresh oath under Oath of Office (Judges) 
Order No. 1 of 2000, doe s not in any way 
preclude the Judges of this Court from 
examining the questions raised in the above 
petitions, which have to be decided in 
accordance with their conscience and law so 
as to resolve the grave crises and avoid 
disaster by preventing imposition of Martial 
Law for which the Constitution does not provide any remedy.
New oath of office was taken by the Judges 
of this Court under PCO No. 1 of 1999 read 
with Oath of Office (J udges) Order No. 1 of 
2000 with a view to re iterating the well 
established principle th at the first and the 
foremost duty of the J udges of the Superior 
Courts is to save the judicial organ of the 
State. This was exac tly what was done. By 
virtue of PCO No. 1 of 1999, the 
Constitution has not lost its effect in its 
entirety although its observance as a whole 
has been interrupted for a transitional 
period. The activity launched by the Armed 
Forces through an extra constitutional 
measure, involves the vi olation of “some of 
the rights” protected by the Constitution, which still holds the fi eld but some of its 
provisions have been held in abeyance. A 
duty is cast upon the S uperior Judiciary to 
offer some recompense for those rights 
which were purportedly violated in view of 
the promulgation of PCO No. 1 of 1999. 
This could be achieved only by taking the 
Oath and not by declining to do so and 
thereby becoming a part y to the closure of 
the Courts, which would not have solved 
any problem whatsoev er but w ould have 
resulted in chaos, anarchy and disruption of 
peaceful life. I ndependence of Judiciary  
does not mean that Judges should quit their 
jobs and become instrumental in the closure 
of the Courts. Indeed, the latter course 
would have been the most detestable thing 
to happen. Independence of Judiciary  
means that the contentious matters, of 
whatever magnitude th ey may be, should be 
decided/resolved by the Judges of the 
Superior Courts according to their 
conscience. This Cour t, while performing 
its role as “the bene ficial expression of a 
laudable political r ealism”, had three 
options open to it in re lation to the situation 
arising out of the mi litary take-over on 
Twelfth day of October, 1999: firstly , it 
could tender resignation en bloc, which 
most certainly coul d be equated with 
sanctifying (a) chaos/an archy and (b) denial 
of access to justice to every citizen of 
Pakistan wherever he may be; secondly , a complete surrender to the present regime by 
dismissing these peti tions for lack of 
jurisdiction in view of  the purported ouster 
of its jurisdiction under PCO No. 1 of 1999 
and thirdly , acceptance of the situation as it 
is, in an attempt to save what “institutional 
values remained to be saved”. This Court, 
after conscious deliberations and in an endeavour to defend and preserve the 
national independence, the security and 
stability of Pakist an, sovereignty and 
honour of the country and to safeguard the 
interest of the community as a whole, 
decided to maintain and uphold the 
independence of Judiciary , which, in its 
turn, would protect th e State fabric and 
guarantee human ri ghts/Fundamental 
Rights. It took the Oath under PCO No. 1 of 
1999 so as to secure the enforcement of law, 
extend help to the law enforcing agencies 
for maintenance of pub lic order and with a 
view to restoring demo cratic institutions, 
achieving their stability and guaranteeing 
constitutional rights to the people of 
Pakistan. 
  
Oath of Office prescr ibed under Articles 
178 and 194 of the Constitution for the 
Judges of the Superior  Courts contains a 
specific provision that a Judge shall abide 
by the Code of Co nduct issued by the 
Supreme Judicial Council. Same is the 
position with regard to the provisions regarding Oath of Office (Judges) Order 
No. 1 of 2000. The precise provisions in the 
Oath of Office (Judges)  Order, 2000 are that 
a Judge, to whom oath is administered, shall 
abide by the provisions of Proclamation of 
Emergency of Fourteen th day of October, 
1999, PCO No. 1 of 1999, as amended, and 
the Code of Conduct i ssued by the Supreme 
Judicial Council. Bu t there is specific 
omission of words, “to preserve and defend 
the Constitution”. Adherence to the Code of 
Conduct has not been subjected to any pre-
conditions and there can be no deviation 
from it by a Judge w ho takes oath either 
under the Constitution or PCO No. 1 of 
1999 or Oath of Offi ce (Judges) Order No. 1 of 2000. One of the requirements of the 
Code of Conduct is that the oath of a Judge implies complete submission to the 
Constitution, and under the Constitution to 
the law. Subject to these governing 
obligations, his function of interpretation 
and application of the Constitution and the 
law is to be discharged for the maintenance 
of the Rule of Law over the whole range of 
human activities within  the nation. Thus the 
new Oath merely indica tes that the Superior 
Judiciary, like the rest  of the country had 
accepted the fact that on 12th October, 
1999, a radical transformation took place. 
  
MAINTAINABILITY OF PETITIONS  
  
Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in the 
Proclamation of Emergency of the 
Fourteenth day of October, 1999, the Provisional Constitution Order No. 1 of 
1999, as amended and the Oath of Office 
(Judges) Order No. 1 of 2000, all of which 
purportedly restrained  this Court from 
calling in question or permitting to call in 
question the validity  of any of the 
provisions thereof, this Court, in the 
exercise of its inhere nt powers of judicial 
review has the right to  examine the validity 
of the aforesaid inst ruments. Additionally, 
submission of th e Federation in response to 
the Court’s notice concerning its own 
legitimacy also suggest s that this Court has 
an inherent authorit y, arising from the 
submission of both the parties to its 
jurisdiction, notwithstanding the preliminary objection raised in the written 
statement as to the maintainability of the 
above petitions. In the exercise of its right 
to interpret the law, this Court has to decide 
the precise nature of the ouster clause in the 
above instruments and the extent to which 
the jurisdiction of the Courts has been 
ousted, in conformity  with the well-
established principles  that the provisions 
seeking to oust the jurisdiction of the Superior Courts are to be construed strictly 
with a pronounced leaning against ouster. 
The Constitution Peti tions filed by the 
petitioners under Arti cle 184(3) of the 
Constitution are, therefore, maintainable.  
  
  
INTERVENTION BY ARMED FORCES  
  
National Assembly is the highest 
representative body, wh ich reflects the will 
and aspirations of th e people of Pakistan. 
Similar is the status of a Provincial 
Assembly in a Province. Senate, being a 
symbol of unity of th e federating units has 
its own utility for the c ountry as a whole. It 
is, therefore, of utmo st importance that the 
impugned suspension of the above 
democratic institutions is examined with 
great care and cauti on, otherwise it would 
adversely affect the democratic processes in 
the country, which may cause instability, 
impair the economic gr owth and resultantly 
prove detrimental to the general well-being 
of the people. However, where the 
representatives of the people, who are 
responsible for running the affairs of the 
State are themselves accused of massive 
corruption and corrupt practices and in the 
public as well as private sectors are 
benefiting therefrom a nd resist establishing 
good governance; where a large number of 
references have been filed against the 
former Prime Minister, Ministers, 
Parliamentarians a nd members of the 
Provincial Assemblies for their disqualification on acc ount of corruption 
and corrupt practices; where there is a 
general perception that corruption is being 
practised by diversif ied strata including 
politicians, parliamentarians, public 
officials and ordinary  citizens and that a 
number of Parliamentar ians and members of 
the Provincial Assemblies mis-declared 
their assets before  Election Commission and Tax Authorities; where there was no 
political and economic stability and bank 
loan defaults were ra mpant and that as per 
report of Governor, St ate Bank of Pakistan 
Rs. 356 billion are payable by the bank 
defaulters up to 12.10.1999, having no 
accountability and transparency; where 
economic stability in Pakistan was highly 
precarious and there was an overall economic slowdown as GDP growth during 
the past three years ha d hardly kept pace 
with the growth of population; where 
Pakistan has a debt burden, which equals 
the country’s entire national income; where 
all the institutions of  the State were being 
systematically destroyed and the economy 
was in a state of collapse due to self serving 
policies of the previous government, which had threatened the existence, security, 
economic life, financial stability and credit 
of Pakistan; where a situation had arisen 
under which the democr atic institutions 
were not functioning in  accordance with the 
provisions of the Constitution, inasmuch as, 
the Senate and the National and Provincial 
Assemblies were closel y associated with the 
former Prime Mi nister and there was no real 
democracy because the country was, by and 
large, under one man rule; where an attempt 
was made to politicize the Army, destabilize 
it and create dissension within its ranks and 
where the Judiciary  was ridiculed, leaving 
no stone unturned to disparage and malign 
it by making derogatory and contemptuous 
speeches by some of the members of the 
previous ruling party in side and outside the 
Parliament and no Refe rence was made to 
the Chief Election Commissioner for their 
disqualification as members of the 
Parliament under Arti cle 63 (2) of the 
Constitution; where the disparaging remarks 
against the Judiciary  crossed all limits with 
the rendering of judgmen t by this Court in 
the case of Sh. Liaquat Hussain 
v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1999 SC 504), 
declaring the establis hment of Military 
Courts as  ultra vires  the Constitution, which 
resulted into a slande rous campaign against 
the Judiciary  launched by the former Prime 
Minister registering hi s helplessness in the 
face of the Judiciar y not allowing him the establishment of Milita ry Courts as a mode 
of speedy justice; where the image of the 
Judiciary  was tarnished under a well 
conceived design; wh ere the telephones of 
the Judges of the Superi or Courts and other 
personalities were tappe d in spite of the law 
laid down by this C ourt in the case of 
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto  v. President of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 388), that tapping 
of telephones and eavesdropping was 
immoral, illegal and unconstitutional; where 
storming of the Suprem e Court was resorted 
to allegedly by some of the leaders and 
activists of the Pakistan Muslim League 
which ultimately led to the issuance of 
contempt notices agai nst them/contemners 
by the Full Bench of th is Court in a pending 
appeal; where Mian Nawaz Sharif’s 
constitutional and moral authority stood 
completely eroded and where situation was 
somewhat similar and analogous to the 
situation that was prevalent in July, 1977, 
the extra constitutiona l step of taking over 
the affairs of the country by the Armed 
Forces for a transitional period to prevent 
any further destabilization, to create corruption free atmosphere at national level 
through transparent accountability and 
revive the economy before restoration of 
democratic institutions under the 
Constitution, is validated, in that 
Constitution offered no solution to the 
present crisis.  
  
In the Commonwealth Finance Ministers 
Meeting, held on 21-23 September, 1999, 
commenting on the Framework for 
Commonwealth Principles on Promoting 
Good Governance and Combating 
Corruption, it was, inter alia , observed that; 
“Good governance is not a luxury but a 
basic requirement for development. Corruption, which undermines development, 
is generally an outcome and a symptom of 
poor governance. It has reached global 
proportions and needs to be attacked directly 
and explicitly.”……“The Commonwealth 
should firmly commit itself to the policy of 
“zero tolerance” of all types of corruption. This policy must permea te national political 
cultures, governance, legal systems and 
administration. Where corruption is 
ingrained and pervasive, especially at the highest political levels , its eradication may 
require a sustained effo rt over a protracted 
period of time. Howe ver, the policy of 
“zero tolerance” should  be adopted from the 
outset, demonstrating a serious commitment 
to pursue the fight against corruption. The 
Commonwealth should remain firm in its 
determination that th e high standards and 
goals enunciated in the 1991 Harare 
Declaration are upheld and enhanced. 
Creating an environment, which is 
corruption-free will require vigorous actions 
at the national and international levels, and 
within the Commonwealth itself. These 
actions should encompass the prevention of 
corruption, the enforcement of laws against 
it and the mobilization  of public support for 
anti-corruption strategies.”  
Probably, the situation could have been avoide d if Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution had 
been in the field, which maintained parlia mentary form of government and had provided 
checks and balances between the powers of the President and the Prime Minister to let the 
system run without any let or hi ndrance to forestall the situati on in which Martial Law can be 
imposed. With the repeal of  Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution, there was no remedy 
provided in the Constitution to meet the situati on like the present one with which the country 
was confronted, therefore, constitutional devi ation made by the Chief of the Army Staff, 
General Pervez Musharraf for the welfare of  the people rather than abrogating the 
Constitution or imposing Martial Law by mean s of an extra constitutional measure is 
validated for a transitional period on ground of Stat e necessity and on the principle that it is in 
public interest to accord legal recognition to th e present regime with a view to achieving his 
declared objectives and that it is in the inte rest of the community that order be preserved. 
Legal recognition/legitimacy can be accorded to the present regime also on the principle that 
the government should be by the consent of the governed, whether voters or not. Here there is 
an implied consent of the governed i.e. th e people of Pakistan in general including 
politicians/parliamentarians, etc. to the army ta ke-over, in that no prot ests worth the name or 
agitations have been launched against the army take-over and/or its c ontinuance. The Court 
can take judicial notice of the fact that the people of Pakistan have generally welcomed the 
army take-over due to  their avowed intention to initiate the process 
of across the board and transparent 
accountability against those, alleged of 
corruption in every walk of life, of abuse of 
national wealth and of not taking appropriate 
measures for stabilizing the economy and 
democratic institutions . Another principle, 
which is attracted is that since an extra-
constitutional action has been taken by 
General Pervez Mushar raf wielding effective 
political power, it  is open to the Court to steer 
a middle course so as to ensure that the frame-
work of the pre-existing Order survives but 
the constitutional deviation therefrom be 
justified on the principle of necessity, 
rendering lawful what would otherwise be unlawful. However, pr olonged involvement of 
the Army in civil affairs runs a grave risk of 
politicizing it, which would not be in national 
interest, therefore, civilian rule in the country 
must be restored within  the shortest possible 
time after achieving the declared objectives, 
which necessitated the military take over and Proclamation of Emergenc y as spelt out from 
the speeches of the Chief Executive dated 13
th 
and 17th October, 1999. The acceptance of 
the above principles does not imply 
abdication from judici al review in the 
transient suspension of  the previous legal 
order.  
  
We accordingly hold as under:-  
  
1. On 12th October, 
1999 a situation 
arose for which the 
Constitution 
provided no solution 
and the intervention 
by the Armed Forces 
through an extra 
constitutional 
measure became inevitable, which is 
hereby validated on 
the basis of the doctrine of State 
necessity and the 
principle of salus 
populi suprema lex as 
embodied in Begum 
Nusrat Bhutto’s  case. 
The doctrine of State 
necessity is recognized not only 
in Islam and other 
religions of the world 
but also accepted by 
the eminent 
international jurists 
including Hugo 
Grotius, Chitty and 
De Smith and some 
Superior Courts from 
foreign jurisdiction to 
fill a political vacuum 
and bridge the gap.  
  
2. Sufficient 
corroborative and 
confirmatory material 
has been produced by the Federal 
Government in 
support of the 
intervention by the 
Armed Forces 
through extra 
constitutional measure. The 
material consisting of 
newspaper clippings, 
writings, etc. in 
support of the 
impugned 
intervention is 
relevant and has been 
taken into consideration as 
admissible material 
on the basis of which 
a person of ordinary 
prudence would 
conclude that the 
matters and events narrated therein did 
occur. The findings 
recorded herein are 
confined to the 
controversies 
involved in these 
cases alone.  
  
3. All past and closed 
transactions, as well as such executive 
actions as were 
required for the 
orderly running of 
the State and all acts, 
which tended to 
advance or promote 
the good of the 
people, are also validated.  
  
4. That the 1973 
Constitution still 
remains the supreme 
law of the land 
subject to the 
condition that certain 
parts thereof have been held in 
abeyance on account 
of State necessity;  
  
5. That the Superior 
Courts continue to 
function under the 
Constitution. The 
mere fact that the Judges of the 
Superior Courts have 
taken a new oath 
under the Oath of 
Office (Judges) 
Order No. 1 of 2000, 
does not in any manner derogate 
from this position, as 
the Courts had been 
originally established 
under the 1973 
Constitution, and have continued in 
their functions in 
spite of the 
Proclamation of 
Emergency and PCO 
No. 1 of 1999 and 
other legislative 
instruments issued 
by the Chief Executive from time 
to time;  
  
6.(i) That General 
Pervez Musharraf, 
Chairman, Joint 
Chiefs of Staff 
Committee and Chief 
of Army Staff through 
Proclamation of 
Emergency dated the 
14th October, 1999, 
followed by PCO 1 
of 1999, whereby he 
has been described as 
Chief Executive, 
having validly assumed power by 
means of an extra-
Constitutional step, 
in the interest of the 
State and for the 
welfare of the 
people, is entitled to 
perform all such acts 
and promulgate all legislative measures 
as enumerated 
hereinafter, namely:-  
  All acts or legislative measures which ar e in accordance with, or could have been 
made under the 1973 Constitution, including the power to amend it;  
  
All acts which tend to advance or promote the good of the people;  
  
All acts required to be done for the ordi nary orderly running of the State; and  
  
All such measures as would establish or lead to the es tablishment of the declared 
objectives of the Chief Executive.  
  
  
(ii) That 
constitutional 
amendments by the 
Chief Executive can 
be resorted to only if 
the Constitution fails 
to provide a solution 
for attainment of his 
declared objectives 
and further that the power to amend the 
Constitution by 
virtue of clause 6 
sub-clause (i) (a) ibid 
is controlled by sub-
clauses (b)(c) and (d) 
in the same clause.  
  
(iii) That no 
amendment shall be 
made in the salient 
features of the 
Constitution i.e. 
independence of 
Judiciary , 
federalism, parliamentary form of government 
blended with Islamic 
provisions.  
  
(iv) That 
Fundamental Rights 
provided in Part II, 
Chapter I of the 
Constitution shall 
continue to hold the field but the State 
will be authorized to 
make any law or take 
any executive action 
in deviation of 
Articles 15, 16, 17, 
18, 19 and 24 as 
contemplated by 
Article 233 (1) of the Constitution, keeping 
in view the language 
of Articles 10, 23 
and 25 thereof.  
  
(v) That these acts, 
or any of them, may 
be performed or 
carried out by means of orders issued by 
the Chief Executive 
or through 
Ordinances on his 
advice;  
  
(vi) That the 
Superior Courts 
continue to have the power of judicial 
review to judge the 
validity of any act or 
action of the Armed 
Forces, if challenged, 
in the light of the 
principles underlying the law of State 
necessity as stated 
above. Their powers 
under Article 199 of 
the Constitution thus 
remain available to 
their full extent, and 
may be exercised as heretofore, 
notwithstanding 
anything to the 
contrary contained in 
any legislative 
instrument enacted 
by the Chief 
Executive and/or any 
order issued by the Chief Executive or 
by any person or 
authority acting on 
his behalf.  
  
(vii) That the courts 
are not merely to 
determine whether 
there exists any nexus between the 
orders made, 
proceedings taken 
and acts done by the 
Chief Executive or 
by any authority or 
person acting on his behalf, and his 
declared objectives 
as spelt out from his 
speeches dated 13th 
and 17th October, 
1999, on the 
touchstone of State 
necessity but such 
orders made, proceedings taken 
and acts done 
including the 
legislative measures, 
shall also be subject 
to judicial review by 
the superior courts.  6. That the previous 
Proclamation of Emergency of 28th 
May, 1998 was 
issued under Article 
232(1) of the 
Constitution whereas 
the present 
Emergency of 14th 
October, 1999 was 
proclaimed by way of an extra-
Constitutional step as 
a follow up of the 
Army take-over 
which also stands 
validated 
notwithstanding the 
continuance of the 
previous Emergency which still holds the 
field.  
  
7. That the validity 
of the National 
Accountability 
Bureau Ordinance, 1999 will be 
examined separately 
in appropriate 
proceedings at 
appropriate stage.  
  
8. That the cases of 
learned former Chief 
Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court, 
who had not taken 
oath under the Oath 
of Office (Judges) 
Order, 2000 (Order 1 
of 2000), and those 
Judges of the Lahore 
High Court, High 
Court of Sindh and Peshawar High Court, who were not 
given oath, cannot be 
re-opened being hit 
by the doctrine of 
past and closed transaction.  
  
9. That the 
Government shall 
accelerate the process 
of accountability in a 
coherent and 
transparent manner 
justly, fairly, equitably and in 
accordance with law.  
10. That the Judges of 
the superior Courts 
are also subject to 
accountability in 
accordance with the 
methodology laid down in Article 209 
of the Constitution.  
  
11. General Pervez 
Musharraf, Chief of 
the Army Staff and 
Chairman Joint 
Chiefs of Staff 
Committee is a holder of Constitutional 
post. His purported 
arbitrary removal in 
violation of the 
principle of audi 
alteram partem  was 
ab initio void and of 
no legal effect.  
  
12. That this order 
will not affect the 
trials conducted andconvictions recorded 
including proceedings for 
accountability 
pursuant to various 
orders made and 
Orders/laws 
promulgated by the 
Chief Executive or 
any person 
exercising powers or jurisdiction under his 
authority and the 
pending 
trials/proceedings 
may continue subject 
to this order.  
  
13. This is not a case 
where old legal order has been completely 
suppressed or 
destroyed, but 
merely a case of 
constitutional 
deviation for a 
transitional period so as to enable the 
Chief Executive to 
achieve his declared 
objectives.  
  
14. That the current 
electoral rolls are 
out-dated. Fresh 
election cannot be held without 
updating the 
electoral rolls. The 
learned Attorney 
General states that as 
per report of the 
Chief Election 
Commissioner this 
process will take two years. Obviously, after preparation of 
the electoral rolls 
some time is required 
for delimitation of 
constituencies and 
disposal of objections, etc.  
  
15. That we take 
judicial notice of the 
fact that ex-Senator 
Mr. Sartaj Aziz 
moved a Constitution 
Petition No. 15 of 
1996, seeking a  
mandamus to the 
concerned authorities 
for preparation of 
fresh electoral rolls 
as, according to Mr. 
Khalid Anwar, 
through whom, the 
above petition was 
filed, the position to the contrary was 
tantamount to 
perpetuating 
disenfranchisement of 
millions of people of 
Pakistan in violation 
of Articles 17 and 19 
of the Constitution. 
Even MQM also resorted to a similar 
Constitution Petition 
bearing No. 53 of 
1996 seeking the 
same relief. However, 
for reasons best 
known to the 
petitioners in both the 
petitions, the same were not pursued any 
further.  
  
16. That havin g regard to all the 
relevant factors involved in the case 
including the one 
detailed in paragraphs 
14 and 15 above three 
years period is 
allowed to the Chief 
Executive with effect 
from the date of the 
Army take-over i.e. 12th October, 1999 
for achieving his 
declared objectives.  
  
17. That the Chief 
Executive shall 
appoint a date, not 
later than 90-days 
before the expiry of the aforesaid period 
of three years, for 
holding of a general 
election to the 
National Assembly 
and the Provincial 
Assemblies and the Senate of Pakistan.  
  
18. That this Court 
has jurisdiction to 
review/re-examine 
the continuation of 
the Proclamation of 
Emergency dated 
12th October, 1999 at any stage if the 
circumstances so 
warrant as held by 
this Court in the case 
of Farooq Ahmed 
Khan Leghari  v. 
Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 1999 
SC 57).”    
28. In the backdrop of above circumstances and in  pursuance of the Proc lamation of Emergency
and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 and in exercise of al l other powers enabling him in that behalf, the
Chief Executive and President of Pakistan  on 9th April 2002 prom ulgated the Referendum
Order, which is worded thus: -  
“CHIEF EXECUTIVE’S ORDER NO.12 OF 2002  
AN 
ORDER  
  
To provide for holding referendum  
WHEREAS on 12TH October 1999 a 
situation had arisen due  to steps taken by the 
then Prime Minister undermining the 
discipline and integrity of  the armed forces of 
Pakistan and thereby potentially jeopardizing 
the security of Pakistan;  
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of the 
deliberations and decisi ons of the Chiefs of 
Staff of the Armed Forces and Corps 
Commanders of Paki stan Army, General 
Pervez Musharraf, Chairman Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Committee and Chief of Army Staff 
proclaimed Emergency throughout Pakistan 
and assumed the office of Chief Executive of 
Pakistan;  
AND WHEREAS the Constitution was placed 
in abeyance and Provi sional Constitution 
Order No.1 dated 14th October 1999 was 
promulgated to provi de a framework for 
governance under law, as nearly as may be in 
accordance with the Constitution;  
AND WHEREAS all laws as specified in 
Article 5 of the Pr ovisional Constitution 
Order No.1 of 1999 conti nue to be in force 
subject to orders of the Chief Executive.  
AND WHEREAS, since at that juncture the 
institutions of State stood seriously weakened 
and the democratic and moral authority of the 
government of the da y stood gravely eroded, the Chief Executive of Pakistan announced a 
7 - Point Agenda on 17th October 1999, 
stating his objectives to rebuild national 
confidence and morale; strengthen the 
Federation, remove inter-provincial 
disharmony and restore national cohesion; revive the economy a nd restore investor 
confidence; ensure law and order and 
dispense speedy justic e; depoliticize state 
institution; devolution of power to the grass 
roots level; and ensure  swift and across the 
board accountability;  
AND WHEREAS the Ch ief Executive of 
Pakistan has emphasised that, inter alia, appropriate measures will be taken for good 
governance, economic revival, poverty 
alleviation and political restructuring;  
AND WHEREAS it is imperative to 
consolidate the measur es taken by the Chief 
Executive of Pakistan for the reconstruction 
of the institution of state for establishing 
genuine and sustainable democracy to ensure 
good governance for an i rreversible transfer 
of power to the people of Pakistan;  
AND WHEREAS it is essential to combat 
extremism and sectarianism  for the security of 
the State and tranquillity of society;  
AND WHEREAS it is in  the supreme national 
interest to obtain a de mocratic mandate from 
the people of Pakistan through referendum for 
General Pervez Musharraf to continue to be the President of Pakistan;  
NOW, THEREFORE, in pursuance of the 
Proclamation of Emerge ncy of 14th October, 
1999, and Provisional Constitution Order 
No.1 of 1999, and in exercise of all other 
powers enabling him in that behalf, the Chief 
Executive and President of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan is  pleased to make and 
promulgate the following Order:-  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. - (1) 
This Order may be called the Referendum 
Order, 2002.  2. It extends to the whole of Pakistan.
3. It shall come into force at once.  
2. Definitions: In this Order, unless there is 
anything repugnant in the subject or context, -  
“Commissioner” 
means the Chief 
Election 
Commissioner 
appointed under the 
Election Commission Order, 2002 (Chief 
Executive Order 
No.1 of 2002) and 
the “Commission” 
means the Election 
Commission 
constituted under the said Order;  
“question”, being a 
matter of national 
importance, means 
the question to be 
asked at the 
referendum under 
this Order;  
“Schedule” means a 
Schedule to the 
Order; and  
“Returning Officer’ 
means a Returning 
Officer, Additional 
Returning Officer, 
Assistant Returning 
Officer.  
3. Referendum.- (1) There shall be a 
referendum on the 30th day of April 2002, in 
which every citizen of Pakistan who has 
attained the age of eighteen years on the date 
of referendum and posse ss a National Identity 
Card issued under the National Database and 
Registration Authority Ordinance, 2000 (VIII 
of 2000), shall be eligible to vote at the referendum:  Provided that where a Na tional Identity Card 
under the National Database and Registration Authority Ordinance, 2000(VIII of 2000) has 
not been issued, but he is in possession of an 
identity card validly is sued under section 5 of 
the National Registrati on Act, 1973 (LVI of 
1973), (since repealed), he shall be eligible to 
cast his vote on the basis of such identity card.  
(2) For the purpose of this referendum, the 
whole of Pakistan shall be a single 
constituency and every vot er shall be entitled 
to vote at a polling station of his choice 
regardless of his place of residence.  
(3) The question for referendum shall be as 
set out in the First Schedule on the ballot 
paper in Urdu;  
Provided that in the Province of Sindh, the 
Commission shall provide a ballot paper 
printed in Sindhi or in Urdu as demanded by the voter.  
(3) The question shall be answered in either 
“yes” or no” by affixing the stamp provided 
by the Commission approximately in the 
appropriate circle printed on the ballot paper.  
(4) The procedure for holding the referendum 
shall be as provided in the Second Schedule.  
4. Consequence of the result of referendum.-  
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Constitution or any law for the time being in 
force, if the majority of the votes cast in the 
referendum are in the af firmative, the people 
of Pakistan shall be deemed to have given the 
democratic mandate to General Pervez 
Musharraf to serve the nation as President of Pakistan for a period of five years to enable 
him, inter alia, to consolidate the reforms and 
the reconstruction of inst itutions of State for 
the establishment or genuine and sustainable 
democracy, including the entrenchment of the 
local government system, to ensure continued 
good governance for the welfare of the 
people, and to combat extremism and 
sectarianism for the security of the State and the tranquillity of society.  (2) The period of five ye ars referred in clause 
(1) shall be computed from the first meeting 
of the Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) to be 
elected as a result of the forthcoming general 
election to be held in October, 2002, in accordance with the Judgment of the Supreme 
Court.  
5. Bar of Jurisdiction. (1) Subject to clause 
(2), no court, tribunal or other authority shall 
call in question, or pe rmit to be called in 
question, the validity of any provision of this 
Order or of anything done  or action taken, or 
purporting to be done or  taken, thereunder on 
any grounds whatsoever or grant an injunction 
make any order or ente rtain any proceedings 
in respect of any matter  provided for in this 
Order or arising therefrom.  
(2) All disputes as to the result of the 
referendum shall be finally decided by the 
Commission and no court or other authority 
shall have any jurisdiction to entertain any proceedings re lating thereto.  
6. Order to override ot her laws. The provision 
of this order shall have  effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in th e Constitution or any 
other law for the time being in force.  
7. Removal of difficult y. If any difficulty 
arises in giving effect to any of the provisions 
of this Order, the President may make such 
order for the removal of the difficulty as he 
may deem fit.  
FIRST SCHEDULE
 
(see Article 3 (3)]  
  Ballot Pape r
  Ballot Paper Referendum 2002  
  
  
   
  
SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See Article 3 (4)]  
1. Poll for the purpose of the referendum shall 
be held on the 30th da y of April 2002, from 
09.00 a.m. to 07.00 p.m.  
2. Polling under this Orde r shall be by secret 
ballot and every voter shall cast his vote on 
the ballot paper speci fied in the First 
Schedule.  
3. (1) Where a voter pr esents himself for 
casting his vote, the President Officer shall 
issue a ballot paper to  him after satisfying 
himself about his identity and shall, for that 
purpose, require the voter to produce the 
identity card issued to him. 
(2) Before a ballot paper is issued to a voter,-  
(a) his name and identi ty card number shall be 
entered on the counterfoil of the ballot paper;  
  
(b) the ballot paper shall on its back be 
stamped with the official mark and initialed 
by the Presiding Officer;  
  
(c) the voter shall put his signature or thumb 
impression on the counterfoil; and  
  
(d) the Presiding Officer shall put a mark on 
the right hand thumb of the voter with 
indelible ink:  
  
Provided that where the right hand thumb of a person is missing such ma rk shall be made on 
the left hand thumb of such person.  
  
(3) The voter on receiving a ballot paper 
shall-  
  
(a) forthwith proceed to the place reserved for 
marking of ballot papers;  
  
(b) secretly affix on the ballot paper the stamp 
provided to him by the Presiding Officer to indicate his answer to the question; and  
  
(c) after he has affixe d the prescribed stamp, 
fold the ballot paper and insert it in the ballot 
box. 
  
(4) Where a voter is bl ind or otherwise so 
incapacitated that he cannot vote without the 
assistance of a companion, the Presiding Officer shall allow him such assistance, and 
thereupon such voter ma y cast his vote as 
provided in sub-paragraph (3).  
  
(5) No voter shall vote at the referendum-  
(a) more than once at th e same polling station; 
or 
  
(b) at more than one polling station.  
  
(6) All votes cast in contravention of sub-paragraph (5) shall be void.
  
4. A Presiding Officer may refuse to deliver a 
ballot paper to person if he has reason to 
believe that such pers on has already cast his 
vote at the referendum at the same polling 
station or at any other polling station, or is not 
the person whose identity card has been 
produced by such person. 
  
5. (1) The following persons may cast votes 
by postal ballot in such manner as the 
commission may specific:- 
(a) a person who is a publ ic servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of  the Pakistan Penal 
code (Act XLV of 1860), including members 
of armed forced of Pakistan and persons 
attached with such forces;  
  
(b) persons employed by statutory 
corporations;  
  
(c) persons employed by companies and 
corporations set up, esta blished or controlled 
by the Federal Government or a Provincial 
Government;  
  
(d) citizens of Pakistan residing abroad;  
  
(e) wives and children of  persons referred to 
in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d); and  
  
(f) a person who is detain ed in prison or held on custody;
  
(2) A voter eligible to cast vote by postal ballot  shall apply to the Returning Officer along with a 
copy  of his National Identity Card for a ballot paper for voting by 
postal ballot at least one week before the date of polling.  
  
(3) The Returning Officer shall immediately upon the receipt of 
an application by a voter under sub-paragraph (2) send by post to such voter a ballot paper and an envelope bearing on its face a form of certificate of posting, showing the date thereof, to be 
filled in by the proper official of the Post Office at the time of 
despatch by the voter or, where a specific request has been made, deliver the ballot paper to such person directly or through an authorised messenger to avoid any delay.  
(4) A voter, on receiving his ballot paper for voting by post 
shall record his vote in the manner specified by the Commission and send the ballot paper to the Returning Officer in the envelop sent to him under sub-paragraph (3), by post or through an authorised messenger, so as to reach the Returning 
Officer before the consolidation of results by him.  
  
(5) The Commission may make arrangements for provision and 
collection of ballot papers of the persons referred to in sub-
paragraph (1) collectively, without compromising the secrecy of the ballot.  
  6. A person referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of 
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 who is eligible to cast vote by 
postal ballot may, instead of voting through postal ballot, appear before a Presiding O fficer along with his National 
Identity Card cast his vote in person at any polling station and the Presiding Officer shall, after identification, allow him to 
cast his vote.  
  
7. (1) Immediately after the close of the poll, the Presiding 
Officer shall-  
(a) in the presence of such persons as may be specified by the 
Commission, open the ballot box, or ballot boxes, and count the ballot papers taken out therefrom; and  
  
(b) count in such a manner as ma y be prescribed, the votes cast 
in favour of each answer to the question after rejecting the 
invalid ballot papers, that is , the ballot papers which have-  
  (i) no official mark or initia ls of the Presiding officer,  
  
(ii) any mark by which the voter can be identified;  
  
(iii) no mark to indicate the answer to the question; and  
  (c) prepare a statement of the result of the count and such other 
statements and packets in such manner as the Commission may direct.  
  
(2) The Presiding Officer shall, immediately after the count 
under sub-paragraph (1) prepar e a ballot paper account 
showing-  
(a) the number of ballot papers entrusted to him;  
  (b) the number of ballot papers  taken out of the ballot boxes 
and counted; and  
  
(c) the number of un-issued ballot papers and spoilt and invalid 
ballot papers.  
  
(3) The Presiding Officer shall, immediately after the close of 
the proceedings under sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), cause the 
statements, packets and account prepared by him to be sent to the Returning Officer together with such other records as the Returning Officer may direct.  
  
8. (1) The Returning Officer shall, on receipt of the statements 
of the results of the count from the Presiding Officer, 
consolidate in the prescribed manner the results of the count by the Presiding Officers in respec t each answer to the question, 
including therein the postal ballot received by him until then.  
  
(2) The Returning Officer shall, after obtaining the result of the 
count, forthwith submit a retu rn of the referendum to the Commission.  
(3) The Commission shall announce the result of the 
referendum showing the total numbe r of votes cast in favour of 
each answer and shall also publish the same in the official Gazette.  
  9. (1) Save or otherwise provided, the Commission shall make 
all arrangement necessary fo r holding of the referendum, 
including the appointment of Returning Officers, make provision of polling stations and may issue and prescribe such 
order, directions and instructi ons, and exercise such powers as 
may be necessary for the performance of its functions for 
ensuring that the referendum is co nducted justly and fairly in 
accordance with the provisions of this Order.  
  
(2) The Commissioner may authorise any member of the 
Commission, an authority or offi cer to exercise any of its 
powers and functions under this Order.  
  (3) The Commissioner shall have  the same powers as a Judge 
of the Supreme Court to punish any person for contempt of court as provided under the Contempt of Court Act, 1976 (XLIV of 1976).  
  
(4) All executive authorities in the Federation and in the 
Provinces shall render such assistance to the Commissioner and 
the Members of the Commission in  discharge of his or their 
functions as may be required by them by the Commissioner and the Members of the Commission.  
GENERAL  
PERVEZ MUSHARRAF  
Chief Executive and  
President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
And Chief of Army Staff  
  
MR.JUSTICE  
MANSOOR AHMED  SECRETARY”  
  
29. As mentioned earlier, the valid ity of the Referendum Order, th e CE Order No. 2 of 2001 and the 
CE Order No. 3 of 2001 has been challenged in thes e petitions. Dr. Farooq Hasan, learned counsel for 
the petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 15 of  2002, formulated his submissions as under: -  
The Constitution remains the supreme law of the 
land and the position now being taken by General Pervez Musharraf, although lawfully holding the 
portfolio of Chief Executive as allowed by this 
Court, is in total disregard of the above concept to which he had subscribed personally and through his lawyers in Syed Zafar Ali Shah
’s case ; 
The Constitution is the vehicle of a nation’s 
movement towards advancement and democracy. The freedoms envisaged by it generate the energy, which provide velocity and dynamics to the nation’s life. The respondents, in contravention of 
their duties as outlined by this Court, are 
relentlessly stifling even the most elementary freedoms in Pakistan;  
The mechanism of referendum contained in the 
Constitution is wholly and utterly inapplicable for the election of President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and as such all steps taken in that behalf including the Referendum Order are utterly void 
and ultra vires  the Constitution and the law 
declared by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah
’s 
case; 
It is impermissible under the Constitution and the 
law declared by this Court to politicize the Army. 
Respondent No.1 is direc tly doing that, which is 
prohibited by this Court;  
It is unlawful and shocking to conscience that 
respondents No.1 and 2 in connivance with each other are openly using the re sources of the State of 
Pakistan for the political ambitions of respondent No.1;  
Under the judgment of this Court in  Syed Zafar Ali 
Shah ’s case , the present governme nt is expressly 
described to be ‘transient’ in nature. It is for a temporary period with definite and clear-cut duties 
and purposes. Its actions, whether executive or 
legislative, are always capable of being tested qua 
or de hors  the Constitution. In a nut shell, the 
present government has a fiduciary relationship in the discharge of functions of the State and no Court of equity or of law can allow a trustee to gobble up the property of the trust and use it for his own 
benefit on fake and flimsy pretexts;  
In view of the direction of this Court to hold 
elections to all the democratic institutions of the 
country by 12th October 2002, it is manifest and 
self-evident that allowing political activity towards election is the obligation of the respondents, which they are defeating on flimsy grounds of administrative necessity and convenience.  
  
Elaborating his formulations the learned counsel submitted that the present government has transient 
authority and it has been given ad interim  charge in the nature of a caretaker administration with a 
specific mandate, a specific time-table and a specific list of duties spelt out in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s 
case. It is not a supra-constitutional authority, but  one functioning under the Constitution. However, 
in the discharge of their duties the respondents are continuously violating their mandate and have in 
fact devised legal stratage ms aimed at getting out of the limitations  set for them. They have forgotten 
that the declared objectives are to be achieved a nd election is to be held within a period of three 
years, the power to amend the Constitution is subj ect to as many as seven riders and this Court 
continues to have its power of judicial review. Respondents No.1 is holding rallies at the expense of 
public exchequer using the electronic media for his personal gain and is not allowing his opponents 
even to have right of audience to the people of Pa kistan in exercise of their fundamental rights of 
freedom of expression and freedom of assembly. In this contex t he referred to the restrictions 
imposed on the movement of petitioner Qazi Hu ssain Ahmed. According to the learned counsel 
respondent No. 1 was acting in a despotic manner a nd the statements made by him in his speech of 
5th April, 2002 in regard to the powers to be exerci sed in future by the President, the Prime Minister 
and the Chief of Army Staff defy the constitutional scheme of things because the Chief of Army Staff 
does not figure in the Constitution as a centre of power. He further contended that President Mr. 
Muhammad Rafiq Tarar continued in office after th e promulgation of the Pr oclamation of Emergency 
and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 which stand validated by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case  and 
would continue as such till 28th December, 2002 to  be replaced by an incumbent elected under the 
new set up. He had not tendered resignation from his office and was removed arbitrarily and 
unceremoniously by promulgating the CE Orders No.2 and 3 of 2001 which are ultra vires  the 
Constitution and have changed the system to the Pres idential form of Government. It is well settled 
that the lawmaker cannot make laws for his personal benefit. Both the orders being a device for self-
aggrandizement of respondent No.1 who has destr oyed even the semblance of the parliamentary 
system of government by removing the elected President, is ex facie  mala fide . Respondent No. 1 
continues to be in the service of Pakistan whereas no person in the service of Pakistan can even be a 
candidate for President. He is hit by Article 41(1) , Article 62 and Article 63(i)(d) read with Article 
260 of the Constitution. Besides, even in the interre gnum respondent No.1 is not allowed to defeat the 
parliamentary system by amalgamating two distinct functionaries, viz., the President and the Prime 
Minister into one person. The Constitution does not  allow holding of referendum for election of the 
President. The device of referendum  on the part of respondent No.1 for the above purpose, is a direct 
affront to the judgments of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case  and Wasim Sajjad ’s case . 
Electoral process in relation to the election of the o ffice of President is dealt with in Article 41 of the 
Constitution which would be available afte r the election is held in October, 2002.  
30. He further submitted that under Ar ticle 48 the President, in the exercise of his functions, has to 
act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or  the Prime Minister. This is again foundation of the 
parliamentary system as it envisa ges a safeguard against arbitrary exercise of power by empowering 
the President to require the Cabinet or the Prime Minister, as the case may be, to reconsider the 
advice. There are only few matters where the Presiden t is empowered to act in his discretion. In all 
other matters, he has to act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or the Prime Minister, as the case may be. Thus, the Chief Executive's Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 have rendered this provision 
meaningless and ineffective.  
31. He next contended that Article 48(6) of the Constitution does not spell out the consequences of 
the referendum. However, once referendum is held  under the Referendum Order, respondent No. 1 
would become President as laid down therein, wh ich is against the Constitution as well as the 
judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . The non obstante  clause in the Referendum 
Order is meaningless in view of the law laid down by this Court. The learned counsel read out 
excerpts from several books and treatises to show that  in the United States referendum is resorted to 
in Municipal matters and in the European context it is basically used to ask for the people’s vote on 
any policy matter.  
32. Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC, appearing in Constitution Petition No. 18 of 2002 filed by the 
Supreme Court Bar Association ra ised the following contentions:-  
(1) Article 48 (6) & (7) of the 
Constitution pertaining to referendum do not envisage referendum as a means for election to the constitutional offices. It is meant for soliciting opinion of the people on issues of 
national importance;  
(2) Even if, for the sake of argument, it 
is accepted that refe rendum can be held 
to elect a President, then the 
consequences would be that Article 41 
clauses (2), (3), (4), (5) & (6) and Second Schedule to the Constitution would become redundant and nugatory and under the established principles of 
interpretation of a Constitution or any 
constitutional provision, only that interpretation is to be made, which does not render a provision of the Constitution redundant, meaningless or nugatory;  
(3) The Referendum Order is not in 
accordance with the Constitution. It is rather inconsistent with the 
Constitution being repugnant to 
Articles 41 and 48 of the Constitution and the Second Schedule to the Constitution specifically and, therefore, is liable to be declared ultra 
vires  the Constitution. Any action 
taken thereunder would also be ultra 
vires  the Constitution;  
(4) Only once in the history of 
Pakistan, a constitutional provision 
was made vide Article 96-A of the Constitution (inserted through the Constitution [Seventh Amendment] Act, 1977) for holding referendum as a 
means of conferring vote of confidence in favour of the holder of a constitutional office (the then Prime Minister of Pakistan). This provision was made for a specific period and 
under certain circum stances. Under 
section 1(2) it came into force on 16th May 1977 and under section 1(3) it ceased to be in force on the thirteenth day of September, 1977;  
(5) Even under the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1977, no referendum took place because this was an aberration in the constitutional document. Such referendums are not 
provided. It had a special background. 
There was a strong PNA movement going on against Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, the then Prime Minister of Pakistan agitating that the elections to the National and Provincial Assemblies 
held in March, 1977 were not fair, 
impartial and just. The opposition neither recognized the assembly nor accepted this amendment. Negotiations between the ruling party and the 
opposition started in the month of 
June, 1977 and ultimately the government gave the idea of holding referendum under this provision;  
(6) The Referendum Order is violative 
of the judgment of this Court in Syed 
Zafar Ali Shah ’s case , inasmuch as -  
The judgment 
only permits those legislative measures which are in 
accordance 
with the 1973 Constitution;  
(ii) The 
judgment requires that only such legislative and other acts can 
be performed, 
which are meant for 
ordinary and 
orderly functioning of the State. In other words, it 
means that 
the government can only pass such legislation, 
which is 
essential for day-to-day functioning of the government. 
The authority 
of the government is restricted. The Referendum 
Order has got 
nothing to do with the day-to-day functioning of the State. 
This is totally 
outside the ambit of the powers of the government;  
It has been 
clearly laid down in prohibitory 
language that 
no amendment in the Constitution can be made, 
which is 
against the basic features of the Constitution and in 
particular 
reference has been made to 
the 
parliamentary form of government. The Referendum 
Order is 
against the basic features of the Constitution because it is 
violative of 
parliamentary form of government. It seeks to establish 
Presidential 
form of government. Respondent No.1 has clearly stated 
in his speech 
of 5th April, 2002 that under the new constitutional 
dispensation, 
the President will be more powerful than the Prime Minister and 
the 
Parliament;  
Under the 
scheme of the 
Constitution, there is a clear succession of events. In the 
first place, 
election to the national and provincial assemblies is 
to take place. 
In the second place, 
election to 
the senate is to take place. In the third place, election to 
the office of 
the President takes place after completion of the first two 
stages. By 
holding the referendum for election to the office of the President 
to be 
effective from the date the assemblies meet, it 
nullifies the 
scheme and precludes the election to the office of the President 
by the 
electoral college provided in the Constitution;  
It has been 
held in the judgment that 
there is no 
destruction of the old order and constitutional deviation for 
a transitional 
period has been allowed. By introducing Referendum 
Order and 
holding referendum 
for conferring 
five years term on respondent No.1, this finding has 
been 
completely violated because the effect of the same will go 
beyond the 
transitional period of three years. It is extending transitional 
period from 3 
years to 8 years;  
  
(7) The respondent No.1 is holding 
Presidential election in the garb of referendum as being in the service of 
Pakistan he is disqualified under 
Articles 41 and 63 (k) to contest the Presidential election;  
  
(8) By holding the referendum 
respondent No.1 is violating his oath of office as a member of Armed Forces under which he cannot engage 
himself in any political activity;  
  
(9) The referendum being held on 30th 
April, 2002 deprives the people of Pakistan to elect their President through their chosen representatives in the Parliament and the provincial 
assemblies as envi saged under Article 
2A of the Constitution;  
  
(10) There is a consistent practice of 
military rulers in Pakistan of attempting to obtain legitimacy to 
their dictatorial rule by holding 
referendums, which are generally fake 
and false. The forthcoming referendum will be held without electoral rolls. An election without electoral rolls cannot be fair, impartial and transparent;  
  
(11) The functions of the Election 
Commission have been spelt out in 
Article 218 of the Constitution and obviously referendum does not fall within those functions;  
  
(12) The proposed referendum is 
constitutionally a futile and harmful 
exercise because it will have no 
validity unless ratified and indemnified by the Parliament. On the one hand, it will be invalid without ratification and on the other, it will obviously lead to confrontation 
between the President and the 
Parliament inasmuch as the latter will be compelled to ratify it as was done by General Ziaul Haq by insertion of Articles 41(7) and 270A(1) of the Constitution; and  
  
(13) From 1944 to 1996, in all 100 
referendums have been held in the 
world, but none of them was held for election to a public office. Referendums are held to ascertain the public opinion on policy matters. In USA, no referendum has been held at 
the federal level. In UK, the only 
referendum has been held in 1975 on the question whether or not to stay in the European Economic Community. Dr.Maija Setala , a constitutional 
writer, in her book titled, 
‘Referendums and Democratic 
Governments’ has said that referendum is only us ed by dictatorial 
regimes.    
  
33. Mr. Muhammad Ikram Chaudhry, learned counsel for the petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 
17/2002 adopted the arguments of Mr.Hamid Khan and submitted that the preliminary objections 
taken by the Federation in the written statem ent had no legal basis and were not tenable.  
34. He further submitted that the referendum is not only violative of the mandate of this Court in 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case  regarding restoration of democratic in stitutions within a limited period of 
three years but also involved violation of oath which General Pervez Musharraf had taken as an 
Army Officer to uphold  the Constitution. The holding of referendum has the effect of politicizing the Armed Forces
therefore, the Referendum Order is against the declared objectives of the Chief Executive.  
35. Syed Sharif Hussain Bokhari, learned counsel  for the petitioner in Constitution Petition No
19/2002 also adopted the arguments  addressed by Mr.Hamid Khan and added that the preliminar y
objection regarding locus standi  of the petitioner in the concis e statement of the respondents wa s
devoid of substance as the petitioner is a juri stic person and represents  major political partie s
which in turn represent a large number of peopl e belonging to different strata of society whos e
fundamental rights have been infringed by th e Referendum Order. Simi larly the objection wit h
regard to maintainability of petition against th e President of Pakistan on the touchstone of th e
prohibition contained in Article 248 of the C onstitution had no substanc e because the petitione r
had not impleaded the President of Pakistan as a respondent but  General Pervez Musharraf in hi s
capacity as the Chief Executive of Pakistan who is not one of the persons  exempted from the lega l
process under Article 248. The lega l provisions regarding exempti ons and immunities from th e
legal process are to be strictly construed b ecause such exemptions are not applicable unles s
expressly provided by law. In any case even the pr otection granted to the functionaries of the Stat e
under Article 248 of the Constitu tion does not cover illegal and mala fide  acts because such act s
cannot be deemed to be in pursuan ce of the law or in discharge of  the official functions. Relianc e
was placed on Zahoor Elahi  v. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  (PLD 1975 SC 383), Sadiq Hussain Qureshi v
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1979 Lahore 1) and Muhammad Anwar Durrani  v. Province o f
Balochistan  (PLD 1989 Quetta 25).  
36. He further submitted that the Referendum Order is tainted with mala fide  and not an hones t
legislation. The legislation thr ough which Article 96-A was insert ed in the Constitution was a n
honest legislation inasmuch as it clearly provid ed that the Prime Minister would be deemed t o
have tendered resignation in case of negative vote.  
37. He next submitted that the Referendum Order offends the principle of trichotomy of power s
among the three organs of the State because in  consequence thereof General Parvez Musharaf f
would continue to be the President, the Ch ief Executive and the Chief of Army Staff.  
38. Sheikh Mushtaq Ali, ASC, petitioner in C.P.  No. 21 of 2002 contended that the respondent ha d
politicized the Army, assumpti on of the office of President by the respondent was illegal, th e
referendum had no nexus either wi th the declared objectives or the judgment of this Court in Zafar
Ali Shah ’s case , the Election Commission was not possesse d of authority to hold the referendum
just and fair referendum was not possible under the Refere ndum Order, there were in- built
provisions of the Referendum Orde r to facilitate riggi ng and the exercise being tainted with mala
fide must be stopped.  
39. Mr. A.K. Dogar, ASC, while appearing in s upport of Constitution Peti tion No. 22 of 2002 file d
by Syed Zafar Ali Shah criticized the campaign a nd public meetings being held in connection wit h
referendum and contended that referendum is be ing held by General Parvez Musharraf for hi s
personal gain and not for the benefit of the nation  and it is in fact a device through which he want s
to break the shackles put around him by this Court in Zafar Ali Shah ’s case .  I t  i s  a n  e x t r a -
constitutional step which does not appear in  the readmap mentioned in the said case.  
40. He further contended that th e respondent has been given powe r to amend the Constitution onl y
to the extent that the Parliament  could have amended it and this  power could be exercised only i f
the Constitution fails to provide a solution for the attainment of his declared objectives. To remai n
personally in power is not one of the declared objectives. The Referendum Order is not only i n
conflict with the judgment of this Court in Zafar Ali Shah ’s case but also the Constitution.41. He next submitted that refe rendum amounts to election of the President whereas the Presiden t
cannot be elected before the election of the National Assembly, Senate and the Provincial
Assemblies, which is the electoral  college because that is the scheme of the Constitution. The
electoral college has to be ther e first and then there would be President. Moreover the system o f
referendum is a disenfranchisement  of all eligible persons who ar e qualified to become President.
The respondent is not eligible to be elected as President because he is disqualified for various
reasons and one of the reasons is that he is in the service of Pakistan (Articles 43 and 63(1)(k) o f
the Constitution). Another significan t reason is that he has violat ed the oath taken as an Army
Officer. He lastly contended that the doctrine of necessity cannot be pressed into service to defen d
referendum and the respondent by removing Muhammad Rafiq Tarar through the methodology o f
the CE Orders No.2 and 3 of 2001 had violated the provisions of Article 47( 1) of the Constitution.
42. Mr. Hashmat Ali Habib, learned counsel for the petitioner in Constitution Petition No. 23 o f
2002, reiterated the contentions ur ged by the learned counsel for the other petitioners and adde d
that referendum is not only aime d at altering the parliamentary system but also a device fo r
perpetuation of the dictatorial regime, the referendum order exte nds the declared objectives from
seven to sixteen, the question asked in the refe rendum is a compendium of six questions and a
case for grant of interim relief of stay of pro ceedings was made out as billions of rupees were
being spent on the referendum campaign.  
43. Mr. Wasim Rehan, petitioner in  C.P. No. 24 of 2002 criticized  the referendum order withou t
raising any noticeable point.  
44. Mr. Iqbal Haider submitted in support of CPLA NO. 512/2002 against the order of the High
Court of Sindh that the refere ndum being held under the Refe rendum Order is covered by the
Constitution as was the case wi th the referendums held by Fiel d Marshal Ayub Khan and General
Ziaul Haq. The two referendums held  earlier were accepted by the political parties, inasmuch as
while passing the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1997, although Article 58(2)(b) was
deleted but the provisions regard ing referendum were not touched.  
45. Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, learned counsel for the Federation, contended that law is not a n
abstract thing and while interpreting the same th is Court being the protec tor of the Constitutio n
must attempt to reduce the gap between the ideals of  justice and the supreme interest of the people
of Pakistan particularly in a situation that is legalistically not ideal. In Haji Saifullah Khan ’s case
which had arisen when the Consti tution was in full operation, relief  of restoration was refused by
this Court on the ground that a cal l had been given to the suprem e political sovereign. He nex t
submitted that prior to 12th October, 1999 the Constitution was the only organic and supreme law
of the land without any clog on it but after 12th May, 2000 when  the Short Order was announce d
by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case , the Constitution of Pakistan  is to be read with the
Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of  1999. The present controversy has to be looke d
at in the light of these three documents.  
46. He further contended that  in view of the observa tions in para 6(i) of the judgment of this Cour t
in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case  the present government has much  wider powers than an electe d
government. If respondent No.1 feels that there is an impediment in his way on account of certai n
constitutional provisions or a cons titutional provision needs to be in serted for achievement of his
declared objectives he can make the necessary am endments in the Constit ution. The Proclamatio n
of Emergency lays down that the Constitution is in abeyan ce and the PCO No. 1 of 1999
envisages that Pakistan would be governed, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the
Constitution.  47. He went on to argue that assumption of office of Pres ident by respondent No.1 cannot b e
challenged in collateral proceedings in  the light of the law laid down in Abdul Mujeeb Pirzada v
Federation of Islamic Republic of Pakistan  (PLD 1990 Karachi 9), Ghulam Jilani  v. Province o f
Punjab  (PLD 1979 Lahore 564), Pir Sabir Shah  v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1994 SC 738) an d
Farzand Ali  v. Province of West Pakistan (PLD 1970 SC 98). Responde nt No. 1 became Presiden t
through a valid legal instrument promulgate d on 20th June, 2001. It has been acted upon an d
widely accepted. The Chief Justice of Pakistan has been  acting as President of Pakistan by virtu e
of the Chief Executive’s Order No. 3 of 2001. Th e continuance in office of Mr. Muhammad Rafi q
Tarar was dependent on the Proclamation of Emergency.  
48. The next submission made by him was that the Referendum Order has to be read with Article s
48(6) & (7) of the Constitution. After the lapse of Article 96-A of the Constitution there was n o
provision akin to the holding of referendum unde r the Constitution. That was the reason tha t
clauses (6) & (7) of Article 48 we re introduced in 1985. It was fe lt that there was no provision fo r
holding a referendum which is envisaged by the Referendum Order.  Promulgation of th e
Referendum Order was necessary b ecause clause (7) of Article 48 enjoins that the Parliament ma y
lay down the procedure for the co nduct of referendum. The presen t referendum is not being hel d
exclusively under Article 48(6) of the Constitution. It is directly relatabl e to the dictum laid dow n
in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case  whereunder the Chief Executive ha s been authorized to promulgat e
all such measures as w ould establish or lead to the establis hment of his declared objectives. Th e
ultimate objective is the holding of electi on which is an unwavering commitment of th e
respondent.  
49. He lastly contended that refe rendum being merely an appeal to  the political sovereign canno t
be equated with election and the Referendum Or der cannot be challenged even on moral grounds
The statements made by the political leader s including Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto and Qaz i
Hussain Ahmed immediately after the Army takeove r are part of the reco rd. Their present stanc e
needs to be examined in juxtaposition with their previous conduct.  
50. Mr. Maqbool Elahi Malik, Sr. AS C, learned counsel for the Fe deration appeared on behalf o f
the respondents and submitted that  the Referendum Order was in line with the judgment of thi s
Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case  and if referendum is not allowed to be held the entire exercis e
done in that case would go wast e, the Election Commission had ma de all necessary arrangement s
to guard against malpractices, the Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Researc h
Laboratories Complex, Karachi had i ssued a certificate to the effect that indeli ble ink to be used o n
the thumb of the voters will last  for a week and the referendum is  being held by the respondent no t
for his personal benefit but for ta king the process of restoration of democracy initiated by him t o
its logical conclusion.  
51. Mr.Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. AS C, appearing on behalf of the Federation traced the history o f
evolution of the Constitution and made the fo llowing submissions in s upport of the Referendu m
Order:-  
(1) There are certain misconceptions about the 
Constitution, which must be cleared. The 1973 Constitution, which is in abeyance, is the 
supreme law of the land. It is the organic law 
and is indestructible. It  has shown resilience, 
tenacity and poignancy and notwithstanding 11 
years rule of General Zi aul Haq it has survived 
and it will survive as  long as the power of judicial review is exer cised by this Court. The 
position of the Chief Executive and the 
Federation is very clear. For the first time under 
an extra-constitutional rule, the supremacy of 
the judicial power and j udicial review has been 
accepted.  
(2) The Referendum Order is a valid piece of 
legislation. It is hit ne ither by the constitutional 
ultra vires  nor by the doctrine of substantive 
ultra vires . 
(3) The validity of the Referendum Order is to 
be tested not on the touchstone of the 
Constitution but on the touchstone of the extra-
constitutional legal order upheld by this Court in 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . The legal order 
which will determine the validity of the 
Referendum Order is the Proclamation of 
Emergency read with the PCO No. 1 of 1999, 
which have been validated in toto  by this Court 
and are in the nature of quasi -organic law of the 
country during the constitutional deviation.  
(4) This Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case  has 
identified the basic stru cture of the country as 
consisting of four charac teristics; firstly, a 
parliamentary system of democracy; secondly, 
the federal structure of the State; thirdly, under 
the trichotomy of powers complete 
independence of the judi ciary and its power of 
judicial review, and fourth ly, irrepressibility of 
certain fundamental rights . It has been held in 
the judgment that while exercising the power of 
amendment of the Constitution during the 
interregnum or the constitutional deviation, these four characteristic s cannot be interfered 
with.  
(5) The constitutional provi sions with regard to 
parliamentary system of democracy are in 
abeyance. There are no a ssemblies, senate, etc.  
(6) The most important characteristic is the 
federal structure of the government which stands suspended by virt ue of the Proclamation 
of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999. 
There are no provincial assemblies or provincial 
executives and the Governors in the provinces 
have to act under the instructions of the Chief 
Executive while perform ing legislative and executive functions in relation to the affairs of 
the province as laid down in Article 3(2) of the 
PCO No. 1 of 1999.  
(7) The fundamental rights with few exceptions 
are not in suspension a nd the provisions of the 
Constitution in that behalf are in force.  
(8) The power to amend the Constitution given 
to the Chief Executive is relatable to the future 
to facilitate transi tion because otherwise 
transformation a nd transition cannot take place, 
which is established fr om the provisions of 
Articles 269, 270 and 270A  of the Constitution. 
Currently the basic structure consists of the 
independence of the judiciary as the remaining 
two organs of the Stat e under the trichotomy of 
powers are under suspension.  
(9) The validity of the Referendum Order is to 
be examined in the c ontext of the present 
circumstances and fact ual position on the 
ground. This Court cannot enter into academic, 
hypothetical or presum ptive exercise. In Asad 
Ali's case  and the Review Petition of Justice 
Sajjad Ali Shah  (1999 SCMR 640), the question, 
which concerned the independence of judiciary, was as to whether an Advocate of the Supreme 
Court could be appointed  as Chief Justice of 
Pakistan. The Court held that the issue was not 
before it.  
(10) The Referendum Or der does not in any 
manner amend or claim to amend the 
Constitution. Therefore, the question of testing 
the legality of Refere ndum Order and the legal 
consequences flowing therefrom on the 
touchstone of the Consti tution does not arise at 
this stage, being abstract, hypothetical, 
presumptive and academic, which might be 
decided by proper forum at proper time.  
(11) The power of amendment given to the Chief 
Executive, as rightly st ated by Syed Sharifuddin 
Pirzada in Syed Zafar Ali Shah
’s case , is subject 
to certain limitations.  The amendments when 
introduced will come up be fore the appropriate 
forum.  
(12) This Court should tr ace firstly the history of 
evolution of the Constitu tion as the organic and supreme law of the la nd making distinction 
between the two periods of  history, viz. (i) the 
periods of abrogations a nd (ii) the periods of 
constitutional abeyance and deviations. On a 
less onerous side, this Court should examine the 
similarities, legal and constitutional, between 
the 1977 takeover and the present takeover and 
the factual dissimilarities.  
(13) Under the first re ferendum, Field Marshal 
Muhammad Ayub Khan got the mandate for 
framing Constitution and to  be President for the 
first term under that Cons titution. Transition is 
the most important aspect particularly when it is 
from an extra-cons titutional or supra-
constitutional Order to a constitutional Order 
which is to be seen in th e light of the doctrine of 
eclipse. The 1973 Constitution itself provided 15 years for transition, th erefore, the transition 
is a very delicate and sensitive process.  
(14) The effect of the j udgment of this Court in 
Mahmood Khan Achazai
’s case  (PLD 1997 SC 
426) whereby revival of Article 58(2)(b) of the 
Constitution was adopted needs to be examined. 
Jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) 
of the Constitution is an equitable jurisdiction, which is to be exercised ex debito justitiae  and 
the conduct of the parties. This Court upheld the 
Constitution (Eighth Am endment) Act, 1985 on 
two grounds, namely, (i ) Parliament had 
approved it, and (ii)  three successive 
Parliaments did not undo it and, therefore, by 
necessary implication they accepted it. 
Acquiescence on the part of the parties has to be 
taken into consideration by the Court.  
(15) Article 277 of the Interim Constitution of 
1972 provided for a referendum but the same 
was not incorporated in the permanent 
Constitution. Mr. Mehmud Ali Qasuri, 
Chairman of the Committee which prepared the 
draft constitution, in his note of dissent at page 
197 of the book titled “C onstitution making in 
Pakistan” published by the National Assembly of Pakistan had supported this provision. At 
page 200 of the said book it is mentioned, “A 
referendum would be useful in circumstances 
where it becomes necessary, in mid term, to 
elicit the views of the electorate on matters of 
major  importance. Referendum can in some 
circumstances be a subst itute for dissolution of 
legislature.”  
(16) In Mahmood Khan Achakzai ’s case , it 
was categorically held th at with the removal of 
Article 58(2)(b), Martia l law would be invited. 
The 13th and 14th Amendments should be 
viewed in this background. It was the rigidity of the Constitution that brought about the 1977 
Martial law. The Constitution does not provide 
solution to all political  problems. It is the 
ground realities that ar e to be taken into 
consideration.  
(17) The supremacy of the Constitution has 
progressed from 1977 to 1999. The validation 
accorded to General Ziaul Haq was no different than the one in Syed Zafar Ali Shah's 
case. In Begum Nusrat Bhutto ’s case  identical 
power was granted to General Ziaul Haq as 
has been granted to General Pervez Musharraf. 
Constitutionally and legally, there is no 
difference at all except that General Ziaul Haq 
had assumed power by the Proclamation of 
Martial Law and the Laws (Continuance in 
Force) Order, 1977 and General Pervez 
Musharraf assumed power under the 
Proclamation of Emerge ncy and the PCO No. 
1 of 1999.  
Transition in 1984-85 last ed for more than a 
year. The Assembly started functioning in 
March 1985, but Martial law was lifted in 
December, 1985. It is the concern of the 
Federal Government that  the transition from 
the extra-constitutional Order takes place to 
the constitutional Order. It is absolutely 
committed. However, there should be some 
sort of checks and balances so that the 
institutions and office s of the State act in 
equilibrium otherwise change of musical 
chairs will go on and on. The election is going 
to be held in October,  2002. It is in accordance 
with the judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar 
Ali Shah's case . 
  
52. S yed Sharifuddin Pirzada, Sr. ASC, learned counsel for the Federation opened his ar gument swith the comment that Mr.Abdul Hafeez Pirzada had adopted a ve ry clear line of reasoning an d
he would make submissions in  the alternative. The learne d counsel submitted that Mr
Muhammad Rafiq Tarar was elected as Presiden t of Pakistan by the Na tional Assembly, Senat e
and the Provincial Assemblies on 29th Decemb er, 1998. That was the pos ition till 13th Octobe r
1999 whereafter he continued under the Proclama tion of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999
In Syed Zafar Ali Shah's case , this Court upheld th e validity of the Pr oclamation of Emergenc y
and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 and then gave pow er to do certain things on the lines of Begum
Nusrat Bhutto's case  including the power  to amend the Constitution.  General Pervez Musharra f
in exercise of the pow ers enabling him issued the CE Or der No. 2 of 2001 whereby the Nationa l
Assembly, the Senate and the Provincial Assemblies were di ssolved with immediate effect
Thus, the electoral college, which had elected President M uhammad Rafiq Ta rar was no mor e
available and the person elected by that electoral coll ege ceased to hold office. He had bee n
allowed to continue under th e Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 an d
perform the functions which the Chief Executive, either by order or acts, asked him to issue an d
he issued such orders. So, there was a void a nd therefore the CE Order No. 3 of 2001 was issue d
on the same day, which enab led General Pervez Musharraf to a ssume the office of President. B y
way of abundant caution, it was provided that this Order sh all take effect notwithstandin g
anything contained in the Constitution or the law. The CE Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 are
therefore, in consonance with the judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . He
further submitted that these Orde r s  w e r e  a l s o  i n  l i n e  w i t h  t h e series of precedents and pas t
practice, which has become a convention, upheld by th is Court. In this context he referred to th e
circumstances in which various Constitutions we re framed and abrogated or held in abeyanc e
and Martial Law was imposed thrice. General Ayub Khan wa s appointed Chief Martial La w
Administrator and thereafter he assumed the office of President,  Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto ha d
become civilian Chief Martial Law Administrator and the President’s Successions Order, 197 8
was promulgated whereby General Zia-ul-Haq had assumed the office of the President. Th e
assumption of office of Presid ent by General Zia-ul-Haq wa s challenged first by Lt. Genera l
(Retired) Nasirullah Khan Baba r and then by Mr.Ghulam Jillani but the petitions were dismisse d
as per the judgments reported as Nasirullah Khan Babar  v. Chief of Army Staff  (PLD 197 9
Peshawar 23) and Malik Ghulam Jillani  v. Province of Punjab and others  (PLD 1979 Lahor e
564). The assumption of the offi ce of President by General Parv ez Musharaff was thus valid an d
not mala fide . 
53. He next contended that the present government was sui generis  and not a caretake r
government. It was not open to que stion having regard to the f unctions to be performed by i t
under the powers given by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . Adverting to th e
Referendum Order he submitted that there are two kinds of re ferendums, viz. (i) referendums i n
general and (ii) refe rendums in Pakistan. The book titl ed “Referendums and Democrati c
Governments” by Maija Setala, cite d by Mr. Hamid Khan is a rest ricted study as it covers onl y
26 countries. In England, where the parliamentary system is founded and recognized, Dicey ha d
suggested referendum. In France , General de Gaulle had us ed referendum for a vote o f
confidence. Referendums were held in several countries of the world including Greece, Italy
Luxembourg, Norway, Romania, Ru ssia, Egypt, Iraq, Maldives, Philippines, Turkey, and Bangl a
Desh. In the United Kingdom referendum was he ld in 1975 on the question whether or not t o
stay in the European Economic Community.  
54. In Pakistan, the very birth of Pakistan partly is the result of referendum held in NWFP
Balochistan and Sylhet. President’s Order No. 3 of 1960 was issued on 13th January, 1960 b y
Ayub Khan for seeking mandate from the local c ouncils. It was mentione d in the Order itsel f
that object of the mandate was to  frame the Constitution and beco me President for the first ter m
under that Constitution. Article 24 of the 1962 Constitution provide d for referendum in case o fconflict between the Presiden t and the National Assembly. Ju stice Monir has said that th e
provision was superfluous. The ca nons of construction speak ot herwise. In 1964 the Referendu m
Act was passed. It was repealed  in 1970. Article 277 of the Interim Constitution provided tha t
the President could refer any particular matter to a referendum but this provision was no t
included in the 1973 Constitution. In March 1977 the National Assembly election took place
The Pakistan National Alliance (PNA) refused to  accept the results for alleged massive rigging
On 13th May, 1977, Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto brought the 7th Am endment inserting Article 96- A
in the Constitution seeking vote of confidence and in case the result was against him, he woul d
be deemed to have resigned. The referendum did not take place in  view of the boycott and the n
the military intervention took place, which was justified in Begum Nusrat Bhutto's case . On 1s t
December, 1984 General Ziaul Ha q promulgated President’s Or der No. 11 of 1984 for holding a
referendum on the continuance of  his policies and in conseque nce giving him a term of fiv e
years. The election was held on 23rd March, 1985. On 2nd March, 1985, Revival of th e
Constitution of 1973 Order, 1985 (P.O. No. 14 of 1985) was made . Article 48 of th e
Constitution was amended and sub-Articles (6) & (7) were added. In the original Constitutio n
there was no provision for refere ndum. In exercise of the extr a-constitutional powers, Genera l
Ziaul Haq promulgated P.O. No. 11 of 1984 where by he was deemed to have been elected a s
President for five years. It was vehemently argued that refe rendum can be held on matters o f
national importance but one Prime Minister chose to seek vote of confidence and General Ziau l
Haq became President through referendum and was so recognized by Article 41(7) of th e
Constitution.  
55. Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, learned Attorney Gene ral for Pakistan submitted that the mai n
challenge in the petitions has be en made to the Referendum Orde r and in some of the petitions
particularly Constitution Petiti on No. 15/2002 the CE Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 have bee n
challenged. The latter challenge is  not only hit by the doctrine of laches but also by the principl e
laid down in Pir Sabir Shah ’s case  (PLD 1994 SC 738) that such a challenge cannot be made i n
collateral proceedings. So far as laches  is concerned, though generally a plea of laches is no t
allowed to defeat the writ of quo warranto but in some of the cases it has been held that it wil l
reflect on the bona fides  of the petitioner. Reliance was placed on Ali Raza Asad Abdi  v. Mr
Ghulam Ishaq Khan  (PLD 1991 Lahore 420). In that case, election of President Ghulam Isha q
Khan was challenged after two and a half  years. Reference was also made to Mahmood Kha n
Achakzai ’s case  (PLD 1997 SC 426), wherein it was observed that the delay alone is not enoug h
but other circumstances ar e to be looked into by this Court. He further submitted that absence o f
non obstante  clause in the CE Order No.2 of 2001 was immaterial as being merely an amendin g
order, it amended the Proclamati on of Emergency, which has a non obstante  clause. He pointe d
out that after 14th October, 1999, the continuati on in office of Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Tarar wa s
not by virtue of his election but by virtue of the Proclamati on of Emergency and the PCO No. 1
of 1999 which was accepted and acted upon by hi m. He could have been removed and he
therefore, lawfully ceased to hold office.  
56. He also submitted that the CE Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 do not deri ve their validity fro m
the Constitution, but from the Proclamation of  Emergency and the PC O No. 1 of 1999 and thu s
the same have to be examined  on the touchstone of these tw o documents. As to the objectio n
that under Article 43 read with  Article 260 of the Constitution General Pervez Musharraf canno t
hold two offices, he submitted that it cannot be denied that this is a transitional period and th e
source of validity is different. In Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  v. State (PLD 1978 SC 40), the appointmen t
of Mr. Justice Mushtaq Hussa in, Acting Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court as Chie f
Election Commissioner wa s questioned on the ground that he could not hold t hose two offices
The appointment was upheld. Ot her relevant cases were reported as PLD 1978 Karachi 736
PLD 1979 Peshawar 23 and PLD 1979 Lahore 564.  57. The learned Attorney General fu rther submitted with the support of case law that  in a time o f
extra-constitutional transition the power of judicial review is to be exercised within certai n
parameters and with caution.  
58. He next submitted that th e Referendum Order has been pr omulgated in pursuance of th e
Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 upheld by this Court in Syed Zafar Al i
Shah ’s case , therefore, at the present point of time it s validity cannot be questioned. In a time o f
extra-constitutional deviation wh ere the constitutional provisions are in abeyance the validity o f
the legislative measures cannot be examined on the touchstone of constitutional provisions. Th e
consequences of the referendum ar e not to take effect  immediately and the contentions raised b y
the petitioners are academic, presumptive and hypothe tical. Even looking at the constitutiona l
provisions, the Referendum Order falls within the scope of Arti cle 48(7) of the Constitution an d
is within the nature of the law made by the comp etent authority at a time  when the legislature i s
not in existence. The referendum held by Gene ral Ayub Khan received judicial recognition i n
Asma Jillani ’s case . 
59. The learned Attorney General referred to a number of referendums held  in various countrie s
of the world and submitted that appeal to the political soverei gn i.e. people of the country ca n
never be regarded as either undemocratic or being against the letter and spirit of th e
Constitution. He lastly submitte d that as pointed out earlier by Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada th e
verdict in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case  was analogous and s imilar to that in Begum Nusra t
Bhutto ’s case . 
60. In rebuttal, Dr. Farooq Hasa n submitted that; (1) the chal lenge to Presidency cannot b e
termed collateral as in  the petition relief of quo warranto has been prayed first; (2) the learne d
counsel for the respondents have  raised certain contentions wh ich travel beyon d the pleadings
(3) Army takeover was welcomed in itially but now the motivations have changed; (4) there is n o
proposition of law that a transient government ha s extraordinary and unbridled powers; (5) it ha s
been held in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case that Constitution still rema ins supreme law of the lan d
and constitutional amendments can  be resorted to only if the Constitution does not provide an y
solution; (6) the Proclamation of emerge ncy and PCO No.1 of 1999 cannot override th e
Constitution and (7) with the promulgation of the Referendum Order the image of the countr y
has been tarnished.  
61. It may be pointed out at the out set that insofar as the legal st atus of the Referendum Order i s
concerned, it is unquestionable inasmuch as it has been pr omulgated in pursuance of th e
Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999, which have been validated by thi s
Court. In this behalf, it ma y be mentioned here that the verdict given by this Court in Syed Zafa r
Ali Shah ’s case , which holds the field, manifestly show s that the Chief Executive/President o f
Pakistan has not only been empower ed to run the affairs of the Government for a period of thre e
years to achieve his decl ared objectives and directed to hold the election on a date not later tha n
90 days before October 12, 2002, but also give n power to amend the Constitution and mak e
necessary legislation for the pu rpose of implementing his decl ared objectives and for runnin g
day-to-day affairs of the gove rnment. The Referendum Order wa s promulgated notwithstandin g
the provisions of Clause (6) of  Article 48 of the Constitution under which a referendum can b e
held if the President, in his discretion or on the advice of the Prime Mini ster, considers that it i s
desirable that any matter of na tional importance should be referr ed to a referendum. In the sai d
event, the President can cause the matter to be referred to a refe rendum in the form of a questio n
which is capable of being answ ered either by “Yes ” or “No”. It was strenuously argued tha t
Article 48(6) of the Constitution having not be en held in abeyance, the holding of referendu m
was illegal and uncons titutional particularly  when General Pervez Musharraf being not a nelected President under the Constitution had no authority to hold such referendum. It was
contended that the President, w ho is also the Chief Executive and the Chief of Army Staff, has
no authority to act under Article 48(6) of the Constitution. The searching question fo r
ascertaining answer to this argument is under what powers the Chief Ex ecutive/President has
decided to hold the referendum. The answer lies  in the Referendum Or der itself the preamble
whereof makes it manifest that  the Chief Executive/President did not act under Article 48(6) o f
the Constitution for holding a referendum but pr omulgated the Referendum  Order in pursuance
of the Proclamation of Emerge ncy and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 a nd in exercise of all othe r
powers enabling him in that behalf. As already observed, General Pervez Musharraf had taken
over the affairs of the country in  extraordinary circumstances and in the light of the judgment o f
this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’ case the Chief Executive/Preside nt was fully competent to
issue the Referendum Order and thus no objection could be taken because he had the power an d
authority to do so. We ma y reiterate here the ratio  of Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case , which allowed 
a period of three years to Gene ral Pervez Musharraf to hold th e reins of government in his
capacity as the Chief Executive. It is further pertinent to menti on here that the country is being
steered towards the path of demo cracy and this is a transitiona l or transformation period and in
the present scenario the Referendum Order has turned out to be a springboard for reiteration o f
the commitment of the Chief Executive to hold the general election in October, 2002. It will not
be out of place to mention that after the re signation of General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan
Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  was appointed as the Civilian Chief Martial Law Administrator. The
question is could a civili an be appointed as the Chief Mart ial Law Administrator? In ordinary
circumstances the answer would be ‘No’. But for transitional period and with a view to 
effecting peaceful transfer of power it was thought desirable a nd expedient to hand over powe r
to Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto as the Chief Mar tial Law Administrator. We have already held in
Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case  that the Chief Executive does not have the power to alter the basic 
structure of the Constitution and the parliamentary form of  government is one of the
fundamentals of the 1973 Constitu tion. It may be observed here that General Pervez Musharra f
has time and again made statements both within a nd outside the country th at he is committed to
hold election in October, 2002 in accordance wi th the direction given by this Court in Syed 
Zafar Ali Shah's case . 
  
62. It was also urged before us that in an indirect method Ge neral Pervez Musharraf is seeking
his election to the office of  President through referendum a nd be it Article 48(6) of the
Constitution or the Referendum Order this method  cannot be adopted to get oneself elected as
President. The argument ignores the fact that in the past on two occas ions such a referendum
was held, one by Field Martial Ayub Khan and th e other by General Ziaul Haq with a view to
effecting transfer of power from  military to civilian authoritie s. We have already taken note o f
the provisions of Article 96-A of the Constitution, which was in serted into the Constitution by
Mr.Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto fo r holding a referendum in order to ascertain whether the nation in the
midst of agitations against him wanted to retain him as the Pr ime Minister or not.  
63. This brings us to the nature, definition, c oncept and meaning of referendum. According to 
the Oxford English Dictionary,  Volume XI, Second Edition, 1989, the word ‘referendum’ is of Latin origin which means
‘things to be referred’. It is derived from the French term ‘referer’ or from the Latin term
‘referre’ and a compound verb form ed from the prefix ‘re’, meaning, ‘back’ and ‘ferre’ meaning 
‘carry’ and referendum is an adoption of ‘netur e gerundive of referre’.  The terms ‘plebiscite’
and ‘referendum’ are interchangeable. According to  the Oxford English Di ctionary, Volume XI,
Second Edition, 1989, the word ‘plebiscite’, which is  also of Latin origin, is made of two words
‘plebis’ and ‘citus’, which mean ‘referring to the people’. The word  ‘plebiscite’ is said to be 
derived from ‘plebeian’ and etymologically is a decree a pproved by the common people. I n
modern politics, plebiscite is a direct vote of the whole of th e electors of a State to decide a
question of public importance. Dire ct democracy elections or plebis cite are nearly as old as the
idea of democracy. The notion of pl ebiscite goes back at least to  the ancient Rome. A plebiscite
is a direct vote by which voters are invited to accept or refuse the m easure, program or the
government of a person or  a party, and is a cons ultation whereby citizens exercise the right o f
national self-determina tion. According to th e book ‘Direct Democracy’ by Thomas E. Cronin,
Harvard University Press, the Swiss Constitut ion of 1848 provided for a popular constitutional
initiative. The Swiss have he ld more than 300 referendums a nd launched 135 initiatives since
1800s. Similarly, Australia, Italy, the Scandinavi an nations, Canada, Ghana and the Philippines
have also used refere ndums. Although the United States is one of the few democracies without a
nationwide initiative or refere ndum, the State Department has so me times recomm ended its use
to settle political questions in other nati ons. In 1978, the US mediators urged Presiden t
Anastasio Somoza to allow Nicaraguans to vot e on the question whethe r he should remain i n
office or not.  
64. The jurists have divided the subject matter of referendum into four broad categories: -  
Constitutional issues: After a revolution or  territorial break up, a country needs to 
give legitimacy to fresh ar rangements and to the rules under which it is to operate 
in the future. A popular vote of endorse ment is an excellent way of giving 
democratic authority to the new regime;  
Territorial issues: After 1918 President Woodrow Wilson’s pr inciple of self-
determination led to the settleme nt of several border disputes;  
Moral issues: Some questions cut across pa rty line and cause deep divisions among 
politicians, who are normally  allied in office or in opposition. Alcoholic beverage 
prohibition, divorce and aborti on are examples of contenti ons that seve ral countries 
have sought to settle through referendum;  
Other issues: In certain count ries the citizens have the ri ght to insist that certain 
matters be put to a popular vote. In Switzer land, Italy and in a nu mber of States in 
the United States of America,  a vast diversity of questions  has been referred to the 
electorate. See ‘Ref erendums Around the World’ by David Butler and Austin 
Ranney, page 2.  
It is not our country alone in which refere ndum is being held unde r the Referendum Order.
Referendums have been held in many countries of the worl d on several issues. President Hosni
Mobarek of Egypt got elected as  President in 1999 for a six-ye ar term through referendum. In 
January 2002, referendum in Uzbekist an took place as a result of  which President Islam Krimov
got elected for seven years. Se e ‘Referendums Around the World’ by David Butler and Austin 
Ranney. The book titled ‘Referendums in Democratic Governments’ by Maija Setala, cited by 
Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC, lear ned counsel for one of the petitioners is comparativel y selectivein character inasmuch as it has dealt with only  28 countries. In this very book at page 88, it is
mentioned that sometimes refere ndum is used to achieve symbo lic legitimization of the positio n
of the government or its policies. Syed Sharif uddin Pirzada, Sr. ASC, learned counsel for the
Federation, who has very ably argued this case, drew our atten tion to the book title d
“Referendums around the World - The Growing Use of Direct Democracy” edited by Davi d 
Butler and Austin Ranney. In  Appendix A to this book unde r the heading “Nationwide
Referendums, 1793-1993” a list of all nationwid e referendums in independent countries excep t
for Australia and Switzerland, which have had more referendum s than all other countries pu t
together, has been given according to which mo re than 300 referendums have been held so fa r
in those countries of the world on various subjects.  
65. As regards the referendums in Pa kistan, it may be observed that the very birth of Pakistan is
associated with referendums held in the NWFP , Balochistan and Sylhet . The Frontier Congress
suggested that the deci sion about accession to Pakistan be  taken by the Provincial Assembly.
Since election to the Assembly was held under the Congress Minist ry, the Quaid-e-Azam
suggested dismissal of the Congr ess Ministry and holding of fr esh election to the Assembly.
This proposal was not acceptable to the Congr ess and Lord Mount Batten. The Quaid-e-Azam
then suggested for holding a referendum in th e Frontier Province. The Congress Ministry
contended that the referendum was illegal and advised to take the matter to the Court. However,
the referendum did take place and although it was boycotted by the Congress, the people with
heavy majority voted in favour of Pakist an on the appeal of the Quaid-e-Azam.  
66. On 13th January 1960 President’s Or der 3 of 1960 was issued, which provided that electe d
members of the local councils shall be called upon by the Elec tion Commission to declare by a
vote in secret ballot whether or not they have confidence in President Muhammad Ayub Khan.
The majority of the votes  cast declared confidence in the Pr esident and thus he was deemed to
have been elected as President for the first te rm under the Constitution. Article 24 of the 1962
Constitution provided for a referendum wher eas Article 153 provided that the Electio n
Commission would be constituted for (a) election to  the office of President, (b) general electio n
and (c) referendum. However, the Refe rendums Act, 1964 was repealed in 1970.  
67. Article 277 of the Inte rim Constitution of 1972 provided th at the President could refer any
particular matter of public importance to a re ferendum. This Article wa s deleted from the draf t
1973 Constitution and no provisi on as to referendum was made  in the 1973 Constitution as
originally framed. In 1977, the P NA refused to accept the results of  the general election alleging
massive rigging. At that juncture, Mr. Zulfiqar Al i Bhutto got inserted Article 96-A into the 
Constitution by means of the Constitution (Sev enth Amendment) Act,  1977, which provided fo r
obtaining a vote of confidence of the people through referendum . However, no referendum too k
place under this Article in view  of the boycott of the oppositi on and the Amendment Act lapse d
on 13th September, 1977 in view of the provi sions of section 1(3) of the said Act.  
68. On 1st December 1984, Presiden t General Ziaul Haq promulga ted President’s Order 11 o f
1984, which provided for holding a referendum. As a result of  the referendum held on 19th
December 1984, General Ziaul Haq was deemed to have been duly elected as President for a
term of five years. Election to the National a nd Provincial Assemblies and the Senate was hel d
on 23rd March 1985 and by means of the Revival of the Constitu tion Order (President’s Orde r
No. 14 of 1985), Article 48 was amended and cl auses (6) & (7) were added regarding
referendum.  
69. As already discussed, the Gove rnment of Mian Muhammad Na waz Sharif came to an end o n12th October, 1999 when General Pervez Mushar raf took over the affairs of the country i n
pursuance of the Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999, which were validate d
by this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . On 20th June 2001, Ge neral Pervez Musharra f
assumed the office of President by means of the CE Orde rs No. 2 and 3 of 2001 and on 9th
April 2002 issued the Referendum Order which has been challenged in these proceedings.  
70. We have already held that the legal status of the Refere ndum Order is unquestionable. We
would reiterate that the Refere ndum Order has been validly prom ulgated and further add that a
case for interrupting the proce ss is not made out as the stag e is set for holding the referendum
on 30th April, 2002. As regards the consequences  of the result of referendum spelt out by
Article 4 of the Referendum Order, suffice it to say that in the Short Order we have already hel d
as follows: -  
“13. As regards the grounds of challenge to 
the consequences flow ing from the holding of 
referendum under the Referendum Order, 
apparently these que stions are purely 
academic, hypothetical and presumptive in 
nature and are not capable of being 
determined at this j uncture. Accordingly, we 
would not like to go in to these questions at 
this stage and leave the same to be determined 
at a proper forum at the appropriate time. 
Since no relief can be granted in these 
proceedings at this st age, the Constitution 
Petitions are disposed of being premature.”  
  
71. We would now advert to the CE Orders N o. 2 of 2001 and CE Order No. 3 of 2001 agains t
which scathing criticism was made and it was attempted to argue that the former President Mr.
Muhammad Rafiq Tarar still c ontinued to hold the office of  President and General Pervez
Musharraf had illegally assume d unto himself the office of the President. The argument is
untenable because in our considered view the CE  Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 have been validly
promulgated by the Chief Executive/President in  exercise of the powe rs conferred on him by
virtue of the Proclamation of  Emergency and PCO No.1 of 1999, which have been validated by
this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . Accordingly, we hold th at Mr. Muhammad Rafi q
Tarar has ceased to hold office by virtue  of CE Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001.  
72. We may further add here that  the CE Order No. 2 of 2001 was promulgated on 20th June,
2001 amending the Proclamation of  Emergency and as a result  thereof Mr. Muhammad Rafi q
Tarar, the then President of Pakistan, ceased to  hold office with immedi ate effect, the National
Assembly, the Provincial Assemblies and the Se nate of Pakistan suspended by the Proclamatio n
of Emergency were dissolved, th e Chairman and Deputy Chairman  of Senate and Speakers an d
Deputy Speakers of the National and the Provin cial Assemblies also ceased to hold thei r
respective offices. The CE Order No. 3 of 2001 which was also issued on the same day provide d
that upon the office of the President becoming v acant, the Chief Executiv e shall be the Presiden t
of the Islamic Republic of  Pakistan and shall pe rform all functions assigned to the President by
or under the Constitution or by or under any law. It was further provided that if the President is
unable to perform his functions either by his absence from the country or for any other reason,the Chief Justice of Pakistan shall act as Presid ent and in case the Chief Justice is unable to ac t
as President the most senior Judge  of the Supreme Court shall act as Presiden t of Pakistan till th e
President returns to Pakistan and assu mes his functions, as the case may be.  
73. On 20th June 2001, General Pervez Musharraf entered upon the office of the President an d
was administered oath of office provided in th e Schedule to the CE Or der No. 3 of 2001 by th e
then Chief Justice of Pakista n. Thereafter, General Pervez Mu sharraf has been performing th e
functions of the President. He has sworn in tw o Chief Justices of Paki stan. He has met foreig n
heads of the States as well as local politicians including many of th e petitioners in his capacity a s
President of Pakistan. No challenge muchless e ffective was thrown to the assumption of offic e
of President by him and even in these petiti ons the challenge has b een made only peripherall y
and collaterally while ch allenging the Referendum Order. It is  well settled that a writ of quo
warranto  cannot be brought through collat eral attack. Such a relief has to be claimed directly
We are fortified in this behalf by the judgment of this Court in Pir Sabir Shah ’s case  (PLD 199 4
SC 738). Not only in this case but  also in other cases it was held that for orderly and goo d
governance validity of the a ppointment of incumbent of publ ic office cannot be impugne d
through collateral proceedings. Although st rictly speaking the principle of laches  does not appl y
to the writ of quo warranto  but the Court cannot close its ey es as regards the conduct of th e
petitioners appearing before it , which militates against the bona fides of the petitions. We ar e
fortified by the judgment of the Lahor e High Court in th e case reported as Ali Raza Asad Abdi v
Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan  (PLD 1991 Lahore 420). One of the petitioners through Dr. Faroo q
Hasan had also challenged the election of Mr. G hulam Ishaq Khan as President of Pakistan i n
the Lahore High Court. That election was he ld on 12th December 1988 and Mr. Ghulam Isha q
Khan was elected as President of Pakistan and he took oath  of office on 13th December 1988 bu t
the petition was filed in  1991. The principle of laches was applied by the Lahore High Cour t
while dismissing the said petition. Th e Lahore High Court held as under: -  
“…. the attempt of the petitioner at such a 
belated stage to call in question the validity of 
the said election and as a consequence the validity of the acts of the President……. is 
bound to create confusion and chaos which in 
national affairs must be  avoided as far as 
possible……..the circumst ances which floated 
manifestly on the service warranted an 
explanation from the pe titioner about the delay 
in filing this petition. No thing at all has been 
urged today to explain th e inordinate delay of 
2 - ½ years from the date  of the election of the 
President and more than one year passed from 
20-3-1990, in filing this petition. This is yet 
another valid basis for refusing to entertain 
this petition.”  
  
Similarly, in the case of Mahmood Khan Achakzai  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1997 S C
426), this Court observed as under:-  
“……delay per se may not be the only ground to refuse the relief where question of 
Constitutional importance is involved. 
Nevertheless, the delay and laches shall have to be considered along with other grounds in 
refusing to give the relief.”  
  
In the case before us, the petitioners also rose from slumber when the Referendum Order wa s
promulgated in April 2002 although the CE Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001 were issued in Jun e
2001 and while challenging the Referendum Order, the assumption of of fice by General Perve z
Musharraf has been challenged co llaterally. No explanation has been rendered by the petitioner s
for not filing the petitions afte r 20th June 2001 till the promul gation of the Referendum Order.  
74. Dr. Farooq Hasan also submitted that th e CE Order No. 2 of 2001 did not contain a non
obstante  clause and therefore it coul d not override the Constitution. The perusal of the Order No
2 would show that it merely amended the Proclamation of Em ergency and being an amendin g
order is an integral part of the Proclamation of Emer gency. The Proclamation of Emergenc y
clearly provided in para 2(a) that the Constit ution of the Islamic Re public of Pakistan shal l
remain in abeyance. It further provided in para 2(f) that the whole of Pakistan shall come unde r
the control of the Armed Forces of Pakistan. Since the 1973 Constitu tion itself is in abeyance, i t
was not necessary to repeat in the CE Orde rs No. 2 and 3 of 2001 the language used in th e
Proclamation of Emergency and there was hardly any necessity to provide that the provisions o f
the Proclamation of Emergenc y will override the Constitu tion or shall have effec t
notwithstanding anything contained therein. The perusal of the CE Order No. 3 of 2001 woul d
clearly reveal that it provides in Article 2 th at it shall have effect  notwithstanding anythin g
contained in the Constitution or any other law.  The CE Order No. 3 of  2001 has not been issue d
under the Constitution an d it is like the earlier extra- constitutional measures, viz. th e
Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 and has been issued in extraordinar y
situation to promote the good of  the people and good governance in  the country. The CE Order s
No. 2 and 3 of 2001 draw their va lidity from the Proclamation of  Emergency and the PCO No. 1
of 1999 and have been issued in exercise of  the powers enabling Gene ral Pervez Musharraf i n
that behalf as the Chief Executive  of Pakistan. Needless to ment ion that this Court has validate d
the Proclamation of Emergency as  well as the PCO No. 1 of 1999.  
75. Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Tara r was elected as President on 29th December, 1997 an d
continued in office t ill 14th October, 1999, i. e. the date when Proc lamation of Emergency wa s
promulgated and given effect from 12th Octobe r 1999. It clearly provided in para 2 that th e
President shall continue in of fice. Thus, he continued as Pr esident under the Proclamation o f
Emergency and not under the 1973 Constitution and th e fact that he was not given oath under th e
PCO No. 1 of 1999 is of no consequence.  
76. We may observe that in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case this Court empowered General Perve z
Musharraf to perform all such acts and promulgate all legi slative measures which are i n
accordance with and could have been made under the 1973 Constitution as well as acts an d
measures which promote good of the people or which are required to be done for ordinar y
orderly running of the affairs of the State or wh ich lead to the establis hment and attainment o f
declared objectives of the Chief Executive. The CE Orde rs No. 2 and 3 of 2001 wer e
promulgated to promote the good of the people a nd thus in our view were necessary to establis h
the objectives of the Chief Executive for the or derly ordinary running of the State within th escope of the judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . These legislative measures 
have, therefore, been validly i ssued. The three Orders, i.e. th e CE Orders No. 2 and 3 of 2001
and the Referendum Order read together are essential to provide for smooth and orderly
transition to the democratic se t up after the October 2002 election.  
77. Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, learned Sr. ASC drew our attention to the circumstances in 
which after the fall of Dacca, General Agha  Muhammad Yahya Khan handed over power to 
Mr.Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto who was declared first Ci vilian Chief Martial Law Administrator as well 
as President of Pakistan. Interim  Constitution was given to the country and then long parleys were held. Tripartite agreements
were entered into by the Pakist an People’s Party with other pol itical parties. On number o f
occasions, there was a deadlock  on the framing of the 1973 Cons titution but eventually the
1973 Constitution was passed by the Nati onal Assembly and promulgated on 14th August,
1973 and Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto assumed the of fice of the Prime Minister of Pakistan. We
need not go into the details of that history but the perusal ther eof does show as to how delicate
and difficult is the path for pr oceeding on the road to democrac y and for the transfer of powe r
to the civilian side. As already observed by us, we have no manner of doubt that the presen t
referendum like the earlier refe rendums held in this country tw ice before, is a step towards
restoration of democracy.  
78. Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada also argued that th ere was similarity between the ratio of the
judgments of this Court in Begum Nusrat Bhutto ’s case  and Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case . In
Begum Nusrat Bhutto's case , this Court laid down as under: -  
“As a result, the true legal position which, 
therefore, emerges is: -  
(i) That the 1973 Constitution still remains the supreme 
law of the land subject to th e condition that certain parts 
thereof have been held in abeyance on account of State 
necessity;  
(ii) That the President of Pakistan and the superior Courts 
continue to function under the Constitution. The mere 
fact that the Judges of the superior Courts have taken a 
new oath after the proclamati on of Martial Law, does not 
in any manner derogate from this position, as the Courts 
had been originally established under the 1973 
Constitution and have conti nued in their functions in 
spite of the proclamation of Martial Law;  
(iii) That the Chief Martial Law Administrator, having 
validly assumed power by means of an extra-
Constitutional step, in the inte rest of the State and for the 
welfare of the people, is entitl ed to perform all such acts 
and promulgate all legislativ e measures which have been 
consistently recognized by judi cial authorities as falling 
within the scope of the law of necessity, namely: -  
(a) All acts or legislat ive measures which are 
in accordance with, or could have been made 
under the 1973 Constitution, including the 
power to amend it;  
(b) All acts which tend to advance or 
promote the good of the people;  
(c) All such measures as would establish or 
lead to the establishment of the declared objectives of the Proclamation of Martial 
Law, named restoration of law and order, and 
normally in the country, and the earliest 
possible holding of free a nd fair elections for 
the purpose of restor ation of democratic 
institutions under the 1973 Constitution.  
(iv) That these acts, or any of them, may be performed or 
carried out by means of Pres idential Orders, Ordinances, 
Martial Law Regulations, or Orders, as the occasion may 
require; and  
(v) That the superior 
Courts continue to 
have the power of 
judicial review to 
judge the validity of 
any act or action of 
the Martial Law 
Authorities, if 
challenged, in the 
light of the principles 
underlying the law 
of necessity as stated 
above. Their powers 
under Article 199 of 
the Constitution thus 
remain available to their full extent, and 
may be exercised as 
heretofore, 
notwithstanding 
anything to the 
contrary contained 
in any Martial Law 
Regulation or Order, 
Presidential Order or Ordinance.”  
  
The legal and constitutional positi on as noted above is similar to  that which prevails now. I n
Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case , this Court has held that th e Chief Executive may perform act s
referred to in the judgment by means of Orde rs issued by him or th rough Ordinances on hi s
advice. He has the authorit y to issue legislative meas ures. The authority, as in Begum Nusra t
Bhutto's case , is subject to certain qua lifications. These measures are, however, subject t o
judicial review. This Cour t in both the cases has held that “t his is not a case where the old lega l
order has been completely suppressed or destr oyed but merely a case of  constitutional deviatio n
for a transitional period.” This extraordinar y situation was dealt with by this Court in SyedZafar Ali Shah ’s case  and it was held as under: -
“….the impugned action has not been taken 
under any constitutional provision, but it is 
the result of an extra-constitutional measure 
and, therefore, reference to the above 
constitutional provision is of no 
consequence.”  
  
At another place in the aforesaid j udgment, this Court held as under: -  
“… action dated 12-10-1999 is in itself 
sufficient to be equa ted with something 
beyond the contemplati on of the Constitution, 
and, therefore, no question regarding the 
same being attended to by the courts for 
resolution by treating it as having been taken 
under the Constitution arises.”  
  
We may observe here that simi lar is the position of the Refe rendum Order, which has not bee n
issued under the Constitution and therefore, reference to Articles 41, 42, 43 and 48 of th e
Constitution is absolutely irrelevant. The Re ferendum Order, which has been issued under th e
Proclamation of Emergency and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 cannot be challe nged in any manner o n
the touchstone of the Constitution including any reference to the provisions, which lay dow n
explicitly or implicitly that the offices of the President and the Prime Minister shall be held b y
two different persons or that the President cannot be the Chie f Executive as well as the Chief o f
Army Staff at the same time. It was also ur ged that under Article 62 of the Constitution, whic h
contains qualifications for being elected as a member of the National Assembly, which are als o
the qualifications for election to th e office of the President, cannot  be read into Article 41(2) o f
the Constitution. The said Article  only provides that the Presiden t must be a pe rson qualified t o
be elected as a member of the National Assembly. The disqualifications listed in Article 6 3
cannot be read into Article 41(2) in vi ew of the judgement of this court in Aftab Shahba n
Mirani  v. President of Pakistan  [1998 SCMR 1863] which upheld the judgement of the Lahor e
High Court in the ca se reported as Muhammad Rafiq Tarrar  v. Justice Mukhtar Ahmad Junej o
[PLD 1998 Lahore 414]. The same view was also expressed in Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif v
Muhammad Iltaf Hussain  [PLD 1995 Lahore 541].  
79. As regards the provisions of Ar ticle 43 of the Constitution an d the definition of ‘service o f
Pakistan’ given in Article 260 read with othe r provisions of the Constitution including th e
Second and Third Schedule thereto, all these provi sions are in abeyance. Therefore, they hav e
no relevance and the assumption of the office of the President by General Pervez Musharra f
and the holding of referendum cannot be cha llenged on the strength of these provisions.  
80. We may also mention here that after the decision in Begum Nusrat Bhutto ’s case , Mr
Justice Maulvi Mushtaq Hussain, Acting Chie f Justice of the Lahor e High Court was als o
appointed as the Acting Chie f Election Commissioner. The appointment was challenged an dthis Court in Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  v. State [PLD 1978 SC 40] at pages 58-59 held that on the 
basis of doctrine of ne cessity, the holding of two offices by Mr. Justice Mushtaq Hussain was
not at all illegal. The Court observed as follows:  
“58. These categories of  the various types of 
permissible actions we re spelt out after a 
review of the leading authorities on the 
doctrine of necessity which purported to lay 
down that such actions  would be construed 
or deemed to be necessa ry in the interest of 
the welfare of the peopl e and the State. The 
reason underlying such a view obviously is 
that once an extra-Cons titutional action or 
intervention is validat ed on the ground of 
State or civil necessit y, then, as a logical 
corollary it follows that the new Regime or 
Administration must be permitted, in the 
public interest, not only to run the day-to-day 
affairs of the country, but also to work 
towards the achievement  of the objectives on 
the basis of which its intervention has earned 
validation. In other words, if it can be shown 
that the impugned action reasonably falls 
within one or the othe r of the enumerated 
categories, then it must  be construed as being 
necessary and thus held valid under the law 
of necessity. The word  “necessity” has, 
therefore, come to be used in this context as 
a term of art, having a certain constitutional 
and legal connotation as  distinct from its 
ordinary dictionary meaning.  
“59. It seems to us, theref ore, that it must be 
clearly understood that  in judging whether an 
action taken by the President or the Chief 
Martial Law Administrato r is valid under the 
law of necessity, the C ourt is not to sit in 
appeal over the executi ve or legislative 
authority concerned, nor  substitute its own 
discretion for that of the competent authority. 
The responsibility for th e relevant action, its 
methodology and procedural details, must 
rest on the authority. In exercising its power 
of judicial review th e Court is concerned 
with examining whether the impugned action reasonably falls within any of the categories 
enumerated by this Court in Begum Nusrat 
Bhutto’s case, while spelling out the powers 
which may be exercise d by the Chief Martial 
Law Administrator, or the President of 
Pakistan acting on his a dvice. As to what is reasonable or not in this context must be 
judged by the standards of an ordinary, 
prudent and reasonable citizen, and will 
depend on the prevailing circumstances and 
the object with which the action has been 
taken. These observations are, of course, 
without derogation to the other accepted principles governing th e exercise of powers 
conferred by Article 199 of the 
Constitution.”  
This judgement was followed in Rustam Ali
 v. Martial Law Administrator  [PLD 
1978 Karachi 736] by a Division Bench of the High Court of Sindh at Karachi. In 
Nasirullah Khan Babar  v. Chief of the Army Staff  [PLD 1979 Peshawar 23], the 
issue under consideration was whether Gene ral Ziaul Haq could hold the offices of 
the Chief of Army Staff a nd the President of Pakistan  simultaneously. A Division 
Bench of the Peshawar High Court at pages 27 and 28 paragraph 8 held as 
follows:  
“It is true that by combining two offices, 
respondent No.1 was deviating from the 
provisions of Article 43 of the Constitution 
but the all important quest ion that arises is as 
to whether respondent No.1 acted under the 
Constitution or that his or that of the former 
President’s action was an extra-
Constitutional action. In this context it will be useful to refer to the President’s 
Succession Order, 1978, the Preamble 
whereof reads:-  
“In pursuance of the Pr oclamation of fifth 
day of July, 1977, read  with the Laws 
(Continuance in Force) Order, 1977 
(C.M.L.A. Order N o.1 of 1977) and in 
exercise of all powers enabling him in that 
behalf, the President is pleased to make the 
following Order.”  
“It will be seen that this Presidential Order 
was not under the Constitution but was in 
pursuance of the procla mation of the 5th day 
of July, 1977, read with the Laws 
(Continuance in Force) Order, 1977. Now 
paragraph 2 (1) of the Laws Continuance in 
Force Order No.1 provides:-  
Notwithstanding the abeyance of the 
provisions of the Const itution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, he reinafter referred to 
as the Constitution, Pakistan shall, subject to this Order and any order made by the 
President and any Regulation made by the 
Chief Martial Law Administrator be 
governed as nearly as may be, in accordance 
with the Constitution.  
So to speak this paragraph gives power to the 
President or to the Chief Martial Law 
Administrator to make Constitutional deviations or in the other words issue extra-
Constitutional orders. On a second look at 
the Begum Nusrat Bhutto’s case it will 
appear that this Laws  Continuance in Force 
Order was declared as valid.  
29: “If the holding of two posts by Mr. 
Justice Mushtaq Hussain simultaneously in 
pursuance of President Post-Proclamation Order could not be sifted  at the touchstone of 
the Constitution, how could the President’s 
Succession Order, 1978 be subjected to such 
an attack or sifting. Even though two 
opinions are possible, it cannot be reasonably 
argued that the combination of the two posts 
by respondent No.1 was in any way an act 
which would not tend to  advance or promote 
the good of the people or an act which was not required for the ordinary orderly running 
of the State. Taking into consideration the 
requirements of the pres ent situation it would 
rather appear that by combination of the two 
posts the respondent No.1 has not only done 
away with a cumbersome formality but has 
also assumed direct  responsibility and 
incidental accountability for his actions as 
Chief Executive of Pakistan.  
At page 31 in paragraph 14 the Court observed as follows:-  
“14. It will follow, we  cannot substitute our 
own discretion for that of a competent 
authority and we are cl ear in our mind that 
ultimate responsibility for an action taken, its 
methodology and proce dural details must 
rest with respondent No.1 in all capacities, which he has assumed. The possibility of 
two opinions on certain  points may be there 
but to say that it is the duty of this Court to 
judge in the exercise of its Constitutional 
jurisdiction, the political implications of this 
or that action will be an argument to which we cannot subscribe subject to law, every 
party whether in minority or majority, is at 
liberty to question the wi sdom of this or that 
decision of the Fede ral Government, as 
presently constituted, but all that we have to 
ensure is whethe r an impugned action 
reasonably falls within any of the categories 
enumerated in Begum Nu srat Bhutto’s case 
on pages 5 to 7 of this or der. This criterion in 
our judgment presents no serious challenge to 
the impugned actions.” 
In Malik Ghulam Jilani  v. Province of Punjab [PLD 1979 Lahore 564] the appointment o f
General Zia as President of Pa kistan was called into question. It was held by the Lahore Hig h
Court that the appointment promoted the good of  the people and being wi thin the scope of th e
judgement in Begum Nusrat Bhutto ’s case was valid. At page 586 of the report it was held a s
follows:-  
“The imposition of Mart ial Law, therefore, 
stands validated on the doctrine of necessity 
and the Chief Martial Law Administrator is 
entitled to perform all such acts and 
promulgate all legisl ative measures which 
have been consistently recognized by judicial 
authorities as falling within the scope of the 
law of necessity”. This  principle would apply 
to the appointment of President also for which, in the present situation, there is no 
guidance in the Constitution. Resort to extra-
constitutional measures is not only justified 
but is necessary. The Pr esident’s Order 13 is, 
therefore, a valid legislation.” 
81. A word may also be said a bout the definition of the term ‘abeyance’. This expression wa
s
interpreted by the Lahore High Court in University of Punjab  v. Rehmatullah  [PLD 198 2
Lahore 729]. It was held that the word ‘abe yance’ means state of  suspension or dorman t
condition. In a time of constituti onal abeyance, therefore, the vali dity of the Orders issued b y
the Chief Executive insofar as these conf orm to the judgment of this Court in Syed Zafar Al i
Shah ’s case , cannot be questioned on the basis of being at varian ce with the constitutiona l
provisions and while examining such  acts or measures this cour t would not sit in appeal on th e
political wisdom of such acts an d measures. It will also not de termine whether it was proper t o
do so. This Court while retaining the power of judicial review over the acts and orders an d
measures of the Chief Executiv e noted that the power of judi cial review should be exercise d
with caution. We may also observe here that the pow er of judicial review has to remain strictl y
judicial and cannot be undertak en with a view to encroa ching upon the domain of othe r
branches of the government. In Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari  v. Federation of Pakistan [PLD
1999 SC 57] which was approved in Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case , this Court observed that onl y
limited power of judicial review in such matters vested with the Court. It was held as under: -  
“However, whether in a particular situation 
the extent of powers used is proper and justifiable, is a quest ion which would remain 
debatable and beyond judi cially discoverable 
and manageable standards unless the exercise 
of the excessive power is so palpably 
irrational or mala fide  as to invite judicial 
intervention. In fact, onc e the issuance of the 
Proclamation is held valid, the security of the 
kind and degree of pow er used under the 
Proclamation falls in a narrow compass. There is every risk and fear of the Court 
undertaking upon itself the task of evaluating 
with fine scales and through its own lenses 
the comparative merits of  one rather than the 
other measure. The Court will, thus, travel 
unwittingly into the political arena and 
subject itself more read ily to the charges of 
encroaching upon policy making. The 
‘political thicket’ object ion sticks more easily 
in such circumstances.”  
82. It was also argued that the e ssence of the Referendum Order was mala fide . As far as mal
a
fide is concerned, this Court in terpreted and defined the same in the case reported as Saee d
Ahmed Khan  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1974 SC 151). It was observed as under: -  
“Mala fides  is one of the most  difficult things 
to prove and the onus is entirely upon the 
person alleging mala fides  to establish it, 
because, there is, to start with, a presumption 
of regularity with regard  to all official acts, 
and until that presumpt ion is rebutted, the 
action cannot be ch allenged merely upon a 
vague allegation of mala fides . As has been 
pointed out by this Cour t in the case of the 
Government of West Pakistan v. Begum 
Agha Abdul Karim Shorish Kashmiri (1), 
mala fides  must be pleaded with particularity, 
and once one kind of mala fides  is alleged, no 
one should be allowed to adduce proof of any 
other kind of mala fides  nor should any 
enquiry be launched upon merely on the basis 
of vague and indefinite allegations, nor 
should the person alleging mala fides  be 
allowed to a roving enquiry into the files of 
the Government for the purposes of fishing 
out some kind of a case.  
“Mala fides ” literally means “in bad faith”. 
Action taken in bad faith is usually action 
taken maliciously in fact , that is to say, in 
which the person taking the action does so 
out of personal motives either to hurt the person against whom the action is taken or to 
benefit oneself. Action taken in colourable 
exercise of powers, that is to say, for 
collateral purposes not authorized by the law 
under which the action is taken or action 
taken in fraud of the law are also mala fide . It 
is necessary, therefore,  for a person alleging 
that an action has been taken mala fide  to 
show that the person responsible for taking the action has been motivated by any one of 
the considerations me ntioned above. A mere 
allegation that an ac tion has been taken 
wrongly is not sufficient to establish a case of 
mala fides , nor can a case of mala fides  be 
established on the basi s of universal malice 
against a particular class or section of the people”  
Similar view wa s expressed in Fauji Foundation
 v. Shamimur Rehman (PLD 1983 SC 457) an d
it was held that the exercise of legislative power ei ther by the Assembly or by the President i s
not made dependent on any moti ve or wisdom and the legisl ation cannot be struck down o n
grounds of mala fide  in view of these judgements.  
83. It was argued that after hol ding of the referendum, Gene ral Pervez Musharraf and hi s
regime have no intenti on to hold the election, the referendum would be unfair in the absence o f
the electoral rolls and such re ferendum would be a device to as sume absolute powers. It wa s
also urged before us that after the referendum  General Pervez Musharraf will have to see k
validity of the referendum from the Parliament and in conseque nce of the mandate obtained i n
the referendum he will seek e nhancement of powers and thus the parliamentary system woul d
come to an end and Presidential form of gove rnment will come into  existence. All thes e
apprehensions, in our view, are purely imaginary, academic, presumptive and hypothetical an d
in fact such questions have been raised prem ature. We cannot anticipate nor can the petitioner s
as to the course of future events. This Court has always declined to go into academic exercise s
in respect of unborn issues . In the case reported as Asma Jilani  v Government of Punjab [PLD
1972 SC 139] this Court at page 166 observed as follows:-  
“The Courts do not decide abstract, 
hypothetical or contingent  questions or give 
mere declarations in the air. “The 
determination of an abstract question of 
constitutional law divor ced from the concrete 
facts of a case”, as observed by the same 
learned Chief Justice, “floats in an 
atmosphere of unreality; it is a determination 
in vacuum and unless it  amounts to a decision 
settling rights and oblig ations of the parties 
before the Court it is not  an instance of the 
exercise of judicial power.  
“There is no duty cast on the Courts to enter 
upon purely academic exercises or to pronounce upon hypothetical questions. The 
court’s judicial functi on is to adjudicate upon 
a real and present c ontroversy which is 
formally raised before it by a litigant.”  
Reference may also be made  to the cases reported as Muhammad Saddiq Javaid Chaudhry v
The Government of West Pakistan  [PLD 1974 SC 393], Muhammad Hassan  v. Government o f
Sindh and others  [1980 SCMR 400], Asad Ali  v Federation of Pakistan  [PLD 1998 SC 161 ]
and Sajjad Ali Shah  v Asad Ali  [1999 SCMR 640].  
84. It was also argued before  us that the Chief Election Commissioner and the Electio n
Commission of Pakistan had no authority to conduct the refere ndum in view of provisions o f
Articles 213(3), 218 and 219 of the Constitution. The argument is fallacious because it ignore s
the fact that the provisions of the Constitution are in abey ance. As mentioned earlier, th e
Referendum Order has been i ssued by the Chief Executive not withstanding anything containe d
in the Constitution and under th e Proclamation of Emergenc y and the PCO No. 1 of 1999 an d
all other powers enabling him in  that behalf. Furthermore, th e Chief Election Commissioner, i n
view of Article 213(3), has such powers a nd functions as are c onferred on him by th e
Constitution and law. We have already he ld that the Referendum Order is a validl y
promulgated Order of the Chief Executiv e. The Referendum Order empowers the Chie f
Election Commissioner and the Election Co mmission of Pakistan to hold and conduc t
referendum and this is not open to challe nge on any ground or crit eria laid down in Syed Zafa r
Ali Shah ’s case . It was repeatedly argued that the prov isions for referendum in the Constitutio n
are general in nature while Articl e 41 specifically provides the m ode for election to the office o f
the President through an electoral college of the National Assembly, the Provincial Assemblie s
and the Senate and Article 41 being the special provision woul d prevail over Article 48(6). Mr
Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada urged th at Article 41 and Article 48(6)  of the Constitution, if rea d
together and harmonized, provide plural remedies, courses and opt ions. It may be observed tha t
the principles for interpreting constitutional docum ents as laid down by this Court are that al l
provisions should be read toge ther and harmonious construc tion should be placed on suc h
provisions so that no provision is rendered nuga tory. The learned counsel appearing for th e
respondents have rightly urged that appeal to th e political and popular sovereign, i.e. the peopl e
of Pakistan cannot be termed as  undemocratic and cannot be rega rded as against the letter an d
spirit of the Constitution. As already observe d, Articles 41, 43 and 48 and the definition o f
‘service of Pakistan’ in Article 260 and Schedules to the Constitut ion are not at all relevant an d
have no bearing upon the issue i nvolved in these proceedings.  
85. Before parting with the judgment, we would like to re cord our deep appreciation of th e
valuable assistance rendered by the learned couns el for the parties and the learned Attorne y
General for Pakistan during the hearing of the case.  
CHIEF JUSTICE  
  
JUDGE  
  
JUDGE  JUDGE  
  
JUDGE  
  
JUDGE  
  
JUDGE  
  
JUDGE  
  
JUDGE  
Islamabad  
April 27, 2002  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 