IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
        (Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
    Present  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
  Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
  
Constitution Petition No. 59 of 2011 and CMAs Nos. 326 and 633 of 2012 and  
Crl. O. P. 94 of 2012 in Const. P.  59/2011.  
(Petition under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution)  
 
Muhammad Ashraf Tiwana etc.    .…   Petitioner(s)  
    Versus  
Pakistan etc.        …    Respondent(s)  
 
For the Petitioner(s):   Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC (in both cases)  
    Assisted by Barriste r Momin Ali Khan (Advocate)  
   
In Const. P. 59/2011:    
For respondent s-1&3:  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Naveed Akhtar, S.O. Finance Division  
For respondents -2,5&6:  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC  assisted by  
    Barrister Sajeel Sheryar and  
    Ch. Hasan Murtaza Mann (Advocates)  
For resp ondent -4:  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  assisted by  
    Malik Ghulam Sabir Advocate  
    Mr. Sameer Khose Advocate  
    Ms. Aneesa Agha Advocate  
    Malik Ahsan Mehmood Advocate  
    Ms. Zainab Qureshi Advocate     
  
In Crl. O.P.94/12:  
For respondent -1:  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC  
For responden t-2:  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC  
Amicus Curiae:    Nemo  
For SECP:    Mr. Muzaffar Ahmed Mirza, Dir. Litigation.  
Date of Hearing:   09.04 .2013  
 
 
 
    ORDER  
 
 
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  This petition has raised important questions of public 
importance relating to the enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed in Chapter I 
of Part II  of the Constitution. The salient aspect of this petition relates to the 
functioning and go vernance structure of the Securities and Exchange Commission of 
Pakistan (SECP) which is the apex regulator inter alia, of the corporate sector and the 
capital markets of the country.  
2. Over the course of several days, we have heard and noted in detail, t he 
submissions of learned counsel representing the parties. For reasons to be recorded we 
hold, declare and direct as under: - 3. That: - 
(a) the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 namely, 
Muhammad Ali Ghulam Muhammad as Commissioner and 
Chairman SECP  does not meet the requirements of the Securities and 
Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act 1997 (the SECP Act);  
(b) as a consequence, the notification No. SRO 21 (KE)/2011 dated 24th 
December 2010 appointing Mr. Muhammad Ali Ghulam Muhammad 
as Commissioner and Chairman SECP is set aside;  
(c)       the Federal Government shall, without delay, make appointments to 
statutory positions in SECP which meet the requirements of the 
SECP Act including Sections 5 , 6 and 7 thereof, in a  credible, 
rigourous,  transparent and ope n manner, through a selection and 
appointment process  undertaken with due diligence and 
deliberation  which manifestly  and demonstrably  ensures that the 
appointees meet the requirements of law as enunciated by 
precedent, including mutatis mutandis, the prin ciples of l aw 
determined in the case of Muhammad Yasin vs. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2012 SC 132) ; 
(d)        the insertion of section 5(5) in the SECP Act through the Finance Act 
2003 was violative of the Constitut ion and in particular Article 73  
thereof;  
(e)   Clause  3(1) of Chapter 11 of the SECP Service Rules  (HR 
Handbook), which allow for termination simpliciter  (without cause) 
of employees of SECP, is ultra vires the Constitution and inter alia, the 
SECP Act;  
(f) the above Clause  must be replaced appropriately  by provisions 
ensuring due process and adherence, inter alia to Articles 9, 10A, 14, 
18 and 25 of the Constitution and  which are  consistent with the 
provisions of the SECP Act ensuring  independent  and objective 
decision making  without fear or favour,  requ ired of an in dependent 
regulator ; (g) the prayer in the petition for striking down the order dated 13.6.2011 
terminating the employment of the petitioner is disallowed as not 
pressed, but without prejudice to his rights/remedies, if any, before 
a competent for um in accordance with law;  
(h) respondent No.1 (Federation) and respondent No.2 (SECP) shall bear 
the costs of the petitioner.   
4. A copy of this  Order shall be sent  to each member of the Securities and 
Exchange Policy Board for action deemed appropriate by said Board  in relation to the 
governance structure and decision making  policies  of SECP as per requirements of the 
SECP Act  and for consideration on issue s of policy -making highlighted by the present 
petition and for the effective performance of the Board’s  functions under the SECP Act , 
particularly section 21 thereof.  The Board having, inter alia, the duty to “oversee the 
performance of [SECP] to the  extent that the purposes of the  [SECP] Act are achieved”, shall 
look into this petition and  documents placed  on file and after making such further 
inquiries as may be deemed appropriate by it, submit within 45 days, a report as to the 
performance of the SECP.   
5. A copy of this Order shall be sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Finance to enable 
the Federal Gove rnment to remain compliant with the law and legal principles 
enunciated by this Court, in terms of Article 189 of the Constitution. The Secretary 
(Finance) shall also look into this petition and documents placed on file (including 
those filed by the Minist ry itself) to examine wrongdoings/shortcomings, if any, within 
the Ministry and the decision -making processes of the Federal Government under the 
SECP Act. A report in this respect shall be submitted in Court within 45 days.    
  
      
         Judge  
 
 
 
 
         Judge  
Islamabad, the  
 
Announced on 12.4.2013.  
A. Rehman 
 