IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice  Manzoor Ahmad Malik   
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
 
 
 
Criminal  Appeal No. 137-L of 2010  
 
 
 
Muhammad Yousaf  
… Appellant  
versus  
The State , etc.  
 … Respondent s 
 
 
For the  appellant:  Nemo.  
 
For respondents  No. 2 & 3:  Mr. Javed Iqbal Qureshi, ASC  
 Mian Ghulam Hussain, AOR  
 
For the State:  Mr. Mazhar Sher Awan, Additional 
Prosecutor -General, Punjab  
 
Date of hearing : 05.06.2018  
 
ORDER  
 
  
Asif Sae ed Khan Khosa, J. : An application has been 
received from the learned Advocate -on-Record for the appellant 
seeking an adjournment on account of serious indisposition of the 
learned counsel for the appellant and the request so received is not 
opposed by the learned counsel for the respondents.  
 
2. We note that at the time of murder of Muhammad Aslam on 
02.02.2005 he was survived by his father namely Waryam, his wife 
namely Mst. Razia Bibi and his son namely Muhammad Akmal 
who could inherit from the deceased a nd were, thus, his Wali in Criminal Appeal No. 137-L of 2010  
 2
terms of section 305(a), PPC. Respondents No. 2 and 3 were 
convicted and sentenced by the trial court for the murder of 
Muhammad Aslam and during the pendency of their appeal the y 
were acquitted of the charge by the High Court on  the basis of a 
compr omise arrived at between the  said respondents and  the 
surviving and existing Wali of the deceased as by that time the 
father of the deceased who was originally a Wali of the deceas ed 
had already died and, thus,  those inheri ting from th e father of the 
deceased were not joined in the compromise. The issue brought 
before this Court is as to whether for the purpose of a valid 
compromis e in the present case of murder  the heirs of the 
deceased at the time when the deceased was done to death w ere 
the persons who could enter into a compromise with the  private 
respondents or when one of such heirs of the deceased h ad died 
after Muhammad Aslam deceased’s murder could the heirs of such 
heir of Muhammad Aslam deceased be  treated as  a nece ssary part 
of  a compromise to be affected for the benefit of the present 
private respondents . This issue had initially been dealt with by a 
Division Bench of the Lahore High Court, Lahore in the case of  
Ahmad Nawaz alias Gogi  v. The State  (PLD 2007 Lahore 121) and 
with express reference to the provisions of section 305(a), PPC it 
had been held that for the purpose of a compromise a Wali is only 
that person who could inherit from the deceased and not a n heir of 
an heir of the deceased who could not inherit from the de ceased at 
the time of his murder. The said view of the Lahore High Court, 
Lahore had been taken notice of a 5-member Larger Bench of this 
Court in the case of  Abdul Rashid alias Teddi  v. The State and 
others  (2013 SCMR 1281) but such view did not find favo ur with 
this Court in that case and we note that while taking a different 
view of the matter this Court had not referred to the definition of 
Wali contained in section 305(a), PPC at all which definition 
apparently did not support the view taken by this Co urt in that 
case. I n this view of the matter we consider that the issu e involved 
in this case requires  a fresh look by this Court so as to render an 
authoritative pronouncement on the subject. Let the office bring 
the matter to the notice of the Hon’ble Ch ief Justice who is Criminal Appeal No. 137-L of 2010  
 3
requested to consider advisability  or otherwise of constitution of a 
Larger Bench of at least seven Hon’ble Judges of this Court in 
order to resolve the controversy noted above. Adjourned.  
 
 
         Judge  
 
Judge   
   
   
Judge  
Lahore  
05.06.2018 
Not a pproved for  reporting .  
Arif 