IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice  Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice  Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION  NO.39  OF 2011  
AND 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 90 OF 20 11 
 
 
Ch. Nasir Iq bal and others  
Imran Khan, Chairman, PTI etc.  (in Const.P.No.39)  
 
(in Const.P.No.9 0) 
Petitioner(s)  
VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Law and 
others  (in both cases)  
Respondent(s)  
 
 
For the Petitioner  (s) : Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
   
On Cour t’s Notice  : Mr. Shafi Muhammad Chandio, DAG  
   
For the ECP : Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, Sr. ASC  
Syed Sher Afgan, DG (Elections)  
   
For M/o Overseas  : Mr. Fiaz Ahmed Malik, Deputy Chief  
Mr. Islam -ud-Din, Assistant Chief.  
   
For the OPF : Raja Muhamm ad Farooq, ASC  
   
Date of Hearing  : 27.03.2013  
 
ORDER  
  In response to our order dated  19.03.2013,  reply (CMA 
No.1584 of 2013) has been submitted to the proposal pointed out 
by the Court, perusal whereof indicates  that the alleged 
difficulties/ problems highlighted by the ECP mai nly relate to three 
areas: - Const.Ps.No.39 & 90 of 2011  - 2 - 
  Firstly, amendment in the Representation of the People 
Act, 1976  and s igning of MOUs with the countries where ECP 
proposed to extend the facility of voting to Overseas 
Pakistanis on the plea that in so me of the countries such 
congregation s are prohibited.  Attending to this aspect of the 
case, we observe that as at present interim Government is 
functioning, the amendments so desired or required can be 
made by adhering to the procedure of temporary legis lation , 
as provided under Article 89 of the Constitution .  So far as 
signing of MOUs is concerned, no law has been cited, 
however, in this behalf if need be, the ECP can solicit opinion 
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs;  
 Secondly, the issue of non -availability of software, 
which shall be used by the Overseas Pakistanis for the 
purpose of extending facility/benefit to cast their votes and 
if the Ministry of I.T is taken into confidence or 
independently  the I.T experts are engaged with the mandate 
to prep are such software under the instruments as early as 
possible but in any case much before the date of polling this 
difficulty can also be overcome ; and  
 Thirdly, the issue of identification of the voters/electors 
who are living in different countries.  Aga in this issue relates 
to NADRA and on taking on board the authorities of NADRA, Const.Ps.No.39 & 90 of 2011  - 3 - 
 the issue being faced by the ECP can conveniently be 
resolved.  
 
2.  We are constrained to observe that these petitions are 
pending since 2011  onward and much time has already b een 
given to the ECP to do the needful, but so far no progress in this 
behalf has been made except analyzing suggestion s which were 
put forward by the Court itself and offering explanation to 
convince the Court that extending the right of franchise to the 
Overseas Pakistani Citizens is not possible this time but we are 
not persuaded because as has been observed time and again that 
these difficulties are not insurmountable and could conveniently 
be solved within a shortest possible time if there is a coordin ated 
effort  between the ECP, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of 
Law & Justice, NADRA and other authorities relevant in this behalf 
in order to achieve the object and all possible efforts must be 
made to all ow an opportunity to the Overseas Pakistanis  so they 
may participate in the election of their representatives  in National 
and Prov incial Assemblies .   
3.  The learned counsel for the petitioner, stated that he 
has been informed by the learned Attorney General for Pakistan 
that the process of extendi ng the facility of exercising the right to 
vote by the Overseas Pakistanis is possible but as the Attorney 
General is appearing before another Bench of this Court, 
therefore, we direct that let a meeting be convened in the office Const.Ps.No.39 & 90 of 2011  - 4 - 
 of the learned Attorney Ge neral on 28.03.2013 , which shall be 
attended by the Incharge Secretary Ministry of Law & Justice, the 
Secretary Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Secretary Ministry of I.T, 
Chairman NADRA as well as the Representative of E CP and they 
should thoroughly delib erate and submit comprehensive report on 
29.03.2013  and further orders, if required will be passed by this 
Court to ensure th e fundamental right  of the Overseas Pakistanis 
to participate in the formation of Federal and Provincial 
Government (s), which shall  be responsible ultimately for good 
governance as well as for protection of their life and property.   
4.  Adjourned to 29.03.2013.  
 
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Islamabad  Judge  
27.03.2013  
*Hashmi * Judge  
 