PSUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed , CJ 
   Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
   Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
   Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
  
   
S.M.C. 01/  2020  
(SUO MOTO ACTION REGARDING COMBATING THE PANDEMIC OF CORONA VIRUS 
(COVID -19) 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed  Khan ,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
(via video Link from Karachi Br anch ) 
Mr. Sohail Mehmood , DAG  
Dr. Tanveer Qureshi,   
Secretary M/o National Health  
Asif Suhail, Director (Lit)  
G.M. Jakhrani, Dy. Director (Lit)  
Saeed Ullah Khan Niazi, JS Admn.  
(All from M/o National Health)  
 
Mirza Mahsoo d, J.S. M/ o Interior  
Shams -ur-Rasool SO Interior.   
Syed Mansoor H. Gardezi, D ir. Legal 
Advisor, Pakistan Bait -ul-Mal.  
Muhammad Idrees Mahsood, Member 
(Admn & Finance), NDMA.  
Zafar Iqbal, Dir. Legal  NDMA.  
   
For ICT  : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi,  
A.G., I slamabad  
Shafaq Hashmi, DG ICT.  
Amir Naveed, ADC ICT.  
Waseem Khan, ADC ICT.  
Azhar Hussain Shah, DSP Legal.  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, A cting A. G., Punjab  
Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl. AG Pb.  
Cap (R) M. Usman, Secy. Primary &  
Secondary Health Deptt. P unjab . 
Khurram Abbas, Law Officer.  
M. Nabeel Ahmed Awan,  
Secy. Specialized, He alth Care &  
Medical Education Deptt . 
Zeshan Rana , Addl. Secy. (Prisons) . 
Saifullah Gondal, Dy. Secy. Zakat and 
Usher.  
Muhammad Aslam Ramy , 
Administrator Zakat and Usher.  
   SMC.01/20  
   2
For Govt. of Sindh  
 : Mr. Salman Talibudin, A.G, Sindh  
Mumtaz Ali Shah, Chief S ecy. Sindh.  
Muhammad Usman Chachar,  
Addl. Chief Secy . Home . 
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi,  
(Focal Person to Chief Secy. Sindh)  
Zahid Abbasi, Secy. Health  
Qazi Shahid Pervez, SMBR  
Iftikhar Shalwani, Commissioner K cy. 
Altaf Bijrani, Spl. Secy. Zakat & 
Usher.  
Rasheed Ahmed Solangi, Secy. Labour 
Deptt.  
(All via Video link from Karachi Branch)  
Muhammad Kassim Mirjat AOR  
(At Islamabad)  
   
For Govt. of KP  
 : Mr. Shumail Butt, A.G. KP  
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Addl. AG.  
Syed Imtaiz Hussain Shah,  
Secy. Health, KP  
M. Abid Majeed,  
Secy. Relief Rehabilitation, KP  
Dr. Maqsood Ali, Chief Executive, 
HCC.  
Dr. Khalid Masood, Director (LRH).  
Khyal Muhammad Mohmand, Legal 
Officer (LRH)  
(All via Video link from Peshawar Br anch ) 
   
For Govt. of 
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahi r,  
A.G, Balochistan . 
Baloch Aziz, Secy. Religious Affairs.  
Dr. Saleem Abro, DG Health.  
(Via Video link from Quetta Branch)  
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl.A.G.  
Mr. M. Fareed Dogar,  
AAG Balochistan.  (At Islamabad ) 
   
For Govt. of GB  : Mr. Muhammad Iqbal, AG,  G.B. 
   
  Syed Iqbal Hashmi, ASC for PMA.  
   
  Mr. Samuel Payara , 
Chairman, Implementation of Minority  
Rights Forum  
 
   
Date of Hearing  : 18.05.2020 . 
   
   
* * * * * *  
 SMC.01/20  
   3
 O R D E R  
  Gulzar Ahmed, CJ:   We have heard the learne d Attorney 
General f or Pakistan , the learned Advocate s General for all the four 
Provinces as well as Islamabad Capital Territory (ICT) and Gilgit 
Baltistan.  
2.  A report has been submitted by the National Health Services 
and Research Centre (NHSRC)  by way of CMA No. 3096 of 2020. With 
this report , minutes of meeting of the National Coordination Committee 
on Covid -19, held on 07.05.2020 , under the Chairmanship of the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan , are attached . The decision taken in the said 
meeting  has been noted down in para -4. For the purpose of present, we 
note that Items No. 2 to 5 thereof deals  inter alia  with shopping malls, 
small community markets in urban and rural areas , and decision to 
close down such shops and business on Saturday and Sunday.  
3.  The learned Advocate General for ICT states that all shops 
and markets in the ICT have been allowed to open and the shopping 
malls , namely , Giga Mall, Centaurs Mall and Safa Gold Mall , have also 
been allowed to open today.  
4.  The learned acting Advocate General, Punjab has s tated that 
all shops and markets have been allowed to open in whole of the Punjab 
and with the permission of NHSR C, the shopping malls in all over Punjab 
will be allowed to open today.  
5.  The learned Advocate Generals KPK, Balochistan and Gilgit 
Baltista n have also made a statement before the court that all shops and 
markets in these areas  have been allowed  to open . They have all stated 
that SOPs regarding Corona virus (COVID -19) will h owever, be 
maintained and the respective governments will ensure that s uch is 
done.  SMC.01/20  
   4
6.  As regards the Province of Sindh, learned Advocate General 
has stated that all shops and markets have been allowed to open in 
whole of the Province but shopping malls have not been allowed to open. 
We have asked the reason as to why the s hopping malls have not been 
allowed to open, the learned Advocate General has relied upon the 
minutes of meeting of 07.05.2020 and has contended that regarding 
shopping malls, review of such decision will be made before 31 .05.2020 
and therefore , the Sindh Government is not allowing of the opening of 
shopping malls.  
7.  We note that all the shopping malls  in the ICT , Punjab will 
be open ed today and so far the KPK, Balochistan and Gilgit Baltistan are 
concerned , it is stated by their respective Advocate Gene rals that they 
don’t have any shopping malls but shops and markets , have been 
allowed to open and they are doing business.  
8.  The learned acting Advocate General, Punjab has stated that 
the Punjab Government has approached NHSR C for obtaining the 
approva l for opening of the shopping malls and similar has been done in 
the ICT  and both Punjab and ICT, are likely to get permission for opening 
of the  shopping  malls today.  
9.  If such can be done by the biggest province of Pakistan i.e. 
Punjab , why the simila r cannot be done by the Province of Sindh and 
apparently , we find no valid reason or justification for the same.  
10.  In the circumstances, we direct the Government of Sindh to 
apply to the NHSR C today , for seeking approval for opening of shopping 
malls i n the Province of Sindh. We expect that after such application is 
made, the NHSR C shall give their decision today and if their decision is 
that shopping malls are allowed to open, the respective Provincial 
Government shall allow the shopping malls to be open and shall not SMC.01/20  
   5
create any hindrance or obstruction in this regard  but ensure that SOPs 
are followed.  
11.  The other aspect which requires to be dealt with is about 
closure of shops, markets and business on Saturday and Sunday by way 
of a complete lock d own. We do not find any justifiable  rational or 
reasonable  classification on the basis of which these two days are 
excluded from doing business , for that , all days of the week are the 
same. It is for the convenience of the human being s that the days have 
been given names , otherwise there is no distinction between others days 
of the week from Saturday and Sunday. We therefore find that this 
restriction put in the minutes of meeting dated 07.05.2020 is contrary to 
Articles 4, 18 and 25 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan and th us, is declared to be illegal and accordingly set aside. The 
businessmen shall be allowed to do their business on all days , which is 
permissible under the law , subject to enforcement of SOPs.  
12.  We may caution the Government of Pakistan so also the 
Governments of all the four Provinc es, ICT and G.B . that looking at the 
past history of Pakistan, where business activities of private 
entrepreneurs  was interfered with by the Government, such 
entrepreneurs lo st faith in the system and packed up and moved to some 
other destinations in the world, where they consider the ir investment to 
be more safe and profitable. If the businesses and industries remain 
closed for a long time, their revival becomes doubtful , more and more , 
and in case they are not revive d, millions of workers will be on streets 
and the Government may be faced with a human disaster and calamity of 
such a magnitude that to overcome it , may be come next to impossible.   
13.  So far the report of NDMA is concerne d, we are not at all 
satisfied with such report and would like to hear the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan on this report as well as the security officials of SMC.01/20  
   6
NDMA , for that , we find no reason why so much money is being spent on 
this Corona virus (COV ID-19), for that , Pakistan is not the country which 
is seriously affected by  it. There are other serious ailments prevailing in 
the country , from which people are dying daily and those ailments are 
not being catered and the Coronav irus (COVID -19), which ap parently is 
not a pandemic in Pakistan , is swallowing so huge money.  
14.  The Secretary, Ministry of Health has stated that over the 
years in the ICT almost one thousand people die only on account of 
pollen allergy. Besides , we note that thousands of peop le die on account 
of brain haemorrhage, cardiac failure, Hepatitis, Dengue, kidney failure, 
liver failure, pulmonary and other related ailments and all these death s 
goes in hundreds of thousands every year.  
15.  We are not suggesting by any means that the  governments 
should not attend to Coronavirus but we expect that the governments 
should not put all its resources for this one disease , nor the country 
should be made all together dysfunctional , because of this disease , for i ts 
consequences will be highly detrimental to the people of Pakistan , and 
the Federal Government and all Provincial Governments should address 
itself on this point.  
16.  Adjourned for tomorrow  at 11:30 a.m.   
 
 
   CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  JUDGE  
 
 
Bench -I 
ISLAMABAD  
18.05.2020 
Atif/*  
 