IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
    
   Present  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
   Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
 
 SUO  MOTO  CASE  NO.  18  OF  2010  
Suo Moto Action regarding violation of Public 
Procurement Rules, 2004 in procurement loss of 
billions of rupees to exchequer caused by National 
Insurance Company Ltd.)  
 
In Contempt Proceedings:  
On Court notice   :  Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, AGP.  
 
For alleged Contemnor  : Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC.  
     Mian Gul Hassan Aurangzeb, ASC.  
     Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR with  
     Malik Muhammad Iqbal DG FIA.   
 
For M/o Int erior   : Mr. Qamar Zaman Ch. Secretary.  
 
For Estt. Division   : Mr. Abdul Rauf Ch. Secretary.  
 
Date of hearing   : 08.06.2011.  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY , CJ. - Mr. Zafar Ahmed 
Qureshi, started investigation of the financial scam of NICL while  he was posted as 
Director F.I.A. He was supervising investigation successfully when he was abruptly 
transferred and posted as Managing Director of the National Police Foundation. 
Therefore, by order dated 24.1.2011 of this Court the Secretary Interior was  directed to 
look into the matter as the case in which Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi was supervising 
investigation pertained to plundering of huge public money. As a corollary of this order, 
notification dated 24.1.2011 was issued by the Government of Pakistan, Cabinet 
Secretariat, Establishment Division, notifying that Capt. (Retd.) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi S.M.C.18/2010.  2 
(PSP/BS -21), Managing Director, National Police Foundation is appointed Member of 
the FIA, under Ministry of Interior, for posting as Additional Director General,  FIA, in 
addition to his present assignment, with immediate effect and until further orders to 
supervise the investigation of NICL case at Lahore.  
 
2.  On 15.4.2011, the D.G, FIA, wrote a letter to the Secretary, Ministry of 
Interior, in which he has stat ed that the supervising officer namely Mr. Zafar Ahmed 
Qureshi on 11.4.2011 has submitted interim challan in the Court of competent 
jurisdiction in the NICL case and on 14.4.2011 report has been submitted to this Court by 
him. On receipt of the letter date d 15.4.2011, of D.G, FIA, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Interior, claims to have passed it on to the Secretary Establishment Division by a 
covering letter. The Secretary, Establishment Division, present in Court, has stated in the 
Court that he received verba l orders of the Prime Minister through his Principal Secretary 
on 18.4.2011 at 10 or 11 p.m in the late evening pursuant to which he has issued the 
notification dated 18.4.2011. According to the Secretary, Establishment Division, he has 
sought confirmation  of the oral orders of the Prime Minister by floating a summary on 
20.4.2011 and the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister has confirmed the oral orders 
of the Prime Minister.  
 
3.  By notification dated 18.4.2011, issued by the Cabinet Secretariat, 
Establishment Division, Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi was disassociated from the 
supervision of investigation assigned by this Court, which reads as follows: -  
“Capt. (Retd.) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi  (PSP/BS -21), was posted as 
Additional Director General, Federation Investigation, under 
Ministry of Interior, in addition to his present assignment as 
Managing Director, National Police Foundation, to supervise the 
investigation of NICL case vide this Div ision’s Notification of even 
number dated 24.1.2001.  
2. The Director General, Federal Investigation Agency has 
intimated that the recoveries have been made and the Challan S.M.C.18/2010.  3 
submitted in the said case. Therefore, the additional charge of the 
officer as Addit ional Director General, Federal Investigation 
Agency is hereby withdrawn with immediate effect.”  
 This Court in its order dated 10.5.2011 has held as under: - 
“Therefore, we are of the opinion that Malik Muhammad Iqbal, D.G, 
FIA, by sending a letter dated 1 5.4.2011, reproduced herein above, 
has created obstacles in investigation of the case which was being 
conducted by Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi in pursuance of directions of 
this Court and in this manner he has disturbed, disobeyed and 
disregarded the order/dir ection of this Court, although has interfered 
with the process of law and due course of judicial proceedings by 
getting the Additional D.G., FIA, disassociated from the investigation 
as stated hereinabove.”  
4.  Therefore, this Court issued show cause notic e dated 11.5.2011 to the 
Director General, FIA, Malik Muhammad Iqbal, under Article 204 of the Constitution 
read with Sections 4 and 5 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance (Ordinance V) of 2003, 
to explain as to why he should not be proceeded against for the  violative acts, which 
reads as under: - 
“Be that as it may, in these compelling circumstances, we issue 
show cause notice of contempt of Court to Malik Muhammad 
Iqbal, D.G, FIA under Article 204 of the Constitution read 
with 3 & 5 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance (Ordinance V) 
of 2003 to explain as to why he should not be proceeded 
against for the violative acts detailed hereinabove interfering 
in the affairs of this Court by approaching the government 
authorities for the purpose of getting notification d ated 
18.4.2011 issued on the basis of which an officer taking deep 
interest recovering a huge amount of the Government, has 
been disassociated from the investigation. He should submit 
the reply on or before the next date of hearing. Adjourned to 
16.5.2011. ” 
5.  Malik Muhammad Iqbal, D.G, FIA, filed his explanation to the show cause 
notice vide C.M.No.1836 of 2011. In the reply to the show cause notice, the D.G, FIA, 
has stated as under: - S.M.C.18/2010.  4 
“5. It is most respectfully submitted that this letter was not 
written  either to procure or seek the transfer of Capt ® 
Zafar Ahmed Qureshi or to have him relieved of the 
additional charge as Additional Director General Federal 
Investigation Agency.  
6. It may further be stated that in the said letter all that was 
stated merely  by way of information was, “that the interim 
challans in NICL cases have been submitted in the Court of 
competent jurisdiction on 11.4.2011 and a report thereof 
has already been submitted in the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of Pakistan on 14.4.2011 by the said o fficer.” This was a 
mere narration of facts. No request was made in this letter 
or otherwise by me to have Mr. Qureshi relieved of his 
duties as an Additional Director of the Federal 
Investigation Agency investigation the NICL cases.  
7. That on receipt of th is letter the Additional Secretary, 
Ministry of Interior by his letter of 16th April, 2011, 
informed the Establishment Division about the receipt of 
this letter and, to the best of my understanding regarded it 
simply as a communication “regarding the latest position 
of investigation in NICL case at Lahore”. A copy of this 
letter is ANNEX”B”.  
8. That in its notification of 18 April 2011, ANNEX “C”, the 
Estab lishment Division, Cabinet Secretariat, Government 
of Pakistan observed that I have “intimated that the 
recoveries have been made and the Challan submitted in 
the said case.” The Establishment Division, according to it, 
therefore, “withdrew the additional charge of the officer as 
Additional Director General, Federal Investigation 
Agency….”  
9. That it is most respectfully submitted that there is a 
significant difference between a “Challan” and an 
“Interim Challan”. The former expression may mean a 
final challan  but the latter expression does not. It is also 
clear that while an investigation may come to an end on the 
submission of a final challan it does not terminate on the 
submission of an interim challan. I had, therefore, used the 
cautious and correct latter expression in my letter of 15th 
April, 2011, and had not used the former expression. It is S.M.C.18/2010.  5 
submitted that the Establishment Division has incorrectly 
attributed the use of the expression “Challan’ to me. I 
never used this word.  
10. it is also humbly and most re spectfully stated that I had not 
used the words, “recoveries have been made: in my letter 
of 15 April, 2011. Even a cursory glance at my letter of 15 
April, 2011 will make it abundantly clear that I had not 
used these or even any similar words. These words  have 
been incorrectly attributed to me by the Establishment 
Division, for reasons best known to it.  
11. I also voluntarily state that I had not used these words in 
any other communication, either verbal or written, in 
respect of this matter. Being a senior o fficer and being fully 
conscious of the sensitivities of this case I could not have 
dared use such loose and incorrect expressions.  
12. On 29 April, 2011, well before the order passed by this 
Hon’ble Court on 10 May 2011, I wrote to the Secretary, 
Ministry of  Interior specifically requesting that the 
notification in question may be withdrawn and the earlier 
notification of 24 January, 2011 be restored, “so that Mr. 
Zafar Ahmed Qureshi may complete the investigation as 
Member of FIA by adjusting him against the  post of 
Additional Director General FIA in addition to his present 
assignment.”  
13. That on 5 May, 2011 in its letter, ANNEX “D: addressed to 
the Secretary, Establishment, the Ministry of Interior 
endorsed my request and attached another copy of it with 
this letter  
14. On 10 May, 2011, I clarified my position through letter, 
ANNEX “E”. In this letter I repeated my request of 29 
April, 2011. No action was taken, however.”  
6.  He, however, in his explanation tendered unconditional apology as well. 
The reply was con sidered by this Court which was not found satisfactory and by order 
dated 3.6.3011, the Court framed the following charge: - 
“That you by committing the aforesaid act have created obstacles 
in investigation of the case which was being conducted by Zafar S.M.C.18/2010.  6 
Ahmad Qureshi pursuant to directions of Supreme Court of 
Pakistan and have thus disobeyed and disregarded the 
order/direction of the Court and has interfered with the process of 
law and due course f judicial proceedings and thus committed 
contempt as defined in Section 3 of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance, 2003 punishable under Section 5(1) thereof.”  
7.  Copy of the charge was supplied to the D.G, FIA, Malik Muhammad Iqbal, 
on 3.6.2011, who on the same day, pleaded as under: - 
“Respectfully submitted that the undersigned holds the apex court 
in the highest esteem and respect. I do not want to contest the 
charge. However, most respectfully I submit that it was not my 
intention or object to undermine the authority of this Honourable 
Court and subvert its orders/d irections. I stand by my earlier 
statement dated 14.5.2011 submitted through my counsel Mr. 
Makhdoom Ali Khan. I humbly and respectfully seek mercy and 
clemency of the August Court and by way of extenuating 
circumstance I submit that I am superannuating on  14.7.2011 and 
I shall immediately proceed on leave and not serve.  
 Respectfully submitted”  
8.  We have examined the available record, which includes letter of D.G, FIA, 
dated 15.4.2011, subject of which has been mentioned as notification, letter dated 
16.4.2011 of the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Interior, addressed to the Secretary, 
Establishment Division, Notification dated 18.4.2011, by which Mr. Zafar Ahmed 
Qureshi, who was assigned duty to supervise the investigation of NICL scam at Lahore, 
was disassociated from the said investigation on 18.4.2011 by a notification issued by the 
Cabinet Secretariat, Establishment Division referred to hereinabove by withdrawing the 
earlier notification dated 24.1.2011, issued by the same Division  and copy of the  
summary of the Secretary, Establishment Division dated 20.4.2011 with confirmation by 
Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.   
9.  We have heard the Attorney General for Pakistan and the learned counsel 
for the Secretaries . We have also heard the D.G,  FIA, the Secretary, Ministry of Interior 
and the Secretary, Establishment Division. We have noticed that the stand taken by the S.M.C.18/2010.  7 
Secretary, Ministry of Interior and the Secretary, Establishment Division in the Court was 
unusual .  We have sought explanation  from the Secretary, Ministry of Interior, as to the 
need of transmitting the routine letter of D.G, FIA, to the Secretary, Establishment 
Division. He could not offer any plausible explanation. We have also inquired from the 
Secretary, Establishment Divisi on as to why he has not brought to the notice of the 
competent authority before issuing notification of 18.4.2011 in haste on verbal direction 
regarding the order s of this Court for  Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi. The Secretary, 
Establishment Division, did not of fer any explanation.  
10.  The fact that the D.G, FIA, has verbally  intimated the Secretary, 
Establishment Division about the recoveries and submission of challan, which is made 
basis for issuance of notification dated 18.4.2011, is not documented in any p aper except 
in the summary of 20.4.2011, for which neither the Secretary, Ministry of Interior nor the 
Secretary, Establishment Division, could offer any explanation in Court. This verbal 
communication has been denied by the D.G, FIA in his reply to the sh ow cuase notice. 
The stand taken by these two senior officers is completely in conflict with the contents of 
para 2 of the notification dated 18.4.2011. The summary floated for confirmation by the 
Secretary, Establishment Division, on 20.4.2011, neither  mention s the verbal orders nor 
reasons for withdrawal of notification of additional charge of Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi. 
The contents of the summary floated by the Secretary, Establishment Division on 
20.4.2011, appears to be after thought and is an attempt to  justify issuance of notification 
dated 18.4.2011. T he notification dated 18.4.2011, prima facie, was issued on the basis of 
the letter of D.G, FIA, prima facie, in order to create a ground for disassociating Zafar 
Ahmed Qureshi from supervision of in vesti gation  the D.G., FIA, Secretary Interior, 
Secretary, Establishment, and Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister have joined 
hands together to create obstacle in smooth and honest investigation in the case in 
defiance of the orders of this Court.  
11.  In the given circumstances, when notification dated 18.4.2011 has been 
issued in violation of the provisions of Rules of Business, 1973, read with Secretariat S.M.C.18/2010.  8 
Instructions , prima facie,  and the letters and actions of D.G, FIA, Secretary, Ministry of 
Interior , Secretary Establishment Division, and Khushnood Lashari Principal Secretary to 
the prime Minister, were instrumental in willful defiance of orders of this Court passed 
on 24.1.2011, and all of them, ex facie, are responsible in interfering and obstructin g the 
investigation process in the above terms.  
12.  In order to meet the ends of justice, we find it necessary to issue notice s 
under Section 17 (1) of the Contempt of Court (Ordinance V ) of 2003,  to Qamar Zaman 
Ch, Secretary, Ministry of Interior, Abdu l Rauf Ch. Secretary, Establishment Division, 
and Khushnood Lashari, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, for willful defiance of 
the orders of this Court passed on 24.1.2011, by withdrawing notification dated 
18.4.2011, which has hampered the smooth  investigation in the case involving huge 
amounts of public money, who may file their replies and matter be fixed in Court on 
23.6.2011. The judgment reserved in the case of Malik Muhammad Iqbal, D.G, FIA 
would be announced after hearing the above official s.     
 
 
CJ 
 
 
 
J 
 
 
 
J 
 
Approved for reporting . 
Sohail/**  
 
  Announced in open Court on ______________________.  
 
 
        J 