IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original/Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
 Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
 Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
 Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
 Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
 Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PET ITION NO.2 OF 2022  
(Re: restraining Political Parties from holding Public Meetings in 
Islamabad before Voting on No -confidence Motion)  
 
 
REFERENCE NO.1 OF 2022  
(Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan under 
Article 186 of the Constitutio n, seeking interpretation of Article 
63-A of the Constitution)  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.9 OF 2022  
(Re: Imposing Life Time Ban from contesting Elections on defection 
from Political Party) 
 
 
Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan 
through its President , Supreme Court Building, 
Islamabad   
(in Const. P. 2 of 2022)  
 
Pakistan Tahreek -e-Insaf through its Chairman  
Imran Khan  
(in Const. P. 9 of 2022)   
 
 
 
 
…Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan through  
M/o Interior Islamabad and others   
(in Const.  P. 2 of 2022)  
 
The Election Commission of Pakistan , 
Islamabad and others  
(in Const. P. 9 of 2022)   
 
 
 
 
…Respondent(s)  
 
For Federation  : Mr. Ashtar Ausaf Ali, AGP  
Mr. Khalid Javed Khan, AGP(F ormer ) 
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AG   
Mr. Sohail Mehmood, Addl. A GP 
Syed Nayyab Hassan Gardezi, DAG  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Munawar Duggal, ASC  
Barrister Asad Rahim Khan  
Barrister M. Usama Rauf  
Mr. M. Usman Peracha, Adv.  
Mr. M. Ibrahim Khan, Adv.    
   
For PTI  : Mr. Ali Zafar, ASC  
Dr. Babar Awan, ASC  Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 2
   
For SCBA  : Mr. Mansoor Usman, ASC   
Assisted by :  
Mr. Asfandyar Khan, Adv.  
Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, President (SCBAP)  
Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik, Sec.  
(SCBAP)  
Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR   
   
For PPPP  : Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC  
Mian Raza Rabbani, Sr. ASC  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Zeeshan  Abdullah, Adv.  
   
For JUI(P) : Mr. Kamran Murtaza, Sr. ASC  
Qari Abdul Rasheed, ASC  
   
For PML(N)  : Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC  
a/w Saad M. Hashmi, Advocate  
Mr. Sarmad Hani, Advocate  
Mr. Ammar Cheema, Adv.  
Mr. Yawar Mukhtar, Adv.  
   
For BNP(M)  : Mr. Mustafa Ramday, ASC  
Mr. Rashid Hafeez, ASC  
Assisted by :  
Mr. Ahmed Junaid, Adv.  
Mr. Akbar Khan, Adv.  
Barrister Maria Haq, Adv.  
Ms. Zoe Khan, Advocate  
   
For NA  : Mr. Abdul Latif Yousafzai, ASC  
Mr. Tahir Hussain, Sec. NA  
Mr. M. Mushtaq, Addl. Sec . 
   
For PML (Q)  : Mr. Azhar Siddiqui, ASC  
   
For Bal.  : Mr. M. Asif Reki, AG  
Mr. M. Ayaz Sawati, Addl AG  
   
For ICT  : Mr. Niazullah Khan Niazi, AG ICT  
   
For KP  : Mr. Shumail Butt, AG KP   
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Addl. AG   
Mian Shafaqat Jan, Addl. AG  
   
For Punjab  : Mr. Ahmed Awais, AG (Punjab)  
Mr. Qasim Ali Chohan, Addl. AG Punjab  
   
For Sindh  : Mr. Suleman Talibuddin, AG Sindh  
Mr. Fauzi Zafar, Addl. AG  
   
 : Mr. Hassan Irfan Khan, ASC  
 
   Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 3
Date of Hearing  : 19, 21, 24, 25, 28 to 30.03.2022, 
04.04.2022  to 07.04.2022, 18.04.2022 
to 22.04.2022,  09.05.2022 to 
11.05.2022, 16 & 17.05.2022.  
 
O R D E R 
   For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject 
to what is  set out therein by way of amplification or otherwise, 
by majo rity of three to tw o (Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel 
and Justice Jamal Khan Mandokh ail dissenting) these matters 
are disposed of  together  in the following terms:  
1. The first question referred by the President relates to the 
proper approach to be taken  to the interpretation and 
application of Article 63A of the Constitution. In our view, 
this provision cannot be read and applied in isolation and 
in a manner as though it is aloof from, o r indifferent to, 
whatever  else is  provided in the Constitution. Nor can 
Article 63A be und erstood and applied from the vantage 
point of the member who  has earned opprobrium and 
faces legal censure as a defector by reason of his  having 
acted or voted (or a bstained from voting) in a manner 
contrary to what is required of him under  clause (1) 
thereof. Rather, in its true perspective this Article is an 
expression in the Constitution itself of certain aspects of 
the fundamental rights that inhere in political p arties 
under clause (2) of Article 17.  The two provisions  are 
intertwined . In its essence  Article 63A functions  to protect , 
and ensure the continued coherence of , political parties in 
the legislative arena where they are the primary actors in 
our system of  parliamentary democracy, which is one of Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 4
the salient features of the Constitution . Political parties 
are an integral aspect  of the bedrock on which  our 
democracy rests. Their d estabilization tends to shake the 
bedrock , which can  potential ly put democracy itself in 
peril.  Defections are one of the most pernicious ways in 
which political part ies can be destabilized . Indeed they 
can delegitimize parliamentary democracy itself, which is 
an even more deleterious effect. Defections  rightly  stand 
condemned as a c ancer afflicting the body politic. They 
cannot be countenanced.   
2. It follows that Article 63 A must be interpreted in a 
purposive  and robust  manner, which  accords with its 
spirit and intent.  Ideally, the Article should n ot need to be 
invoked  at all ; its mere existence , a brooding presence,  
should be enough. Put differently,  the true measure of its  
effectiveness i s that  no member of a Parliamentary Party 
ever has to be declared a defector . Article 63A should  
therefore be given  that interpretation and  application as 
accords with, and is aligned as closely as possible to, the 
ideal situation . The pith  and substance of Article 63A i s to 
enforce the fundamental right of political parties  under 
Article 17 that, in particular in the legislative arena,  their 
cohesion be respect ed, and protected from  
unconstitutional and unlawful  assaults , encroachments  
and erosions . It must therefore be interpreted and applied  
in a broad manner , consistent with fundamental rights . It 
also follows that if at all there is any conflict between the Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 5
fundamental rights of the collectivity (i.e., the political 
party) and an individ ual member thereof  it is the former 
that must prevail. The first question is answered 
accordingly . 
3. Turning to the second question and keeping in mind the 
answer to the fir st, it is our view that the vote of any 
member  (including a deemed member)  of a Parliamentary 
Party in a House that is cast contrary to any direction 
issued by the latter  in terms of para (b) of clause (1) of 
Article 63A  cannot be counted and must be disre garded , 
and this is so regardless of whether the Party Head, 
subsequent to such vote,  proceeds  to take , or refrains 
from taking , action that would result in a declaration of 
defection . The second question referred to this Court 
stands answered in the foregoing terms.  
4. As regards the third question, it is our view that a 
declaration of defec tion in terms of Article 63A can be a 
disqualification under Article 63, i n terms of an 
appropriate law made by Parliament under para (p) of 
clause (1) thereof.  While it is for Parliament to enact such 
legislation  it must be said that it is high time that such a 
law is placed on the statute book. If such legislation is 
enacted i t should not amount to a mere slap on the wrist 
but must be a robust and proportionate response to the 
evil that it is designed to thwart an d eradicate . The 
question stands answered accordingly.  Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 6
5. The fourth question referred to this Court is stated in 
terms  that are vague, and too broad and general. It is 
therefore returned unanswered.  
6. This short order disposes of pending matters under Article 
186 a s well as  Article 184(3). What has be en said herein 
above is to be  read and understood  as a simultaneous  
exercise of  (and thus relatable to)  both the jurisdictions 
that vest in this Court under the said provisions, read also 
in the case of the latter with the jurisdi ction conferred by 
Article  187. 
 
   Sd/- 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 Sd/- 
JUDGE  
 
  
I am not in ag reement with the majority  decision and have 
appended a separate  note.   
Sd/ 
JUDGE  
  
  
Sd/- 
JUDGE  
  
 
I am also not in ag reement with majority decision. I have 
annexed a separa te note.  
Sd/-  
JUDGE 
 
Announced in Court  
on 17.05.2022 . 
 
 
  Sd/- 
  CJ. 
 
 
   APPROVED FOR REPORTING  Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 7
ORDER  
 Mazhar Alam Khan M iankhe l and  Jamal Khan 
Mandokhail , JJ.-   We have had the privilege of going through 
the short order of our learned brothers. For the reasons to be 
recorded later, with great respect, we are not in agreement with 
the same. Article 63A of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan ( the Constitution ) is a complete code in itself, which 
provide s a comprehensive procedure regarding defection of a 
member of the Parliament and consequences thereof. In case the 
Election Commission of Pakistan confirms the declaration  sent 
by a Party Head against a member , he/she shall cease to be a 
Member of the House . As a result thereof, his/her seat shall 
become v acant. A right of appeal to this Court has also been 
provided under sub-Article (5) of Article 63A of the Consti tution , 
to either of the party, aggrieved by the decision of the Election 
Commission . Any further interpretation of Article 63A of the 
Constitut ion, in our view,  would amount to re -writing or reading 
into the C onstitution and will also affect the other provisions of 
the Constitution, which has not even been asked by the 
President through this Reference. Therefore , it is not our 
mandate . We see no force in the questions asked through this 
Presidential Reference, which are answered in the negative. 
However, if the Parliament deems fit or appropriate may impose 
further bar or restriction s upon the defectors.  
 Similarly Constitution Petitions No. 2 and  9 of 2022 are 
dismissed.  
              Sd/- 
 (Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel ) 
 Judge  
 
              Sd/- 
 (Jamal Khan Mandokhail ) 
 Judge  Reference No.1 of 2022  etc. 
 8
 
ORDER OF THE BENCH : 
 
 
  The Presidenti al Reference No.1 of 2022 is an swered 
and the Constitution Petitions No. 2 and 9 of 2022 are disposed 
of in the t erms of majo rity view.  
   
   Sd/- 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
 Sd/- 
JUDGE  
 
 
  
 Sd/- 
JUDGE  
 
 
  
 Sd/- 
JUDGE  
 
 
  
 Sd/- 
JUDGE  
 
Islamab ad, 
17.05.2022.  
 
 
  APPROVED FOR REPORTING   