IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
 
Criminal Original Petition No. 6 of 2024  
[Contempt Proceedings against Senator Faisal Vawda]  
 
 
Attendance : 
On Court ’s Notice :   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
     Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
     Malik Javed Iqbal,  
     Addl. Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
     Ms. Mariam Ali Abbasi, Adv.  
 
For Contemnors : 
Mr. Faisal Vawda:    Mr. Moiz Ahmed, ASC.  
     a/w Mr. Faisal Vawda.  
 
Mr. Mustafa Kamal:   Mr. Farough Naseem, ASC.  
     a/w Mr. Mustafa Kamal.  
 
 
On behalf  of Supreme  
Court Bar Association:   Mr. Mr. Shehzad Shaukat, ASC.  
     President, SCBA.  
 
For PEMRA:     Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC.  
 
On Court’s C all:   Hafiz Arfat Ahmed, ASC.  
 
Date of Hearing:    05.06 .2024. 
 
ORDER  
Pursuant to the notices issued to Mr. Faisal Vawda and Mr. Mustafa 
Kamal , they are respectively represented by learned Mr. Moiz Ahmed and 
learned Mr. Farough Naseem.  
 
2. Mr. Farough Naseem states that his client has submitted an 
unconditional and unqualified written apology (Criminal Misc. Application 
No. 682 of 2024) with regard to what was said in the press conference held 
on 16 May 2024 and throws himself at the mercy o f the Court  and seeks 
forgiveness.  
 
3. As regard s Mr. Faisal Vawda the learned counsel points out that he 
has filed Criminal Misc. Application No. 689 of 2024 setting out the facts, Criminal Original Petition No. 06 of 2024  
 
 2
however, if another opportunity is granted he may submit a n additional 
reply . 
 
4. The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (‘ PEMRA ’) has 
filed transcript of the two press conferences (Criminal Misc. Application No. 
683 of 2024 ) and mentions that 34 channels had live broadcast the press 
conference of Mr. Faisal Vawda and 28 channels had live broadcast the 
press conference of Mr. Mustafa Kamal. In paragraph 8 of our order dated 
17 May 2024 we had noted, ‘ That television channels and all those who 
broadcast , re-broadcast and/or publish material constituting contempt of 
Court may a lso be committ ing contempt of Court. ’ The broadcast of the press 
conferences on the said channels  prima facie appears to constitute 
contempt. Therefore, let notice s be issued to all the said channels , to be 
served through PEMRA , and they are called upon to submit their 
explanation s/replie s within two weeks as to why they should not be 
proceeded against for contempt  of Court . 
 
5. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan  shall mark the transcript s 
where he consider s something was said which may constitute contempt of 
Court. The learned Hafiz Arfat Ahmed who is present in Court volunteers to 
provide a list of verses of the Holy Qur’an and saying s of Prophet 
Muhammad (p eace and blessings be upon him) with regard to backbiting, 
hurtful and/or slanderous speech.  
 
6. To come up on 28 June 2024. Both the alleged contemnors and the 
representatives of the said television channels are directed to be in 
attendance on the next date of hearing.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
05.06 .2024 
(M. Tauseef)   