IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
Mr. Justice Iqbal Hameedur Rahman  
 
 
Constitution Petition No.33 & 34 of 2005  
 
(Regarding sudden increase in petr oleum products on 
13.06.2013 due to increase in sales tax ) 
 
And Civil Misc. Application No.3821 of 2013  
 
  
Engineer Iqbal Zafar Jhagra  
Senator Rukhsana Zuberi  
…Petitioners  
Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan and others  
…Respondents  
 
 
For the petitioners:   Mr. M . Ikram Ch. ASC  
     (in Constitution Petition No.33/05)  
 
     Nemo (in Cons.P.34/05)  
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Munee r A Malik,  
Attorney General  for Pakistan  
     Assisted by:  
     Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, Adv.  
      
     Mr. Dil Mohammad Alizai, DAG  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
For FBR:     Dr. Rana M. Shamim, ASC  
     Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
     Mr. Muhammad Aaqil, Member (Legal)  
     Mr. Raza Baqir, Member  
     Mr. Ashfaq Tunio, Chief Sale Tax  
 
For OGRA:     Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
     Mr. Saeed Ah mad Khan, Chairman  
     Mr. Abdul Basit, Law Officer  
     Ms. Misbah Yaqoob, JED(F)  
 
For M/o Petroleum:   Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR  
 CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  2 
For M/o Finance:    Nemo  
 
For M/o Climate Change:  Mr. Dilawar Khan, Dy. Director  
 
For OCAC:     Nemo  
 
Dates of hearing:    19 – 21 June, 2013  
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
 IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY , CJ. — Engineer Iqbal 
Zafar Jhagra and Senator Rukhsana Zuberi filed the listed Constitution  
Petitions under Article  184(3) of the Constitution  of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan before this Court as back as in the year 2005 with 
the prayer, inter alia , that increase in prices of petroleum products 
from July, 2001 may be declared as illegal, arbitrary, mala fide, non -
transparent, deceitful and violative of various provisions of the 
Constitution.  
2.   With to view to ascertain ing controversies raised in the 
petitioner  vide order dated 30.03.2009 a Judicial Commission  was 
appointed  to prepare a comprehensive report in consultation with all 
the stakeholders including consumers .  
3.   Pending proceedings  of the petitions, o n 12.06.2013, the 
Federal Government presented in the National Assembly the Finance 
Bill 2013 (hereinafter referred to as “the Bill ”) containing various 
financial proposals for the year commencing from the first day of July 
2013 and to amend and enact certain laws to give effect to the said 
financial proposals. The Bill, inter alia , proposed to increase GST from 
16% to 17% on the value of  taxable supplies made by a registered 
person in the course , or furtherance , of any taxable activity carried on 
by him  by amending section 3  of the Sales Tax Act, 1990 [hereinafter 
referred to as “the Act, 1990 ”]. Along  with t he Bill a Declaration made CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  3 
under the Collections of Taxes Act, 1931 (Act No. VI of 1931), 
[hereinafter referred to as “the Act, 193 1”], was also appended,  
contents whereof read as under: -  
“DECLARATION UNDER THE PROVISIONAL COLLECTIONS 
OF TAXES ACT, 1931 (XVI OF 1931)  
 
 The provisions of sub -clause (10) of clause 2, sub -
clause (2), sub -clause (3), sub -clause (7), sub -clause (13) 
and sub-clause (14) of clause 3 and sub -clause (6), sub -
clause (8)(a)(ii), sub -clause (8)(a)(iii), sub -clause 
(8)(a)(iv), sub -clause (8)(b) and sub -clause (9) of clause 5 
of this Bill shall have effect, for the purpose of this 
declaration and for the purposes of the provisions of the 
Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 (XVI of 1931), as 
if they were provisions for imposition of sales tax or duties 
of federal excise or duties of customs.  It is hereby 
declared accordingly in terms of section 3 of the said Act 
that it is expedient in the public interest that the aforesaid 
provisions shall have effect on the 13th June, 2013.  
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  
 
 The purpose of this Bill is to make financial 
provisions for the year beginning on the first day of July, 
2013. Various provisions have been explained in the Notes 
on Clauses. ” 
 
4.   The Oil and Gas Regulatory Authority [hereinafter called 
OGRA], by means of notification No. S.R.O…(1)/2013, dated 
13.06.2013 issued in exercise of the powers conferred by r ule 13 of 
Compressed Natural Gas (Production & Marketing) Rules, 1992, in 
supersession of its notification No.S.R.O.02(I)/2013, dated 01.01.2013 
determined and notified the maximum sale price of Compressed 
Natural Gas (CNG) to be charged by a licensee (CNG  Station) from a 
consumer for vehicular or other mobile use as per Federal Government 
approved policy guidelines and in pursuance of the Federal 
Government Declaration under the Act, 1931 with immediate effect as 
follows: -  
 CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  4 
Sr.# Components  Region -I 
@1040 BTU Region -II 
@ 950 BTU  
                          Rupees per KG  
A 
B 
 
C 
i 
ii 
iii 
 
iv 
D 
E 
F 
G Cost of Gas  
Value Addition (Electricity 
cost) 
Operating Expenses (i -iv) 
Human Resources Cost  
Fee & Subscription  
Repair & Maintenance 
(machinery)  
Oil & Lubrication  
Total Cost (A+B+C)  
Margin  
GIDC  
GST (26% of A+F)  33.00  
7.22 
 
5.06 
2.59 
0.16 
1.50 
 
0.81 
45.28  
4.35 
13.25  
12.02  30.14  
7.22 
 
5.06 
2.59 
0.16 
1.50 
 
0.81 
42.42  
4.35 
9.18 
10.22  
 
Maximum CNG Sale Price 
(D+E+F+G)   
74.90   
66.18  
Region -I, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Baluch istan & Potohar Region 
(Rawalpindi, Islamabad & Gujarkhan)  
 
Region -II: Sindh & Punjab excluding Potohar Region  
 
Immediately thereafter,  the dealers started charging sales tax at the 
increased rate and the prices of petroleum products as well as CNG 
were i ncreased abruptly. From a perusal of the aforesaid notification of 
OGRA, it transpired that  GST is being charged @ 17% as enhanced 
under the Bill on petroleum products, whereas on CNG 9% in addition 
to 17% GST chargeable under section 3 of the Act.   
5.  On 13.06.2013, a note was put up by the Registrar of this 
Court, which was registered as CMA No.3821/2013 in Constitution  
Petitions No.33 & 34 of 2013 vide order of even date and ordered to 
be fixed in Court along with Constitution  Petitions No.33 and 34 of  
2005 on 14.6.2013. Notices were also ordered to be issued to the 
learned Attorney General  for Pakistan and the other concerned parties.  
6.   On 14.06.2013, t he Ministry of Petroleum filed following 
break -up of prices of petroleum products after issuing o f above 
Declaration:  -  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  5 
  Comparative Ex -Depot Prices effective 13 June 2013  
 MOGAS  SKO HSD 
 1-
June 13-
June Diff %age  1-
June 13-
June Diff %age  1-June 13-
June Diff %age  
Ex-Refinery  67.98 67.98  - 0.0%  71.34  71.34  - 0.0%  76.37  76.37  - 0.0%  
IFEM 3.02 3.02 - 0.0%  1.93 1.93 - 0.0%  1.64 1.64 - 0.0%  
District 
margin  2.23 2.23 - 0.0%  1.58 1.58 - 0.0%  1.86 1.86 - 0.0%  
Dealer 
Margin  2.78 2.78 - 0.0%  - - -  2.30 2.30 - 0.0%  
Petroleum 
Levy 10.00  10.00  - 0.0%  6.00 6.00 - 0.0%  8.00 8.00 - 0.0%  
Sales Tax  13.76  14.62  0.86 6.3%  12.94  13.74  0.80 6.2%  14.43  15.33  0.90 6.2%  
Max.ex -
depot sale 
price 99.77  100.63  0.86 0.9%  93.79  94.59  0.80 0.9%  104.60  105.50  0.90 0.9%  
 
7.   It is to be noted that in the above noted break -up, GST 
has been increased 86 paisa per litre, but n o notification to charge 
GST at the increased rate has been issued, as it has been pointed out 
by the learned counsel for OGRA.  
8.  On the same date, the learned Attorney General placed on 
record the Bill  and stated that by means of section 2 of the Bill,  section 
3 and various other provisions of the Act, 1990 have been proposed to 
be amended by substituting the word “sixteen ” wherever it occurs with 
the word “seventeen ”. He further stated that in view of the provisions 
of section 3 read with section 4 of the Act, 1931 , the increased sale 
tax from 16% to 17% is being legitimately charged with immediate 
effect , inasmuch as the said provisions empower the Government so to 
do as per past practice. He also stated that in case the Declaration 
cease d to have effe ct, the amount already charged would be liable to 
be refunded in terms of section 5 of the Act, 193 1, which provides a 
mechanism for refund of the tax  in question .   CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  6 
9.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned ASC for ORGRA stated 
that the prices of petroleum produ cts have been revised strictly 
following the Declaration made in the Bill. H owever, h e candidly 
admitted that except the aforesaid Declaration , no notification 
regarding increase of GST from 16% to 17% qua other taxable 
activities  has been issued.   
10.  The above facts have given rise, inter alia , to the following 
questions: -   
(a) As to whether section 3 of the Act, 1931 is not derogatory 
to Articles 3, 4, 8, 24 and 77 of the Constitution?   
(b) As to whether recovery of taxes from the consumers is 
permissible on  the basis of the Declaration made under 
section 3 of the Act, 1931 before amending the relevant 
provisions of the Act, 1990, the Customs Act, 1969 and the 
Central Excise Act, 1944?  
(c) As to whether section 5 of the Act, 1931 provides a proper 
mechanism for refund of the tax so collected from the end 
users ?   
 
11.  Learned Attorney General  and the learned counsel for 
OGRA argued that sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Act, 1931 being the 
existing law in terms of Article 268(1) of the Constitution  shall 
continue in force. As such , in pursuance of the Declaration  made in 
terms of the above provisions of law, the same  shall have the force of 
law and GST at the increased rate of 17% of the value  of taxable 
activity  is being lawfully charged and  consumers (individuals) or the 
compan ies or the association s of persons , etc. were liable  to pay 
increased GST on the petroleum products including CNG. He further 
argued that t he object of charging GST at t he increased rate under 
section 3 of the Act, 1931 is to maintain balance of taxable supplies in CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  7 
the market. He also argued that OGRA is empowered to charge sales 
tax @ 9% of the value, in addition to the tax chargeable under section 
3 of the Act, 1990 in pursuance of rule 20(2)(c) of the Sales Tax 
Special Procedures Rules, 2007. H owever, he clarified that 26% GST is 
not being charged from the end users and that only 16% previously or 
17% GST presently is being charged from the suppliers /consumers.  
Learned Attorney General further stated that the Court , instead of 
declaring unconsti tutional any of the provisions of sections 3, 4, or 5 of 
the Act, 1931 , may read down the same under Article 268(6) of the 
Constitution, if it comes to the conclusion that any of those provisions 
of Act, 1931 are violative of the provision s of the Constitu tion or 
negate the Fundamental Rights  of the citizens . He concluded that in 
any case,  following the principle laid down by this Court in the case of 
Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 161) , any decision 
made by the Court  in the instant case may be applied  prospectively.    
12.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned counsel argued that 
under certain enactments , such as  the Customs Act, Anti -Dumping Act 
and Sales Tax, Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) /Federal Government is 
empowered to levy and recover duty o r tax by means of legislation or 
sub-legislation, therefore, the Declaration inserted in the Bill is to be 
considered as an Act of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  for the purpose 
of effect ing recovery of GST at the increased rate pending approval of 
amendment  in section 3 of the Act, 1990 by the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) . He argued that OGRA is empowered to charge/recover 
from consumers GST @ 16% or 17% on CNG and except for the rules 
which are not happily worded , OGRA is not charging  additional  GST @ 
9%. However, b oth the learned counsel conceded that under the CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  8 
Constitution, the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  is empowered to levy 
tax and the Executive /Federal Government is not empowered to 
impose tax by means of rules or SROs , and such practice , if allowed, is 
likely to cause havoc in the tax regime.  
13.   Dr. Rana M. Shamim, learned counsel for the F ederal 
Board of Revenue [FBR] adopted the arguments of Mr. Salman Akram 
Raja, ASC.   
14.  Mr. M. Ikram Chaudhry, learned ASC stated that 
Constitution  Petition No.  33 of 2005 was filed on behalf of Engineer 
Iqbal Zafar Jhagra, who is an office bearer of the present ruling 
political party , but as notice has been issued to him by the Court, 
therefore, he would confine himself to the extent of constitutional 
provisions . He argued that  the Declaration appended with the Bill 
confers no authority upon the Government or the Finance Minister to 
increase the rate of GST from 16% to 17% because under Article 77 of 
the Constitution, the power to levy and impose tax vest s in the  Majlis -
e-Shoora (Parliament) . He maintained that the practice of levying tax, 
duty, etc., which is in vogue since long before passing of the Bill by 
the National Assembly  and its enactment after assent of the President  
is illegal  and unacceptable because in such manner no reference ever 
shall be made by the Executive to the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  
and such omission is not permissible under the Constitution. He stated 
that directions be issued for effecting recovery of the excess tax i.e. 
difference of  1% collected on the taxable supplies from the end users  
from the date of tabling of the Bill in the National Assembly and same 
be ordered to be refunded to the consumers , and if it be not 
practicable  for any reason , any other appropriate order  may be CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  9 
passed, e.g., the money in question may be ordered to be spent for 
the public  welfare.   
15.  Learned counsel for OGRA stated that the additional tax 
qua persons involved in the taxable supplies but who are not 
registered under the Act, 1990 and were required t o pay GST @ 19% 
instead of 16% of the  value of taxable supplies , i.e., petrol , CNG, etc., 
on account of which the prices ha d increased exorbitantly , has been 
withdrawn vide letter  dated 17.06.2013, which reads as under : -  
“No.PL -3(457)/2013 -Pt 
Government of Pakistan  
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Resources  
*****  
Islamabad, the 17th June, 2013  
 
 
Secretary General,  
Oil Companies Advisory Council,  
Karachi  
 
Subject:  Pending of charging of additional 2% GST from Un -
registered Petrol Pubmp Dealers/tetail out l ets 
 
 I am directed to refer to subject cited above and to say 
that Minister for Finance has been pleased to allow all the un -
registered petrol pump dealers/retail outlets to get them 
registered within two weeks. Till that time, additional 2% sales 
tax may  not be received from them.   
2. You are therefore requested to inform PSO and other 
concerned OMCs about the above decision of Ministry of Finance 
that they should not receive the said additional sales tax from 
consumer.  
3. This issues with the approval of  Secretary Finance.  
-sd/- 
(Syed Muhammad Ahsen)  
Research Officer (F & P)  
 
16.  We have inquired from the learned counsel for FBR 
whether increase in GST is not charg eable on the essential items 
mentioned in the Sixth Schedule to the Act, 1990  and when his 
attention was drawn towards the Declaration inserted in the Bill,  where CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  10
no exception in charging increased GST @ 17% on the essential items 
as per Sixth Schedule of the Act, 1990 is made , as a result whereof 
prices of essential items have also been exorbit antly increased, he 
candidly conceded that th e Declaration in question has been issued in 
routine, however, after some  time he produced a clarification, which , 
according to him , has been prepared by the Secretary Finance under 
instruction of the Finance Mi nister, contents whereof are reproduced 
hereinbelow:  -  
   “DIRECTIVE OF THE FEDERAL FINACE MINISTER  
The FBR is directed  to inform the general public by all 
appropriate means that the essential items as per Section 13, 
read with the Sixth Schedule, under the Sales Tax, 1990, such 
as vegetables, meat,  milk, eggs, re d chilies, fish, drugs, pulses, 
fruits, poultry, ginger, turmeric, cereals and products of milling 
industry, ice, p oultry feed, butter, sugar cane, yogurt , butter, 
infant milk preparations, salt,  potato, onions, bread, nan, 
chapatti , bun, rusk & others, continue to remain exempted from 
Sales Tax and that the increase in the rate of Sales Tax from 
16% to 17% under the Declaration issued under the Provisional 
Collection s of Taxes Act, 1931, does not  affect any of the items, 
which are exempted under the Sales Tax Act, 1990.  
 
The FBR is also directed to ensure that all Inland Revenue 
Officers strictly monitor that no Sales Tax is recovered on the 
said supplies and to take proper action against violato rs.” 
17.   It is to be seen that the Finance Division has issued 
“Declaration ” in the Bill in routine, otherwise there was no necessity to 
issue letter dated 17.06.2013 withdrawing GST @ 19% instead of 16% 
from the unregistered taxable suppliers (owners of  petrol pumps) and 
above clarification .  
18.   It may be noted that t he Act, 1931 was promulgated 
before the partition  of the Subcontinent in 1947 . There are few other CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  11
countries as well having corresponding provisions of law , but it 
appears that their constitutionality has never been examined in any of 
those jurisdictions including the neighbouring country India on the 
touchstone of the constitution al provisions , except in the case of Abdur 
Rashid v. Central Board of Revenue and other  (PLD 1965  Peshawar  
249). Learned Attorney General  heavily relied upon this judgment and 
argue d that the Government had been following consistent practice of 
appending Declaration with the Finance Bill with a bona fide intention, 
for the reason that in the aforesaid judgment thi s matter has been 
found in accordance with the Constitution.  
19.  After the independence, t he Act, 1931 was ado pted by 
mean s of Ada ptation of Central Acts and Ordinances Order, 1949,  and 
continued in force as per Article  224 of the Constitution  of 1956, t hen 
by Article  225 of the Constitution  of 1962 and then under Article 268 
of the Constitution  of 1973. The Act, 1931  was first amended  vide the 
Finance Act, 1967 whereby in section 3, along with the “duty of 
customs or excise” the words “sales tax” were ad ded. The said Act was 
then amended by the Finance Act, 1990 whereby besides certain 
amendments in sections 4 and 5, in section 3, along with the words 
“for the imposition or increase of a duty”, the words ‘or reduction’ 
were added . Because in the instant p roceedings , constitutionality of 
sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Act, 1931 is required to be examined, 
therefore, it would be appropriate to reproduce the said sections in 
their present form , which read thus:  -  
3. Power to make declarations under this Act. —Where a 
Bill to be introduced in the Central  Legislature on behalf of 
Government provides for the imposition or increase or 
reduction of duty of customs or excise, the Central CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  12
Government may cause lo be inserted in the Bill a 
declaration that it is expedient in the public interest that 
any provision of' the Bill relating to such imposition or 
increase shall have immediate effect under this Act.  
 
4. Effect of declarations under this Act, and duration 
thereof.  — (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (2),  
a declared provision shall have the force of law with 
immediate  effect as if enacted on the day on which the Bill 
is introduced.  
 
(2)  declared provision shall cease to have the force of 
law under the provisions of this Act — 
 
(a) when it comes into opera tion as an enactment, with 
or without amendment, or  
(b) when the federal Government in pursuance of a 
motion passed by the Central Legislature  directs, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, that it s hall cease 
to have the force of  law, or  
(c) if it ha s not already ceased to have the force of law 
under clause (a) or clause (b) then on the expiry of 
the s ixtieth day on which the Bill containing it was 
introduced.  
  
5. Certain refunds to be made , or demands to be 
raised, when declaration cease s to have effec t.—(1) Where 
a declared provision comes into operation as an enactment 
in an amended  form before the expiry of the sixtieth day 
after the day on which the Bill containing it was 
introduce d— 
(a) refunds shall be made of all duties  or taxes 
collected which would  not have been collected 
if the provision adopted in the enactment h ad 
been the declared provision;  
(b) demands shall be raised of all duties and taxes 
not collected which would have been collected, 
if the provision adopted in the enactment had 
been the declar ed provision:  
 
Provided that the rate at which refunds 
of any duty  or tax  may be made , or demand 
may be raised,  under this sub -section shall not 
exceed the difference between the rate of such CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  13
duty or tax proposed in the declared provision 
and the rate of s uch duty or tax in force when 
the Bill was introduced.  
 
(2) Where a declared provision ceases to have the force 
of law under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub -section (2) of 
section 4  —  
(a) refunds shall be made of all duties or taxes 
which would have not been collected if the 
declaration in respect there of had not been 
made; or  
(b) demands shall be raised of all duties and taxes 
not collected, which would have been collected 
if the declaration in respect thereof had not 
been made. ”  
 
A perusal of section 3  shows t hat the Federal Government  may cause 
to be inserted in the Bill a Declaration that it is expedient in the public 
interest that any provision of the Bill relating to such imposition or 
increase or reduction would have immediate effect. In the instant 
case, the Finance Minister , in his budget speech , proposed to increase 
GST from 16% to 17% by ame nding section 3 of the Act, 1990 , but 
effect was given to the proposed amendment  immediately on tabling 
of the Bill in the National Assembly  and GST on all taxable s upplies 
and activities as proposed to be increased was levied as is evident 
from the break -up of the prices of petroleum products filed by the 
Ministry of Petroleum without issuing any notification, whereas 
notification dated 13.06.2013, reproduced hereina bove, in respect of 
consequential increase in GST on  CNG was issued  by OGRA .  
20.  It is well settled proposition that levy of tax for the 
purpose of Federation is not permissible except by or under the 
authority of Act of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) . Ref erence in this 
behalf may be made to the case of  Cyanamid Pakistan Ltd. v. Collector 
of Customs  (PLD 2005 SC 495 ), wherein it has also been held that CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  14
such legislative powers cannot be delegated to the Executive 
Authorities. Also see Government of Pakistan v. Muhammad Ashraf  
(PLD 1993 SC 176 ) and All Pakistan Textile Mills Associations v. 
Province of Sindh (2004 YLR 192) .  
21.   There c annot be two opinions that the Declaration dated 
13.06.2013 inserted in the Bill unless passed by the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parli ament)  was an executive act of the Government and not a 
legislative act of the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) , therefore, 
imposition or increase as well  as reduction of the sales tax with 
immediate effect in pursuance of the Declaration made under section 3 
of the Act, 1931 was against salutary principle envisaged by Article 77 
of the Constitution , which lays down that no tax shall be levied for the 
purpose of the Federation except by or under the authority of Act of 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) .  
22.  Mr. Sa lman Akram Raja, learned counsel for OGRA 
purported to canvass that taxing power of the Parliament can be 
delegated to the Government /Executive and the delegate e of such  
power may then decide at what rate tax is to be imposed or what 
exemption  or reduction , if any,  is to be granted. It  seems that to save 
the provision of section 3 of the Act, 1931 he stated that as the Bill 
has already been tabled before the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) , 
therefore, it would be deemed that pending discussion on the Bill, the  
Parliament has empowered the Government /Executive to impose 
increase in GST with immediate effect in the public interest. He further 
argued that under section 18(2) of the Customs Act , 1969,  section 
3(2)(b) of the Sales Act, 1990 and section 67 of the Anti Dumping 
Ordinance, 2000 such powers have been delegated, therefore, the CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  15
Declaration inserted in the Bill may be considered an instrument , on 
the basis of which the Parliament has authorized the Government to 
impose increase GST from 16% to 17% with immed iate effect. In this 
behalf , he has relied upon the case of Zaibtun Textile Mills v. Central 
Board of Revenue  (PLD 1983 SC 358) . In this case , the owner s of 
Zaibtun Textile Mills w ere aggrieved by the levy and the demand of the 
duty on the production capac ity of the plants and machinery of their 
factories by the Central Board of Revenue under section 3(4) of the 
Central Excises and Salt Act of 1944 . When the matter reached this 
Court , leave to appeal was granted to examine following questions:  -  
(i) In absence  of any guiding principles in the Act it was 
unconstitutional on the part of the Legislature to delegate 
its legislative function to the Central Board of Revenue and 
to empower the Board to determine the production 
capacity of a Textile Mill.  
(ii) Even assuming  the validity of the impugned provisions of 
section 3(4), of the Act, the question was whether the 
requirements of law as prescribed therein were fulfilled 
and in particular, whether the rules were not notified by 
the Central Board of Revenue as required t hereunder, 
which according to the appellants were not in fact notified 
by the Central Government.  
(iii) The law contemplated that the guiding principles upon the 
basis of which the production capacity was required to be 
fixed should have come into existence prio r to the actual 
fixation of the production capacity and not simultaneously 
as was done in the present case.  
(iv) The Awan Committee was unauthorisedly constituted as an 
ad hoc body and it would not, therefore, be legally charged 
with the duty of examining and d etermining the production 
capacity of Cotton Textile Mills.  
  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  16
Having considered the arguments of the parties, the Court returned 
the following findings on the above questions : -  
“21. From the aforesaid analysis of the judgments it would 
appear that it is too late in the day to maintain that the 
Legislature cannot delegat e authority to subordinate or 
outside authorities for carrying the laws enacted by it into 
effect and operation, in view of the long history of 
legislative practice committing the rule -making powers 
having the force of law, to such subordinate functionaries 
or agencies. As held in Hodge v. Regina  by the Privy 
Council as early as 1883, such power of delegation is 
inherent and ancillary to legislation. It is also futile to seek 
and apply the c onstitutional theories underlying the 
doctrine of impermissible delegation of legislative power as 
applied under the American system as these theories were 
irrelevant in our system (as obtaining under the 1962 
Constitution). It is now well established as o bserved by 
Hamoodur Rahman, J. (as he then was) in Province of East 
Pakistan v. Sirajul Hag Patwari  that the powers of the 
Legislatures in the Indo -Pak sub -continent have always 
been as plenary as those of the British Parliament. Mr. A. 
K. Brohi in his arg ument also did not put his contention as 
high as to canvass a total absence of power to delegate 
any part of the legislative function in c onnection with a 
particular statute to outside authorities by the Legislature. 
But his submission was, as mentioned he reinbefore, that 
the impugned provisions were invalid inasmuch as the 
Legislature had effaced itself and abdicated its essential 
legislative function in favour of a subordinate authority i.e. 
Central Board of Revenue who has been given power to 
levy and co llect the duty in question in all its dimensions, 
leaving it unfettered discretion to formulate its own policy 
and standards according to which the tax was to be levied.  
 
“22. The question raised in this argument essentially 
concerns the question of the co nstitutional limits to CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  17
legislative power. In other words the question is as to what 
extent and on what principles delegation of legislative 
power to outside authorities is permissible under the 
Constitution. The Constitution does not expressly lay down 
and prescribe the limits within which such delegation would  
be permissible. Nor is there any provision in the 
Constitution which may define what constitutes the 
essential legislative function, which may then be kept as a 
norm to strike down the legislation by  which such essential 
legislative power is entrusted to other agencies. The 
question whether in a given case the Legislature has 
incompetently delegated its power has to be determined 
by the Courts in the exercise of their judicial power under 
the Constitu tion. The cases reviewed in this judgment bear 
testimony to the fact that the Courts in the various 
jurisdictions have not been able to evolve a consensus on 
a fixed rule or test to determine this question. Indeed they 
illustrate the difficulty with which the objection regarding 
impermissible delegation of administrative power has been 
applied in individual cases. No uni form test has been laid 
down in  these cases to determine this objection. In Hodge 
v. Regina  a case from the year 1853 the wide test that 
where the Legislature retains the power to destroy the 
agency it has created and set up another or take back the 
matter directly into its own hands, was applied to resolve 
this controversy and was reiterated as recently as 1967 in 
the case of Cobb & Co. Ltd.  v. Kropp . This view holds that 
until the Legislature constitutes another legislative power 
or separate legislative body armed with general legislative 
authority, it cannot be said that the Legislature has effaced 
itself. On the other hand in the case of S obho 
Gyanchandani the Federal Court of Pakistan held as ultra 
vires a piece of legislation empowering the executive 
government to give a fresh lease of life to a temporary 
enactment passed by the Legislature, on the ground that 
such power created a paralle l Legisl ature. This objection CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  18
was found  inapplicable in the case of East & West 
Steamship Co. on the ground that it would not be possible 
for the Legislature  in view of the subject -matter of 
legislation to lay down the details how the outside 
authority was  to act in varying situations, which 
necessitated the conferring of unfettered discretion to 
exercise subordinate legislative power. In the case of 
District Magistrate, Lahore v. Raza Kazim , this Court 
upheld the validity of a legislation which laid down n o 
criterion for the guidance of rule -making authority or even 
define the general policy from which guidance could be 
sought. The objection of excessive delegation was avoided 
on the ground of plenary powers enjoyed by the 
Legislature in the matter of legis lation. Once again the 
impossibility of providing for every detail and machinery to 
carry into effect the object sought to  be achieved by the 
Legislature  was regarded as sufficient ground to uphold the 
validity of the enactment.  In this case a view similar  to 
that held in Hodge v. Regina  was taken that the 
Legislature retains its legislative powers intact to do away 
with the agency under the enactment. The case of 
Muhammad Ismail & Co. is perhaps the only case in 
Pakistan, which attempted to lay down a gene ral rule for 
determining the question of i mpermissible delegation, as it 
was observed that only “essential legislative power ” is 
incapable of being delegated. In this case also reference 
was made to the laying down of the policy of the 
legislation in the e nactment for the guidance of the rule -
making authorities. In the last case referred to , viz., 
Province of East Pakistan v. Sirajul Haq Patwarl  also no 
uniform test could be laid down by the learned Judges 
delivering their separate opinions but the validity  of the 
impugned enactment was held not open to objection of 
impermissible delegation, although it did not in itself lay 
down any policy or guidelines for the executive authorities 
to carry into effect the object of the legislation. In this case CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  19
I would pa rticularly point out what Hamoodur Rahman, J ., 
held to be in his opinion constitutionally permissible, 
namely, that the provision for details in a statute, 
particularly when detail s are by their very nature incapable 
of being ascertained by the Legislature  itself, can well be 
left to be worked out by another agency in whom the 
Legislature places confidence. In the final analysis this 
being a question of the vires of the assertion of a 
constitutional power, has to be decided with reference to 
limitations pla ced by the Constitution on the scope of the 
power of the Legislature, either expressly or impliedly by 
necessary intendment. The framers of the 1962 
Constitution did not adopt the distribution of powers as 
found in the Constitution of the United States wit h all the 
implications of that doctrine, but an overall consideration 
of the provisions of the 1962 Constitution relating to the 
setting up of the various organs o f State  does suggest that 
they contemplate a scheme for distribution of function of 
the Gover nment into the three well -known departments, 
each being separately charged with the duty and being 
constituted a repository for the respective power in the 
relevant field of governmental functions of the State. 
Viewed in this context what the Constitution committed to 
the Legislature as  its primary obligation to be discharged 
by it with exercise of powers conferred on it, cannot be 
entrusted by the legislature to another organ of the State 
or to a body of its own creation. That would negate the 
very basic a rrangement adopted by the Constitution and in 
its place create a mode of the discharge of legislative 
function, in a manner not envisaged therein or contrary to 
the instrument which constituted it. A reflection of this 
proposition will be found in the foll owing observations of S. 
A. Rehman, J. (as he then was) in the judgment of this 
Court in Fazlul Quadar Chowdhary v. Shah Nawaz  [PLD 
1966 SC 105]: “The constitution contains a  scheme for the 
distribution of powers between various organs and CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  20
authorities of t he State, and to the superior judiciary is 
allotted the very responsible though delicate duty of 
containing all the authorities within their jurisdiction, by 
investing the former with powers to intervene whenever 
any person exceeds his lawful authority ”.  
 
The learned counsel for OGRA also relied upon the judgment in 
Muhammad Ashraf ’s case  (supra ), wherein  the respondent s had 
imported large consignments of Soya bean oil into Pakistan after 
obtaining  import licence s for the purpose  at a time when there was n o 
customs duty leviable on the commodities in question, however, 
subsequent to the opening of the Letters of Credit by the respective 
respondent s and shipment of imported goods by the foreign suppliers, 
by means of notification dated 07.04.1986, issued und er section 18(2) 
of the Customs Act, 1969, the earlier notification dated 01.07.1985 
was amended so as to add a new Heading , namely, 15.07 -A inserted 
in the table according to which a duty @ Rs.3000 per ton was imposed 
on Soya  bean oil. Subsequently , by an other notification 
No.SRO396(1)/86 dated 17.04.1986 , the rate of regulatory duty on 
Soya bean oil was reduced to Rs.2350/ - per ton. Being aggrieved by 
the imposition of regulatory duty after firm commitments were made 
by the respondent s for the import of g oods by means of contract for 
the sale of goods with foreign suppliers and opening of Letter s of 
Credit, respondents therein filed respective Constitution Petitions 
challenging the levy of regulatory duty by means of aforesaid 
notification s dated 07.04.198 6 and 17.04.1986 , firstly on the ground 
that the Soya  bean oil was an item free from levy on the duty on the 
aforesaid date and , therefore, subsequent imposition and collection of 
duty on the goods affecting the vested rights of the respondents was CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  21
illegal . Secondly , it was urged that imposition of duty, in such 
circumstances, rendered the imported consignments wholly 
uneconomical, if not wholly onerous , and as the respondents were 
exposed to very substantial monetary loss, the imposition was mala 
fide and unconstitutional. In the backdrop of above facts  of the 
precedent case , the learned counsel for OGRA has relied upon 
following para  of the judgment : -   
“However,  the question whether the ratio of Al -Samrez 
Enterprise would be attracted in the case of regu latory 
duty under section 18(2) of the Act is a separate matter. 
The case of A] -Samrez Enterprise dealt with the question 
of the effect of withdrawal of an exemption notification 
under section 19 of the Act. As discussed in Civil Appeal 
No.915 -K of 1990 an d others in Al -Samrez Enterprise the 
concept of exemption as applied to taxation, which 
presupposes a liability and constitutes grant of immunity 
from the liability created by the charging section, was the 
essential principle on which the decision proceede d. So far 
as the power of the Government to impose a regulatory 
duty is concerned, the case falls within the domain of 
delegated legislation, whereby duty or tax is imposed 
under the law as authorised by Article 77 of the 
Constitution, under the authority of the Act of Parliament. 
Therefore, on no principle or rule of law, it can be urged 
that merely because at one time no regulatory duty was 
imposed and was in force, when the contract was entered 
into, any embargo is thereby created upon the delegatee 
of the legislature to impose the tax at any time 
irrespective of any transaction entered into on the basis 
when no such tax was in force. We have not been shown 
any authority for the proposition that abstention of the 
Government or non -exercise of delegated au thority to 
impose the tax at a given  time under delegated authority  
gives a vested right to any one to be exempted from the CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  22
payment of such tax ipso facto subsequently when such 
tax is imposed. ”  
Following principles are highlighted from the above judgment s: -  
(1) The legislature can delegate authority to subordinate or 
outside authorities for carrying the laws enacted by it into 
effect or operation, in view of the long history of legislative 
practice committing the rule -making  powers having the 
force of law  to such subord inate functionaries or agencies;  
(2) Such power of delegation is inherent a nd ancillary to the 
legislation;   
(3) The Constitution does not expressly lay and prescribe the 
limits within which such delegation is permissible nor is 
there any provision in the Constitution, which says that the 
essential legislative functions are to be kept as a norm to 
strike down a legislative bill , as such essential legislative 
power  is entrusted to other agencies;   
(4) The question w hether the Legislature in a given case  has 
incompetently delegated its powers  is to be determined by 
the Courts in exercise of the  power of judicial review under 
the Constitution;  
(5) Abstention of the Government and non -exercise of 
delegated authority to impose the tax at a ny time under 
the deleg ated authority does not give a vested right to 
anyone to be exempted from the payment of such tax ipso 
facto, when such tax is imposed;   
(6) The power  of granting exemption can be conferred on the 
executive authority and the Federal Government in view of 
its powers under section 18(2) of the Customs Act, 1969 
and levy the regulatory duty without any limitation or 
restriction as it may deem fit on such power as may be 
specified in the no tification;   
(7) The power of grant of exemption of customs duty on a 
particul ar article and the power of withdrawal of such 
exemption is always available to the Government under 
the law, therefore, it is not open to the Courts to go CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  23
beyond the notification issued by the Government. Grant 
of power  shall arbitrarily be exercised  unless it is stated 
that grant of exemption on specific duty shall be subject to 
existence of certain conditions; and   
(8) The Government , if it is empowered to issue a notification 
for grant of exemption on custom duty, is also empowered 
to withdraw such exempti on wholly or partially.  
 
23.  On the insistence of learned counsel to treat the 
Declaration as delegation by the Legislature, we, on having gone 
through all the judgments  relied upon by him , have applied the 
principles deduced therefrom to the question of  delegation of powers 
one by one, keeping in view the provisions of section 3(2) (b) of the 
Act, 1990  and section 18(2) of the Customs Act, 1969. It would be 
appropriate to reproduce sub-section s (1) & (2)  of section 3 of the Act, 
1990, which read thus:  -  
“3. Scope of tax .— (1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act, there shall be charged, levied and paid a tax known as 
sales tax at the rate of s ixteen per cent of the value of – 
(a) taxable supplies made by a registered person in the 
course or furtherance o f any taxable activity carried 
on by him; and  
(b) goods imported into Pakistan.  
 
(2)  Notwithstanding th e provisions of sub -section (1) –  
(a) taxable supplies specified in the Third Schedule shall 
be charged to tax at the rate of sixteen per cent of 
the retail price which along with the amount of sales 
tax shall be legibly, prominently and indelibly printed 
or embossed by the manufacturer on each article, 
packet, container, package, cover or label, as the 
case may be:  
 
Provided that the Federal Governme nt, may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, exclude any 
taxable supply from the said Schedule or include any 
taxable supply therein; and  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  24
(b) the Federal Government may, subject to such 
conditions an d restrictions, as it may impose  by 
notification in  the official Gazette, declare that in 
respect of any goods or class of goods imported into 
or produced or any taxable supplies made by a 
registered person or a class of registered persons, 
the tax shall be charged, collected and paid in such 
manner and at  such higher or lower rate or rates as 
may be specified in the said notification. ”  
 
We are not inclined to agree with the learned counsel because in the 
instant case , except tabling the Bill in the National Assembly, no 
legislation on the issue has so far  taken place. The qu estion of 
delegation  of power or its coming into effect or operation  will arise 
only after the Bill is passed by the Parliament and converted into an 
Act on receiving assent of the President , i.e., on successful completion 
of the consti tutional process, and the arguments being raised by the 
learned counsel may perhaps be relevant  thereafter . However, as it 
has been noted hereinabove, the learned counsel himself was of the 
opinion that delegation of power to the executive/government in the 
matter of imposing tax will create havoc  in the tax regime. Thus, i t is 
sufficient to conclude that no such delegation can be considered to 
have been conferred upon the government in terms of section 3 of the 
Act, 1931 , allowing it to insert  Declaration for the purpose of 
imposing/increasing or reduc ing GST with immediate effect.  
24.   It is also to be borne in mind that in a Parliamentary 
system of Government , the scheme of the Constitution  is based upon 
the theory of separation of powers enunciated by the French political 
philosopher Montesquieu  under which powers of the State are 
distributed among the three organs of the State,  namely , Legislat ure, 
Executive and the Judicia ry. Under Article 7 of the Constitution, 1973, 
two institutions named earlier fi nd mention, whereas the Judiciary has CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  25
not been included therein with a view to establish ing a system of 
check s and balance s. Similarly, John Locke, in his  work “Treatise on 
Civil Government ” has emphasized that “the legislat ive cannot transfer 
power of making laws to any other hand s, for it being but a delegated 
power from the people, they who have it cannot pass it over to others. 
The people alone can appoint the form of the commonwealth, which is 
by constituting the legislative, and appointing in whose ha nds that 
shall be. And when the people have said “We will submit, and be 
governed by laws made by such men, and in such forms ”, nobody else 
can say other men shall make laws for them, nor can they be bound 
by any laws but such as are enacted by those whom they have chosen 
and authorized  to make laws for them. ”  
25.  This Court in a number of cases has held that the principle 
of trichotomy of power s is one of the fundamental value s of the 
Constitution of Pakistan. In the case of Dr. Mubashir Hass an v. 
Federa tion of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265 ) this Court held as under : -  
“7.  It is to be noted that this Court vide judgment dated 
31st July 2009, in the case of Sindh High Court Bar 
Association v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 879), 
declared the Proclamatio n of Emergency, 2007, Provisional 
Constitutional Order, 2007, Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 
2007, Provisional Constitution (Amendment) Order, 2007 
and the Constitution (Amend ment)  Order, 2007, to be 
unconstitutional, illegal and void ab initio . Consequent ly all 
the Ordinances (including the NRO, 2007) were shorn of 
the permanency, which was provided under Article 270AAA 
of the Constitution, as validated in Tikka Iqbal Muhammad 
Khan v. General Pervez Musharraf  (PLD 2008 SC 178). But 
the Court, while adherin g to the doctrine of constitutional 
trichotomy, referred the NRO, 2007 along with other 
Ordinances, to the Parliament for consideration to make CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  26
them Act of the Parliament, or the Provincial Assemblies, 
as the case may be, with retrospec tive effect. The rel evant 
paras  from the said judgment are reproduced he reinbelow 
for ready reference: - 
“186. Proclamation of Emergency and PCO No. 1 of 
2007 having been declared unconstitutional and void 
ab initio and the validity purportedly conferred on all 
such Ordinance s by means of Article 270AAA and by 
the judgment in Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan's case 
also having been shorn, such Ordinances would 
cease to be permanent laws with the result that the 
life of such Ordinances would be limited to the period 
specified in Artic les 89 and 128 of the Constitution, 
viz., four months and three months respectively from 
the date of their promulgation. Under Article 89 of 
the Constitution, an Ordinance issued by the 
President, if not so laid before the National 
Assembly, or both Houses  of Parliament, stands 
repealed on expiration of four months from its 
promulgation. Similarly, under Article 128 of the 
Constitution, an Ordinance issued by the Governor, if 
not so laid before the concerned Provincial Assembly, 
stands repealed on expiratio n of three months from 
its promulgation.  
  
187. It may be noted that such Ordinances were 
continued in force throughout under a wrong notion 
that they had become permanent laws. Thus, the 
fact remains that on the touchstone of the provisions 
of Articles 89  and 128 read with Article 264 of the 
Constitution and section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897, only such rights, privileges, obligations, or 
liabilities would lawfully be protected as were 
acquired, accrued or incurred under the said 
Ordinances during the period of four months or three 
months, as the case may be, from their 
promulgation, whether before or after 3rd 
November, 2007, and not thereafter, until such 
Ordinances were enacted as Acts by the Parliament 
or the concerned Provincial Assembly with 
retrospective effect.  
  
188. In the light of the above, the question of 
validation of such Ordinances would be required to 
be decided by the Parliament or the concerned 
Provincial Assemblies. However, the period of four 
months and three months mentioned res pectively  in 
Articles 89 and 128 of the Constitution would be 
deemed to commence from the date of short order 
passed in this case on 31st July, 2009 and steps may 
be taken to lay such Ordinances before the CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  27
Parliament or the respective Provincial Assemblies  in 
accordance with law during the aforesaid periods. 
This extension of time has been allowed in order to 
acknowledge the doctrine of trichotomy of powers as 
enshrined in the Constitution, to preserve continuity, 
to prevent disorder, to protect private rig hts, to 
strengthen the democratic institutions and to enable 
them to perform their constitutional functions, which 
they were unconstitutionally and illegally denied 
under PCO No.1 of 2007. Needless to say that any 
validation whether with retrospective effe ct or 
otherwise, shall always be subject to judicial review 
on the well recognized principles of ultra vires, non -
conformity with the Constitution or violation of the 
Fundamental Rights, or on any other available 
ground. ”  
 
26.  Learned counsel for OGRA al so argued that delegation of 
Parliament’s power of taxation to Government/ Executive is permissible 
in view of legislative requirement provided  in Article 77 of the 
Constitution , as according to said provision , tax can be levied by or 
under the authority of  Act of Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament). In support 
of his argument, h e has cited judgment s in Ittefaq Foundry v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1990 Lahore 121) and All Pakistan Textile 
Mills Association ’s case  (supra ).   
27.  In Ittefaq Foundry ’s case  (supra ), petition under Article 
199 of the Constitution  was filed before the High Court seeking a 
declaration to the effect that the notification dated 10 .07.1989 issued 
under section 7 of Sales Tax Act, 1951 ; the letter of C.E.&S.T. , Circle 
11, Lahore, dated 05.0 7.1989 (intimating revised rates of central 
excise duty and sales tax on billets /ingots ); and the oral order on 
which the above said letter was based as well as the relevant 
provisions of F inance Act, 1989  were without lawful authority and 
hence of no lega l effect. It was further prayed that the petitioner be 
permitted to sell the products already produced before the introduction CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  28
of impugned tax without additional burden of the new impose  and 
the further production on such terms as the Court would  deem fit to 
impose. The learned High Court allowed the petition and held that the 
levy, charging and collecting the excise duty and the sales tax at the 
rates intimated vide letter dated 05.07.1989, were illegal and without 
lawful authority and  the notifications se eking amendment/extending 
the operative period of the aforesaid notification were illegal and 
without lawful authority. Thus, t he Federal  Government was required 
to reconsider within two months the question of grant of exemption of 
excise duty and sales ta x on billets in the light of the observations 
made therein.  However , while dealing with the exemptions which are 
allowed under the relevant provisions of law, given by the Majlis -e-
Shoora  (Parliament)  under Article 77 or by the Provincial Assembly 
under Ar ticle 127, a mechanism has to be laid down to exercise  
burden of taxation on individuals  in view of the principle  of 
reasonability.  
28.  In All Pakistan Textile Mills Association ’s case  (supra) the 
Government  of Sindh , vide notification dated 29.11.1990 i n the 
purported exercise of powers under section 62(2) of the Sindh Local 
Government Ordinance, 1979 , pursuant to the directions of the 
Provincial Government  contained in the Government o f Sindh Local 
Government Public Health Engineering and Rural Developm ent 
Department Notification dated 17 .07.1990, de-linked conservancy 
rates from net annual rental  of properties and link ed it with water 
charges.  Resultantly, the rates of conservancy charges were increased 
exorbitantly . The owners of different textile mill s as well as owners of 
commercial properties  challenged the said increase before the High CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  29
Court, inter alia, on the ground that conferment of unhindered 
executive powers to levy a tax under the Sindh Local Government 
Ordinance, 1979 would amount to excessi ve delegation of legislative 
powers and would have to be str uck down on that ground alone.  
Learned High Court,  having  taken into consideration a number of 
judgments of this Cou rt, including case of Zaibtun Textile Mills Ltd . 
(supra ) held that the doctrine of delegation has not to apply to the 
colonial Legislatures established under the Acts of the British 
Parliament prior to the Independence and this view still holds the field 
after the Independence in this country under the Constitutions adopted 
in Pakista n, as it has been held that the powers of the Legislature 
under the written  Constitutions to make laws withi n the allotted 
sphere s are in the nature of plenary and sovereign power s.  
29.  In the light of the law laid down in the aforesaid 
judgments, it is clear that the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  
/Legislature  alone and not the  Government/Executive is empowered to 
levy tax. As far as delegation of such powers to the 
Government/Executive is concern ed, the same is for the purpose of 
implementation of such la ws, which is to be done  by framing rules, or 
issuing notifications or guidelines, depending upon case to case, as we 
have c ome across s ome of the cases noted hereinabove. But in no 
case, authority to levy tax for the Federation is to be del egated to the 
Government /Executive. Therefore, arguments so raised by learned 
counsel ha ve no force  and the same are repelled hereby .  
30.   Now is the stage , where we are required to examine the 
constitutionality of the Act, 1931 . As it has been noted hereinabove, 
this A ct amongst other laws,  as an existing law , has remained in force CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  30
continuously from the date of its inception. As mentioned earlier, t he 
Act, 1931 was adopted vide Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances 
Order , 1949 and was continued subsequently under Ar ticle 224 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1956 , Article 225 of the 
Constitution of 1962  and then under Article 268 of the Constitution of 
1973. Thus, i t has quite a long life during the course whereof its 
validity was adjudged first in Abdul Rashid ’s case  (supra ) and was also 
considered in the cases of M/s Chhotabhai v. Union of India  (AIR 1962 
SC 1006),  M/s R.H. Ghani v. Assistant Collector of Customs  (1991 
SCMR 90), Fateh Textile Mills v. Pakistan  (1992 CLC 2300 ) and Gul 
Ahmed Textile  Mills v. Collector of Customs  (1990 MLD 126), but its 
constitutionality was not examined.  
31.  Article 209 of Kenya; Article 152 of Uganda; and Article 
265 of the Constitution of India, which deal with imposition of taxes for 
the National /Central Governm ent by or under the authority of the 
Parliament , are pari materia  with Article 77 of the Constitution of 
Pakistan. The aforesaid provisions are reproduced hereinbelow:  
PAKISTAN  
77.  No tax shall be levied for the purpose of the 
Federation except by or und er the authority of Act of 
Parliament .   
 
KENYA   
 
209. (1) Only the national government may impose — 
(a) income tax;  
(b) value -added tax;  
(c) customs duties and other duties on import and 
export goods;  and 
(d) excise tax.  
 
(2) An Act of Parliament may autho rise the national 
government  to impose any other tax or duty, except a tax 
specified in clause (3)(a) or (b).  
 
(3) A county may impose — CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  31
(a)  property rates;  
(b)  entertainment taxes; and   
(c)  any other tax that it is  authorised to impose 
by an Act of  Parliament.  
 
(4) The national and county governments may impose 
charges  for the services they provide.  
 
(5) The taxation and other revenue -raising powers of a 
county shall not be exercised in a way that prejudices 
national economic  policies, economic activiti es across 
county boundaries or the national  mobility of goods, 
services, capital or labour.  
 
210. (1) No tax or licensing fee may be imposed, 
waived or varied  except as provided by legislation.  
(2)  If legislation permits the waiver of any tax or 
licensing  fee — 
(a) a public record of each waiver shall be 
maintained together  with the reason for the 
waiver; and  
(b) each waiver, and the reason for it, shall be 
reported to the  Auditor -General.  
(3) No law may exclude or authorise the exclusion of a 
State  office r from payment of tax by reason of  — 
 
(a) the office held by that State officer; or  
(b) the nature of the work of the State officer.  
 
UGANDA   
 
152. Taxation  
(1) No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of 
an Act of Parliament.  
 
(2) Where a law en acted under clause (1) of this article 
confers powers on any  person or authority to waive or vary 
a tax imposed by that law, that person or  authority shall 
report to Parliament periodically in the exercise of those 
powers,  as shall be determined by law.  
 
(3) Parliament shall make laws to establish tax tribunals 
for the purposes of  settling tax disputes.  
 
INDIA   
265.   Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law. - 
No tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of 
law.  
 
It may  be seen that sect ion 2 of the Provisional Collection of Taxes and 
Duties Act, 1959  of Kenya ; section 1 of Provisiona l Collection of Taxes CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  32
Act, 1968  of the United Kingdom ; and section 1 of the Taxes and 
Duties (Provisional Collection) Act, 1963  of Uganda, which deal with 
collection of taxes , are pari materia  with section 3 of the Act, 1931 . 
Said provisions  too are reproduced hereinbelow:  -  
KENYA  
 
2.  Provisional collection orders  – If a Bill is published in 
the Gazette whereby, if such Bill were passed into law, any 
tax or  duty, or any rate, allowance or administrative or 
general provision in respect thereof, would be imposed, 
created, altered or removed, the Minister may, subject to 
this Act and notwithstanding the provisions of any other 
written  law relating to taxes and duties, make an order 
that all or any specified provisions of the Bill relating to 
taxes or duties shall have effect as if the Bill were passed 
into law.  
 
UNITED KINGDOM  
 
1. (1) This section applies only to income tax, 
purchase tax and duties of customs a nd excise.  
(2) Subject to that, and to the provisions of subsections 
(4) to (8) below, where the House of Commons passes a 
resolution which  -  
(a) provides for the renewal of a further period of 
any tax in force or imposed during the previous 
financial yea r (whether at the same or a 
different rate, and whether with or without 
modifications) or for the variation or abolition 
of any existing tax, and  
(b) contains a declaration that it is expedient in 
the public interest that the resolution should 
have statuto ry effect under the provisions of 
this Act,  the resolution shall, for the period 
specified in the next following subsection, have 
statutory effect as if contained in an Act of 
Parliament and,  where the resolution provides 
for the renewal of a tax, all enac tments which 
were in force with reference to that tax as last 
imposed by Act of Parliament shall during that 
period have full force and effect with respect to 
the tax as renewed by the resolution:  
 
In this section references to the renewal of a tax include  
references to its reimposition, and references to the 
abolition of a tax include references to its repeal.  
 
  UGANDA   CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  33
1.  Provisional collection orders. Whenever the 
Government approves the introduction into Parliament of a 
bill by which if the bill were passed into law — any tax or 
duty or rate of tax or duty, or any allowance relating to the 
tax or duty, would be imposed or created; or any tax or 
duty or any such rate or allowance would be altered or 
removed,  the Minister may, subject to this Act, by 
statutory instrument order that there shall be charged, 
levied and collected the tax or duty which would become 
payable if the bill were passed into law and came into 
operation in place of the tax or duty which would otherwise 
be payable or, as the case may be , that there shall cease 
to be charged, levied and collected any tax or duty which 
would cease to be payable if the bill were passed into law 
and came into operation.  
 
32.  A perusal of section 2 of the Provisional Collection of Taxes 
and Duties Act of Kenya shows that  any tax or duty, or any rate, 
allowance or administrative or general provision in respect thereof, 
would be imposed, created, altered or removed  if the bill were passed 
into law. Similarly,  under  the Provisional Collection of the Taxes Act, 
1968 of the United Kingdom , the renewal of a further period of any tax 
in force or imposed during the previous financial year (whether at the 
same or a different rate, and whether with or without modifications) or 
for the variation or abolition of any exist ing tax and a declaration that 
it is expedient in the public interest that the resolution should have 
statutory effect  are subject to the passing of the resolution by the 
House of Commons. Likewise , under section 1 of the Taxes and Duties 
(Provisional Coll ection) Act, 1963  of Uganda , any tax or duty or rate of 
tax or duty, or any allowance relating to the tax or duty, would be 
imposed or created; or any tax or duty or any such rate or allowance 
would be altered or removed  if the Bill were passed into law. From the 
above, it is clear that the practice of provisional immediate collection 
of tax pending passing of the Bill by the concerned legislative body is 
prevailing since long , but the same is conditional either on the passing CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  34
of an Act of Parliament, or at  least a resolution passed to that effect by 
a House of Representatives.   
33.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned counsel for OGRA has 
placed on record a judgment from the Supreme Court  of New South 
Wales  in re: Ex parte Wallace & Co . of the year 1892. As per  the facts 
of this case, after a resolution having been passed by the House of 
Commons, tax was imposed on certain goods, which up  to 01.12.1891 
had been admitted into the Colony duty free. The goods in question 
arrived in Sydney during December, 1891, at which time no Act of 
Parliament imposing an y duties upon goods of the kind  had come into 
force. The Customs Regulations Act (42 Vic.  No.19, s. 47) provided 
that within a certain time after arrival of the goods , entry thereof 
would be made and “the bill of  entry of any goods, when signed by the 
Collector or proper office r shall  be transmitted to the proper officer and 
be his warrant for the delivery of the goods therein mentioned. ”  The 
applicants duly made entry of the goods and applied to the Collector of  
Customs to sign the entrie s, in order that they might get possession of 
the goods. The Collector refused  to sign the  entries  till certain customs 
duties were paid. The applicants thereupon obtained a rule nisi for a 
mandamus to compel the Collector to sig n the bills of entry upon the 
grounds : -  
(1)  That the said goods were, at the time of the refusal of the 
said James Power (being the proper officer for such 
purpose) to sign the said entries or bills of entry, free 
goods, and not chargeable with any duty  under the 
provisions of the Custo ms Regulation Act then in force; 
and  
(2)  That upon the applicants having complied with the 
provisions of the said Act with reference to the said goods CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  35
and the entries in regard thereto, the said James Power 
was bound to sign the said entries or bills of entry as the 
warrants for the delivery of the said goods to the 
applicants.  
The application was contested mainly on the ground of passing of 
resolution by the House of Commons. The Court declined to issue the 
writ returni ng, inter alia, the following findings : -  
“We are not for one moment saying that upon the mere 
will of the Executive new taxes are to be imposed. Here, as 
in England, a resolution of the Legislative Assembly —the 
House of Commons of the Colony, the keepers  of the 
public purse —must precede the action of the Executive. 
This application for a mandamus is made after the 
resolution of the Assembly had been passed, and is with 
reference to action taken by the Executive after and in 
virtue of that resolution. It i s right that there should be 
time given for the full and free discussion of important 
measures of this character, affecting the public interest in 
the highest degree, and if it were to be held that an 
application of this kind could succeed, the very object  of 
such a resolution would be defeated, and the hands of the 
Executive in a most important matter of public interest 
would be paralyzed . Both Houses of parliament would be 
asked to pass a bill without any discussion, and blindly and 
in the dark to commit themselves to the proposals of the 
Government, or else the object of imposing this new kind 
of taxation would be absolutely useless. Well, our  
Constitution Act  is not so rigid and inexpensive that the 
varying circumstances in the development of our politic al 
system are not to have some effect upon it. This is well 
pointed out, not with regard to the system of taxation, but 
with regard to the question of libel, in the case of Wason v. 
Walter, wherein Stockdale  v. Eansard  was cited as shewing  
that the House o f Commons had no legislative power in 
itself. In that case Sir Alexander Cockburn , C.J.,  after 
citing at length what Stockdale  v. Hansard   was, said in 
delivering the judgment of the Court: “From the doctrines 
involved in this defence, namely, that the Ho use of 
Commons could by their order authorize the violation of 
private rights, and, by declaring the power thus exercised 
to be matter of privilege, preclude a Court of law from 
inquiring into the existence of the privilege ----doctrines 
which would have pl aced the rights and liberties of the 
subject  at the mercy of a single branch of the Legislature  
— Lord Denman  and his colleagues in a series of masterly 
judgments, which will secure to the Judges who 
pronounced them admiration and reverence so long as the  
law of England and a regard for the rights and liberties of 
the subject shall endure, vindicated at once the majesty of CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  36
the law and the rights which it is the purpose of the law to 
uphold. To the decision of the Court in that memorable 
case we gave our un hesitating and unqualified adhesion. 
But the decision in that case has no application to the 
present. The position that an order of the House of 
Commons cannot render lawful that which is contrary to 
law, still less that a resolution of the House of Common s 
can oust the jurisdiction of a Court of law by clothing an 
unwarranted exercise of power with the garb of privilege, 
can have no application where the question is not whether 
the Act complained of being unlawful at law, is rendered 
lawful by the order of  the House or protected by the 
asserting of its privilege, but whether it is independently of 
such order or assertion of privilege, in itself privileged and 
lawful. ” At a later part of the same judgment, Sir 
Alexander Cockburn says, “Whatever disadvantages  attach 
to a system of unwritten law, and of these we are fully 
sensible, it has at least this advantage, that its elasticity 
enables those who administer it to adapt it to the varying 
conditions of society, and to the requirements and habits 
of the age in  which we live, so as to avoid the 
inconsistencies and injustice which arise when the law is 
no longer in harmony with the wants and usages and 
interest of the generation to which it is immediately 
applied. ” I adapt that language to this case, and I say we  
are not to go back to the time of Charles II., or to a time 
even anterior to that. We have to look at the things which 
have grown up with the growth of the Constitution, and we 
have to consider now that has been the established 
practice. It has been made abundantly clear that before 
the date of the passing of our Constitution Act  in 1856 it 
had for a long series of years been the uniform practice 
under the Constitution of England to do what the 
applicants now complain of; and, although the written law 
of our Constitution is silent with reference to matters of 
this sort, still it is well known that it is moulded on the 
lines of the English Constitution, and in matters not 
expressly referred to we follow the precedent of the 
English Constitution.  Therefore, i f it be an exception to the 
matter engrafted upon our written Constitution, the broad 
reason why it should be accepted is that the advantage to 
the community is so great that the occasional 
inconvenience of the individuals arising f rom it must yield 
to the  general good. For these reasons , I have no difficulty 
in concurring with the Chief Justice and Mr. Justice  
Windeyer  in thinking that in the circumstances of this case 
we should not be justified in granting a mandamus which 
would violate a well -recognised constitutional principle and 
might have very mischievous consequence. ”  
 
This judgment  is based on the resolution of House of Commons, not by 
an individual person representing the Government/Executive as it had CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  37
happened in the present case. One of the most  important observations 
made in this judgment was “we are not for one moment saying that 
upon the mere will of the Executive  new taxes are to be imposed”. 
(Emphasis provided). Needless to observe that in this judgment too, 
the longstanding practice of imme diate collection of taxes after passing 
of resolution by the House of Commons pending passing of the tax bill 
has been maintained with certain important observations to ensure 
that the tax is to be levied by the legislature but the distinction is 
apparent vis-à-vis the instant case , in that, the Government or the 
Executive being one of the organs of the State following the doctrine of 
trichotomy of powers was not allowed to effect immediate collection of 
tax. Similar was/is the practice in other countries, reference of which 
has been made hereinabove.   
34.  It is note worthy  that except in the judgment passed by the 
Peshawar High Court in the case of Abdur Rashid  (supra ) the 
constitutionality of any of such law, as stated earlier, never came up 
for examinatio n before the Superior Courts  in exercise of power of the 
judicial review available to them under the Constitution. As the Act, 
1931 had never been challenged for a very long time, a question may 
be posed  would it be appropriate to decide its constitutional ity. Answer 
to thi s proposition lies in the case of Attorney General of 
Commonwealth of Australia v. Queen (PLD 1957 Privy Council 115), 
where in the provision of section s 29(1)(b) & (c) and 29 -A of the 
Conciliation and Arbitration Act, 1904 -1952 were chall enged being 
ultra vires and invalid. The Privy Council , on having examined these 
provisions vis -à-vis facts of the case placed before it, observed that 
“whatever the reasons may be, just as there was a patent invalidity in CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  38
the original Act which for a numb er of years went unchallenged, so f or 
a greater number of years and invalidity, which to their Lordships as to 
the majority of the High Court has been convincingly demonstrated, 
has been disregarded. Such clear conviction must find express ion in 
the approp riate judgment. ” This principle has been reiterated by the 
Sindh High Court in the case of All Pakistan Newspaper Society v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2012 Karachi 1).   
35.  Coming to the case of Abdul Rashid  (supra ) wherein the 
learned High Court decla red the Act, 1931 as intra vires the 
Constitution , it may be seen that constitutionality of the Act was 
challenged mainly on the following two grounds, namely – 
(1) The Provisional Collection of the Taxes Act, 1931 was 
ultra vires as this Act was not passe d by Central 
Legislature of Pakistan ; and   
(2) Under sections 3 and 4 of the Act, no duty is 
recoverable from the day of presentation of the 
Finance Bill , until the Bill has been passed into Act, 
and that too from the new Financial year, viz., the 1st 
of July, 1964.  
 
Learned High Court after hearing the learned Attorney General held as 
under : -   
“24. The words “subject to Constitution ” used in Article 
225 of the Constitution of Pakistan, which is equivalent to 
Article 372 of the Indian Constitution, ha ve been explained 
in the Madras case referred to above. By parity of 
reasoning, in the absence of a provision in the Constitution 
that the collection of tax from the date when the Finance 
Bill was introduced in the National Assembly, is illegal, 
under the pr esent Constitution, the law, which previously 
existed in regard to it, will continue to be valid even after 
the Constitution.   CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  39
  
“25.  In further support of this contention, the learned 
Attorney -General relied on Art. 237 of the Constitution, 
which provide s that : - 
  
“Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution all 
taxes and fees levied under any law in force 
immediately before the commencing day shall 
continue to be levied until they are varied or 
abolished by an Act of the appropriate Legislature. ” 
  
“26. This Article is a complete answer to both the 
objections raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner. 
Accordingly, notwithstanding Article 48 of the Constitution, 
the duty on tobacco stalks at the rate of 6 paisas per 
pound was levied and was enfor ced immediately before the 
commencing day, and this duty was authorised to be 
continued to be levied until it was varied or abolished by 
an Act of the appropriate Legislature. In the instant case, 
this duty was raised to 50 paisas per pound in the Finance 
Act of 1963, which was passed by the Central Legislature 
of Pakistan. ” 
 
With profound respect , we are not inclined to agree with the view 
taken by the learned Peshawar High Court in the aforesaid case on 
question No. 2 noted hereinabove  because the learned  High Court 
found itself satisfied in holding on parity of reasoning that in absence 
of the provisions of  the Constitution  that collection of tax from the date 
when the Finance Bill was intro duced in the National Assembly wa s 
illegal, under the present Con stitution, the law, which previously 
existed in regard to it to be valid even after the Constitution. 
Reference of Article 237 of the Constitution of 1962 was also made as 
the question before the Court was that Inspector , Central Excise, 
Peshawar had issued a notice demanding from the petitioner payment 
of the excise duty on tobacco stalk @ 60 paisa per pound in possession CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  40
of the petitioner on 30.06.1964 after the Finance Bill 1964 was 
introduced in the Central Assembly of Pakistan wherein the proposal of 
levy of this duty was made , and under the same Bill, it was made 
‘declared provision ’ for giving effect to this duty from the date when 
the Finance Bill was presented under the authority of the Act, 1931. 
Admittedly , the Finance Bill had raised the demand f or the recovery of 
excise duty in view of the declaration , according to which 
notwithstanding the Constitution , all taxes and fees levied under any 
law in force immediately before the commencing day shall continue to 
be levied until they are varied or abol ished by an Act of the 
appropriate Legislature. In that case, question of recovery of increase d 
excise duty was involved which the Government/Executive had 
included in the Bill presented before the Assembly, as such , section 3 
was pressed into service by making a declaration to the effect 
imposition o f increase of the duty with immediate effect. Had there 
been no question of increase, there would be no necessity to issue the 
declaration, therefore, opinion so formed by the learned Division 
Bench of the Pesh awar High Court requires to be re -examined in the 
instant case . However, b efore proceedings further , it may be note d 
that under Article 48 of the Constitution of 196 2, no tax was liable to 
be levied for the purpose of Central Government except by or under 
the authority of an Act of Central Legislat ure. Thus, it is held that levy 
of tax also includes increase or reduction  in it, which is possible only 
by or under the authority of an Act of Central Legislat ure. Under Article 
77 of the Constitution of 1973 , in consonance with same expression, 
the words used in Article 48 of the Constitution of 1962 have been 
employed. However, as far as the Indian Constitution is concerned, CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  41
there is a distinction to the effect that taxes are not to be imposed 
save by the author ity of law. On a critical examination of the word 
“Declaration ” which has been used in section 3 of the Act, 1931, we 
are persuaded to determine its status. In this behalf , efforts were 
made to lay hand upon a statute where in the word ‘Declaration ’ had 
been used and the same had received judicial interpret ation. In this 
behalf, we have noticed that in section 3 of the UP Town Area Act ( UP 
No.II) of 191 4, the word ‘Declaration’ has been used and the same has 
been interpreted by the Indian Supreme Court  in the case of Tulsipur 
Sugar Co. Ltd. v. The Notified Area Committee (AIR 1980 SC 882)  as 
under: -  
“The second limb of the argument in support of the above 
contention is that the declaration made under section 3 of 
the Act being in the nature of subordinate l egislation, it 
was the duty of the State  Government to follow the same 
procedure which was applicable to the promulgation of 
rules under section 39 of the Act. Our attention was drawn 
in this connection to sub -section (3) of section 39 of the 
Act which pro vided that the power to make rules under the 
said section was subject to the condition of the rules being 
made after previous publication.  We are of the view that it 
is not possible to equate a declaration to be made under 
section 3 of the Act with r ules m ade under section 39. 
Sub-section (3) of section 39 of the Act does not in terms 
apply to a declaration to be made under section of the Act . 
The contention that the declaration to be made under 
section 3 of the Act is in the nature of the subordinate 
legislation is also not tenable. ”  
 
Thus, status of the declaration made under section 3 of the Act, 1931 
cannot be of a sub -legislation qua the Finance Act, which ultimately is 
to be passed in pursuance of the Finance Bill  by the Majlis -e-Shoora CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  42
(Parliament)  under Article 77 imposing increase in the levy of the sales 
tax, which essentially shall create burden upon the consumers , to 
whom ultimately the sales tax shall pass on. It is to be borne in min d 
that it is the duty of the State to protect the life and pro perty of the 
citizen s under Articles 3, 9 and 24 of the Constitution. Essentially for 
protection of their Fundamental Rights , they cannot be subjected to 
exploitation in terms of section 3 of the Act, 1931 for the purpose of 
subjecting them to pay GST on the taxable supplies in  furtherance of 
any taxable activity. Article 9 of the Constitution has been interpreted 
by this Court in number of cases wherein the scope of guaranteeing 
the Fundamental Rights  enshrined in the said Article  has been widened 
to ensur e guarantee  of life of the citizens. Reference may be made to 
the case of  Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries  (PLD 2010 SC 
1109). Relevant p aras are reproduced hereinbelow: -   
“20. With respect to the legality of assumption of office of 
Acting Chairm an by the Deputy Chairman of N.A.B., it was 
submitted by Mr. Irfan Qadir, the learned Prosecutor -
General, that the same was valid in view of the provisions 
of section 19 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and in 
defence of his own appointment as the learned Prosecutor 
General, his only submission was that his was a fresh 
appointment and not an extension of his earlier tenure and 
that section 8 of the N.A.B. Ordinance of 1999 created no 
bar on a fresh appointment of a person as the Prosecutor -
General who had a lready exhausted one term of three 
years in that office. Reliance in this connection had been 
placed on the Black ’s Law Dictionary and on the cases of 
Malik Shaukat Ali Dogar and 12 others v. Ghulam Qasim 
Khan Khakwani and others  (PLD 1994 SC 281) and Pir 
Sabir Shah v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 1994 
SC 738).  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  43
………………………………………………………  
25. A perusal of the above quoted provision would 
demonstrate that this Court was possessed of powers to 
make any order of the. nature mentioned in Article -199 of 
the Constitution, if, in the opinion of this Court, a question 
of public importance relating to the enforcement of any of 
the Fundamental Rights was involved in the matter, As has 
been mentioned in the preceding parts of this order, what 
was at stake was not only a colossal amount of 
money/property belonging to at least one million 
depositors i.e. a large section of the public but what was 
reportedly at stake was also the very existence of the Bank 
of Punjab which could have sunk on account of the mega 
fraud i n question and with which would have drowned not 
only the said one million depositors but even others 
dealing with the said Bank ”. And what had been sought 
from this Court was the protection and defence of the said 
public property. It was thus not only the  right of this Court 
but in fact its, onerous obligation to intervene to defend 
the said assault on the said fundamental right to life and to 
property of the said public. ”  
 
Thus, in light of the above discussion , any provision of an enactment, 
which is ag ainst the provisions of Article 77 of the Constitution  and 
infringes the Fundamental Rights  of the citizens enshrined in Article s 9 
and 24 of the Constitution  by depriving them of their life or property 
without any proper legislation , is also tantamount  to violation of Article 
3 of the Constitution  and the same cannot be considered to be a 
legislative or a sub-legislative instrument for the purpose of imposing 
or increas ing GST pending passing of the Bill  by the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) , which has alrea dy been tabled before  it. As such, section 
3 being contrary to Articles 3, 9, 24 and 77 of the Constitution  is 
declared to be unconstitutional  and void .  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  44
36.  It may also be seen that the Government/Executive 
subsequent to tabl ing of the Bill in the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  
itself realized that charging of additional 2% GST from unregistered 
petrol pumps/dealers/retail outlets was an error in the Declaration, 
suspended the same and allowed them to get them selves  registered 
within two weeks and in this b ehalf letter dated 17.06.2013 was 
issued, contents of which have already been reproduced hereinabove. 
We appreciate the conduct of the Government/Executive in suspend ing 
the imposition of additional 2% GST not for the reason stated in the 
letter , but in vi ew of the above discussion that no additional GST is 
leviable save by or under the authority of Act of the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament)  under Article 77 of the Constitution . We feel that this 
understanding had been developed because of increase of the pric es of 
essential items as well, exemption of which has been granted under 
section 13(1) and the Sixth Schedule of the Act, 1990, and ultimately 
the consumers ha ve to bear the financial burden of additional GST, 
may be at the rate of 17% of the value or addi tional GST @ 2%.  
37.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan , however, stated 
that the Government/Executive to balance the market do adopt such 
measures to avoid unjust enrichment. Reference has been made by 
him upon the judgment in the case of Mafatlal In dustries Ltd. v. Union 
of India [1997 (5) SCC 536], which has been relied upon  by this Court 
in the case of Facto Belarus Tractor s Ltd. v. Government of Pakistan  
(PLD 2005 SC 605) but we have pointed out to him that end 
user/consumer is not likely to be en riched what to talk unjust 
enrichment as the petrol or CNG is a consumable item and in fact the 
dealers shall also not becom e economically well off as the benefit of CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  45
increase in GST is to be passed on to the Government/State. Contrary 
to it, after recovery  of increased GST with immediate effect in 
pursuance of the Declaration inserted in the Bill , market will become 
imbalanced as the traders/retailers dealing with essential items , which 
are exempted from GST under the Sixth Schedule read with section 
13(1) of the Act, 1990 will increase the prices of essential items 
exorbitantly .  
38.  When we pointed out the above position to the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan , the learned counsel for the FBR 
presented a clarification , which has been reproduced herei nabove , 
according to him w ide publicity is being given for information of  the 
consumers that items mentioned therein are exempted from GST but 
in the meanwhile the Media ha s been consistently reporting that in the 
garb of the Declaration, the Government/Ex ecutive has proposed to 
increase GST by 1% on amendment of the relevant provisions of the 
Act, 1990, but had given immediate effect to its recovery  with the 
result that the prices of essential items have increased up to  15% or 
more. On this , we inquired fr om the learned  counsel for the FBR as to 
why the prices are not being checked through Sales Tax Inspectors , he 
stated that instructions in this behalf have already been issued  to all 
concerned . We are sorry to observe that despite issuance of 
clarification  and the withdraw al of additional 2% GST , the prices of the 
essential items along with  others ha ve not increased by 1% only, but 
the same have been increased exorbitantly and are not likely to come 
to the level prevailing before the speech of Finance Minis ter. In this 
manner , the Fundamental Rights  of the citizens enshrined in Articles 9 
and 24 of the Constitution  have been seriously violated, for which the CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  46
Government/Executive is required to take necessary measures/actions 
under sections 6 and 7 of the Pri ce Control and Profiteering and 
Hoarding Act, 1977 to keep the prices consistent as per the Sixth 
Schedule read with section 13(1) of the Act, 1990 .  
39.  Now turning towards the provisions of section 4 of the Act, 
1931, enforceability of which depends upo n the Declaration inserted by 
the Government in the Bill and as per sub -section (1) ibid the 
Declaration has been given the for ce of law with immediate effect,  
suffice it to observe that the Declaration in terms of section 3 does not 
have the status of legislation or even sub-legislation , therefore, for all 
intents and purpose s, it does not have the force of law for the purpose 
of effecting the increase d levy of GST , as it has been proposed in the 
Bill. As far as the word “law” is concerned, though the same  has been 
used in various Article s of the Constitution , such as Articles 4, 8, etc., 
but has  not been defined in the Constitution of 1973 separately.  
40.  It is to be noted that in Article 8 of the Constitution , in 
contradi stinction to Article 4 , the word s “any custom or usage having 
the force of law ” have been used, but it is settled that to give effect to 
a custom , usage or practice , evidence  of such custom, usage or 
practice is to be laid, therefore, we have to confine ourselves to the 
extent of meaning  of the word ‘ law’ for the purpose of section 4 of the 
Act, 1931  as elucidated in the case of Federation of Pakistan v. United 
Sugar Mills Ltd.,  (PLD 1977 SC 397)  as well as Gokula Education 
Foundation v. The State Of Karnataka  (AIR 1977 Kant 213 ). In the 
latter mentioned case , the word ‘law’ has been interpreted as under : -  
“6. The word ‘law’ has a particular meaning in legal 
parlance. The most standard definition of ‘law’ has been 
given by Salmond thus:  -  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  47
 
“Law is the body that principally recognised an d 
applied by the State in the Administration of Justice. 
In other words, the law consist s of the rules 
recognised and acted on by Courts of Justice. ” 
 
It is clear therefrom, that it is only that rule which is 
capable of being enforced by the Court of law a re 
recognised as ‘law’ and that which are incapable of being 
enforced by the Court of law, cannot be regarded as ‘law’. 
Likewise, the answer to the question whether any rule of 
conduct has the force of law or not, must be found from 
the act whether it is e nforced by the Courts of law . 
Another characteristic of ‘law’ is, it is rule of general 
conduct while administrative instructions relate to 
particular person. The other characteristics have been 
illustrated by the Supreme Court in Sukhdev Singh v. 
Bhagatra m, thus:    
“The characteristic of law is the manner and 
procedure adopted in many forms of subordinate 
legislation. The authority making rules and 
regulation must specify the source of the rule and 
regulation making authority. To illustrate, rules are 
always framed in exercise of the specific power 
confer red by the statute to make rule.  Similarly, 
regulations are framed in exercise of specific power 
conferred by the statute to make regulations. The 
essence of law is that it is made by the law makers 
in exer cise of specific authority ........  
 
This again means that when a power, exercised by 
an official or by a Governmental organ, is 
challenged, legal authority therefore derived from 
existing law must be shown, and that no valid law 
can exist save that which is recognised as such by 
the Courts. ”  
 
It is further to be noted that under Article 13(3) of the Indian 
Constitution  the term “law” includes any ordinance , order, bye -law, 
rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the terr itory of 
India th e force of law.  For the sake of convenience , the  same is 
reproduced h ereinbelow: -  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  48
“13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the 
fundamental rights.  - (1) All laws in force in the territory of 
India immediately before the commencement of this 
Consti tution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such 
inconsistency, be void.  
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away 
or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law 
made in contr avention of this clause shall, to the extent of 
the contravention, be void.  
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires -  
(a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye -law, rule, 
regulation, notification, custom or usage having in 
the territo ry of India the force of law;  
(b)  “laws in force ” includes laws passed or made by a 
Legislature or other competent authority in the 
territory of India before the commencement of this 
Constitution and not previously repealed, 
notwithstanding that any such law or any part 
thereof may not be then in operation either at all or 
in particular areas.  
(4)  Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment 
of this Constitution made under article 368. ” 
 
Article 265 of the Constitution  of India  requires that no ta x shall be 
levied or collected except by the authority of law. The Indian Supreme 
Court while interpreting the expression “authority of law ” in the case of 
Salonah Tea Company Ltd v. Superintendent of Taxes, Nowgoing  (AIR 
1990 SC 772)  = [1988 (33) ELT 249 (S.C)] held that in a society 
governed by rule of law, tax es should be paid by citizens as soon as 
they are due in accordance with law. Equally as a corollary of the said 
statement  of law, it follows that taxes collected without the authority 
of law should  be refunded because no state has the right to receive or 
to retain taxes or monies re alized from citizens without the authority CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  49
of law. Under Article 70 of the Constitution of Pakistan , the procedure 
has been laid down for introduction and passing of legi slative bills . 
According to it, t he Bill after having been passed by both the Houses of 
Parliament is to be assented by the President, whereafter it would 
become a law enforceable  at the courts of law . In the instant case , the 
Declaration, which we have al ready dilated upon , cannot be deemed to 
be a legislation or even sub-legislation for the purpose of section 4(1) 
of the Act, 1931 having force of law. Therefore, the Declaration being 
contrary to the provision of Article 70 of the Constitution , GST cannot 
be recovered at the increased rate pending the passing of the Bill by 
the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  otherwise it would be tantamount to 
violat ion of Articles 9 and 24 and such recover y shall be deemed to be 
exploitation within the ambit of Article 3 of the Constitution. It may be 
noted that a law , which has not been enacted following the procedure 
prescribed in Article  70 of the Constitution , but merely on the basis of 
colonial legacy , and which  impinges upon the Fundamental Rights  of 
the citizens enshri ned in the Constitution is not sustainable. As far as 
section 5 of the Act , 1931  is concerned, though it has already been 
amended as indicated hereinabove , but the mechanism mentioned 
therein is not workable and the recovery of GST on the basis of the 
provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Act, 193 1 in view of the ambiguity 
and absurdity of the language employed in section 5 cannot be 
enforced as ultimately if it is found that the GST has been recovered 
illegally , the same is required to be refunded in line with the law laid 
down in Salonah Tea ’s case  (supra ). This Court, as it has been pointed 
out hereinabove, in a number of judgments , has  exercised power of 
judicial review and examine d the constitutionality of different s tatute s. CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  50
Refer ence in this behalf ma y be made to the case of Baz Muhammad 
Kakar  v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2 012 SC 923) . Primarily , such 
authority is derived by the Court , inter alia , from the provision of 
Article 8 , which empowers this Court to declare any law or any custom 
or usage hav ing the force of law, in so far as it is inconsistent with the 
rights conferred by Chapter  1 of Part II of the Constitution , to the 
extent of such inconsistency, void.  
41.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan  on having argued 
the case at some length adv anced two propositions, firstly, that it 
would be appropriate to read down the provisions of section s 3, 4 and 
5 in exercise of the jurisdiction conferred by Article 268(6) of the 
Constitution, according to which , any court, tribunal or authority 
required or empowered to enforce an existing law shall, 
notwithstanding that no adaptations have been made in such law by 
an Order made under clause (3) or clause (4), construe the law with 
all such adaptations as are necessary to bring it into accord with the 
provisions of the Constitution . We ourselves are of the opinion that 
while examining constitutionality of a statute , a Court must exercise 
restraint and efforts should be made to save the statute instead of 
destroying it. Reference may be made to Baz Muhammad Kakar ’s 
case, but on having concluded hereinabove that section s 3 and 4 being 
ultra vires the Constitution  and in derogation to Articles 9, 24 and 77 
of the Constitution , it is not possible to allow such a law to remain on 
the statute book. Similarly, sect ion 5 of the Act, 1931 on acco unt of its 
absurdity and  ambiguity, even if it is allowed to remain on the statute  
book, it would be of no use and purpose for the Government or the 
executive, therefore, while holding section 3 and 4  to be ultra vires  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  51
the Constitution , section 5 too is held to be redundant and the same 
would also serve no purpose if it is allowed  to continue on the statute 
book. Reference in this behalf too is placed on Baz Muhammad Kakar ’s 
case.  
42.  Secondly , learned Attorney General stated that the 
judgment may be allowed to have prospective effect in line with the 
dictum laid down in Malik Asad  Ali’s case  (supra ). There is no cavil with 
this proposition, but the difference between the reported judgment 
and the instant case is that here we  have declared provisions of 
section 3 and 4 ultra vires the Constitution, as well as derogatory to 
Article 77, therefore, it is not possible to allow it to continue in force.  
The said provisions also being against the Fundamental Rights  
guaranteed under t he Constitution  have to be declared void under 
Article 8 of the Constitution. However, the Legislature is not precluded 
from promulgating a  law directly keeping in view relevant provisions of 
the Constitution  i.e., Article 77 as well as Fundamental Rights  of the 
citizens discussed hereinabove.   
43.  We are conscious of the fact that subject to generating 
funds , the Government machinery for the welfare of the citizens 
cannot run smoothly, therefore, despite having declared certain 
provision s of Act, 1931 ultra vires the Constitution, we have not issued 
direction for immediate refund of 1% GST which has been charged 
from the end users , but have allowed the Parliament to examine this 
aspect of the case subject to all just exception s. However, i f the levy 
of the GST is applie d with retrospective effect, the amount of GST so 
charged shall be handed over to the Government otherwise proper 
orders shall be passed.  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  52
44.  We have noticed that by means of the Bill, GST was 
proposed to be increased from 16% to 17% by am ending section 3 of 
the Act, 1990 from 13.06.2013 on the value of taxable supplies made 
in course or furtherance of any taxable activity , but the notification 
issued by OGRA clearly indicates that GST is being charged on CNG on 
the increased rate of 26%, c ontents of the notification have already 
been reproduced hereinabove, and the increased recovery is being 
made under the provision of rule 20(2)(c) of the Sale s Tax Act (Special 
Procedure ) Rules, 2007, which too has been reproduced hereinabove. 
This recove ry is absolutely contrary to section 3 as it has been sought 
to be amended in the Bill. Therefore, GST at the increased cannot be 
recovered unless so provided under the statute .  
45.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned ASC , however, 
emphasized that in Zaibtun Textile Mills ’ case (supra ), authority can be 
delegated to the Government for the purpose of effecting recovery of 
9% additional GST . We are not in agreement with the learned ASC 
because we have taken into consideration the ratio decidendi  and the 
principl es laid down in the above referred judgments including All 
Pakistan Textile Mills Associations’ case in respect of delegation of 
powers and in all the other case principle has been laid down that levy 
of tax has to be made by the Legislature but its enforc ement in some 
of the case can be le ft at the disposal of Government/Executive 
because in any case the legislation has n either efface d itself  nor has 
abdicated its authority to effect the recovery of tax or granting 
exemption or concession subject to follow ing the principle of 
reasonab leness and guideline s discussed in the case, which he has 
relied upon.   CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  53
46.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan  stated that this 
provisi on of law is not happily worded  and recovery of 9% additional 
GST on CNG is in accordanc e with law .  
 We, th us, declare that the Federal Government  has no lawful 
authority to impose or recover GST on CNG @ 26% and @ 17% on the 
value of taxable supplies made in the course or furtherance of any 
taxable activities with effect from 13.06.2013  until passing of the 
Finance Bill . The excess amount equal to 1% , i.e., 17% - 16%, of GST 
recovered on the petroleum products/CNG or any other taxable 
supplies w.e.f. 13.06.2013 onward is  thus refundable to the consumers 
and the concerned authorities are dire cted to deposit it with the 
Registrar of this Court subject to passing of the Bill by or under the 
authority of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) . The observations following 
the procedure of its refund ha ve already been made hereinabove. 
Similarly, the Governme nt has also been directed to deposit 9% out of 
26% of GST charged on CNG as per notification dated 13.06.2013 in 
the same manner. In respect of recovery of additional 9%, statement 
shall also be filed on behalf of the Government showing the amount of 
GST s o recovered from the consumers under proviso to rule 20(2)(c) 
of the aforesaid Rules of 2007 on the value of CNG in addition to 16% 
GST imposed under section 3 of the Act, 1990 as this amount is also to 
be refunded to the consumers, for which appropriate o rder shall be 
passed subsequently.    
47.  As far as rules are concerned, those are to be framed 
under section s 51 and 71 of the OGRA Ordinance . A perusal of the said 
provisions indicates that rules cannot be framed for the purpose of 
levying additional GST . GST is to be levied on the taxable supplies in CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  54
furtherance of section 3 of the Act , 1990  and not by any rules or 
instrument which has conferred right upon them to impose the tax, 
therefore, the aforesaid rule, being contrary to the Act , is hereby 
declare d non est and also violative of the provision of section 4  of the 
Act, 1990 .  
48.  Above are the reasons for the short order of even date, 
which is reproduced hereinbelow:  -  
(i) The Government is not authorized to impose or increase 
Sales Tax from 16% to 17% on the value of taxable 
supplies, i.e. by inserting in the Finance Bill (Money Bill) 
2013-14 a declaration under section 3 of the Provisional 
Collection of Taxes Act, 1931 [hereinafter referred to as 
‘the Act, 1931 ’] as such declaration neither has the sta tus 
of legislation nor sub -legislation, therefore, it has no force 
of law.  
AND 
Immediate recovery of Sales Tax from 16% to 17% on the value 
of taxable supplies w.e.f. 13.06.2013 is unconstitutional 
being contrary to Articles 3, 9, 24 and 77 of the 
Constitu tion; 
(ii) Under proviso to rule 20(2)(c) of the Sales Tax Special 
Procedures Rules, 2007, 9% in addition to the Sales Tax 
prescribed under section 3 of the Sales Tax Act, 1990 
imposed or recovered from the consumers on CNG is 
unconstitutional and contrary to A rticles 3, 9, 24 and 77 of 
the Constitution as well as section 3 of the Sales Tax Act;  
(iii) Section 4 of the Act, 1931 as a whole is declared 
unconstitutional being contrary to Article 70 of the 
Constitution, which lays down the procedure for 
legislation;  
(iv) Section 5 of the Act, 1931 does not lay down parameters 
for the purpose of refund of the recovered taxes to the CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  55
consumers, as such, in absence of any workable 
mechanism, it is not enforceable in its present form;  
(v) As a consequence of above declaration, the Fed eral 
Government has no lawful authority to levy, impose and 
recover Sales Tax @ 17% from 13.06.2013 on the value of 
taxable supplies made in course or furtherance of any 
taxable activity until passing of the Finance Bill (Money 
Bill) 2013 -14, which has alr eady been tabled before the 
Majlis -e-Shoora;  
(vi) The excess amount equal to 1% (17% -16%) of the Sales 
Tax recovered on the petroleum products/CNG or any 
other taxable supplies w.e.f. 13.06.2013 onwards, thus is 
refundable to consumers and concerned authoritie s 
accordingly are directed to deposit it with the Registrar of 
this Court subject to passing of the Finance Bill (Money 
Bill) 2013 -14 by or under the authority of the Majlis -e-
Shoora;  
If the Sales Tax is imposed by the Majlis -e-Shoora to be 
recovered with  retrospective effect, same shall be paid to 
the Government, otherwise appropriate orders will be 
passed for its disbursement;  
(vii) The Government is also directed to deposit 9% out of 26% 
of the Sale Tax on CNG as per notification dated 
13.06.2013 in the same manner as it has been noted 
above;  
(viii)  A statement shall also be filed by the Government showing 
the amount of Sales Tax recovered @ 9% under proviso to 
rule 20(2)(c) of the aforesaid rules 2007 on value of the 
CNG from the consumers in addition to declared Sa les Tax 
of 16% imposed under section 3 of the Act, 1990 as this 
amount is also to be refunded to the consumers, for which 
appropriate order shall be passed subsequently;  CMA 3821/13  
In Const.P.33 -34/05  56
(ix) As prices of essential commodities mentioned in the Sixth 
Schedule to the Act, 1990 ha ve exorbitantly increased 
according to the media reports, therefore, Federal 
Government and the Provincial Governments are directed 
to take action under sections 6 and 7 of the Price Control 
and Profiteering and Hoarding Act, 1977 to keep the prices 
consis tent as per the Sixth Schedule under section 13(1) 
of the Act, 1990 (Essential Commodities);  
(x) Pending passing of the Finance Bill (Money Bill) 2013 -14, 
Sales Tax shall be recovered from consumers on the 
taxable supplies including petroleum products and CNG  at 
the rate prescribed under section 3 of the Sales Tax Act; 
and 
(xi) The OGRA shall issue revised notification fixing prices of 
CNG as per above observations forthwith recovering Sales 
Tax @16% Sales Tax on taxable supplies till passing of 
Finance Bill (Money  Bill) 2013 -14 by the Majlis -e-Shoora.  
 
The titled Civil Miscellaneous Application is disposed of in 
the above terms.   
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the 
21st June, 2013  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 