SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Review Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
 
Civil Review Petitions No.296 to 301, 308, 309  & 509 of 2020 . 
and C.M.A N o.4533  of 2020.  
(Against the short order dated 19.06.2020 and the detailed judgment   
dated 23.10.2020 passed by this court in C onst. Petition . 17/2019, etc)  
 
 
 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa   (in CRP No.296/2020)  
  
Sindh High Court Bar Association   (in CRP No.297/2020)   
  
Mrs. Sarina Isa  (in CRP No.298/2020)  
  
Supreme Court Bar Association  (in CRP No.299/2020)  
  
Muhammad Asif Reki President  
Quetta Bar Association   (in CRP No.300/2020)  
  
Shahnawaz Ismail, VC Punjab Bar  
Council   (in CRP No.301/2020)  
  
Balochistan Bar Council   (in CRP No.308/2020)  
  
Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists  (in CRP No.309/2020)  
  
Abid Hassan Minto  (in CMA No.4533/2020      
  
Pakistan Bar Council thr. VC  (in CRP.509 of 2020)  
  
 
…Petitioners  
  
    VERSUS  
 
The President of Pakistan and others  (in CRP.296 -301, 308, 309 
& 509 of 2020)  
  
The Supreme Judicial Council thr.  
its Secretary and others  (in CMA No.4533 of 2020)  
 …Respondents  
  
  
  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  2 
 
  
For the petitioner(s)  : Mr. Justice Qazi Faez  Isa (in -person)  
Assisted by Barrister Kabir Hashmi.  
(in CRP.296/2020)  
Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa (in -person)  
(in CRP.298/2020)  
Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
(in CRP.299, 300, 301 & 308/2020)  
Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC.  
(through Video Link from Karachi).  
(in CRP.297 & 309/2020)  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
(in CRP.509/2020)  
 
Nemo. (in CMA.4533 of 2020)  
   
For Federation of Pak.  : Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP.  
   
For President, PM & 
AGP.  : Mr. Sohail Mahmood, Addl. AGP.  
   
Date of hearing  : 26.04.2021.  
   
Table of  Contents  
 
Preface  ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  3 
Impugned directions  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 4 
Contentions of the parties  ................................ ................................ ...........................  6 
Judicial  power of dissenting Judges in review jurisdiction  ................................ ..................  8 
Grounds of review  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 10 
Questions for determination ................................ ................................ ........................  11 
Questi on (i) as to constitutionality and legality of the impugned directions  ............................  11 
 (a) Direction for tax proceedings against the petitioner and “material disadvantage” to her  .  
 ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  12 
(b) Hearing of the petitioner on video -link and the right of hearing  .............................  15 
 (c) Essential constituents of a fair hearing  ................................ ................................ ...... 15 
 (d) Status of hearing petitioner on video -link before making impugned directions ..........  17 
 (e) Effect of violation of right of hearing (principle of audi alteram partem)  ...................  18 
 (f) Right of hearing and Article 10A of the Constitution  ................................ ............  19 
 (g) Right of petitioner (spouse of a Judge) to be dealt with in accordance with law  .........  19 
 (h) Scope of the powers under Article 187(1) of the Constitution  ................................  20 
 (i) Constitutionality of referring the matter to the Supreme Judicial Council for exercise of 
its suo motu power ................................ ................................ .........................  22 
 (j) Obligation of a Judge as to the knowledge of financial matters of his or her financially 
independent family members.  ................................ ................................ ............  24 
 (k) Infringement of the Independence of the Supreme Judicial Council  .......................  24 
 (l) Government Servants cannot file c omplaints against judges directly  .......................  25 
Conclusion on question (i)  ................................ ................................ ..........................  26 
Question (ii) as to recalling impugned directions in review jurisdiction  ................................ . 26 
Conclusion on question (ii)  ................................ ................................ .........................  30 
Question (iii) as to legal status of actions made in pursuance  of impugned directions, and 
conclusion on this question  ................................ ................................ ........................  30 
Right of a Judge to be dealt with in accordance with law in the matter of his accountability  ...... 32 
 CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  3 
 
JUDGMENT  
Maqbool Baqar, Mazhar Alam Khan M iankhel,  Syed Mansoor Ali Shah and  
Amin -ud-Din Khan, JJ .- 
Preface   
  
 This judgment must announce loud and clear that no one, 
including a Judge of the highest court in the land, is above the law. At 
the same time, no one, including a Judge of the highest court in the 
land, can be denied his right to be dealt with in accordan ce with law. 
Every citizen of Pakistan, notwithstanding his status or position, is 
entitled to due process of law in any action detrimental to his life, liberty, 
body, reputation or property under Article 4 of the Constitution and 
safeguarding of his funda mental rights guaranteed under Articles 9 to 28 
of the Constitution. It matters little if the citizen happens to hold a high 
public office, he is equally subject to and entitled to the protection of law.     
 
2.  While judicial accountability is the corner stone of judicial 
independence, it does not mean that accountability of a judge is bereft of 
due process of law and fair trial guaranteed under the Constitution. An 
open court -house is no less than a glass house, yet the judges boldly and 
courageously upho ld the law even against the mightiest in the land, 
without fear and favour, in full public gaze. In doing so, they step on 
many a toes and rattle many a skeleton. This may at times, invite efforts 
to discredit the m by creating doubts about their personal i ntegrity. Since 
judges have no public platform to clarify, respond or defend themselves, 
such efforts go beyond the  person of the judge and undermine public 
trust and public confidence in the judicial institution . Constitutional 
safeguard of due process to  enjoy the protection of law and to be treated 
in accordance with law, therefore, assumes even great er significance in 
the case where integrity of a judge is in question.   
  
Facts  
3.  The President of Pakistan, on advice of the Prime Minister 
of Pakistan, filed a Reference under Article 209 of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan 1973 (“Constitution”)  against Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa 
(“Justice Isa ”), a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakista n, in the 
Supreme Judicial Council of Pakistan (“Council”)  to conduct inquiry  
against him, alleging the commission of misconduct by Justice Isa 
mainly on the basis of his non -disclosure of three foreign properties of CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  4 
 
his family members - spouse and childre n - in the declaration of his 
assets filed with the annual income tax returns under Section 116 of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 (“ITO”) . The Council commenced inquiry -
proceedings against Justice Isa, in the said Reference. Justice Isa and, 
among others, many Bar Councils and Bar Associations of the country, 
challenged the action of filing the Reference by the President and also the 
proceedings commenced on the basis thereof before the Council by 
invoking the original jurisdiction of this Court through con stitution 
petitions filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. The constitution 
petitions were allowed by this Court  vide order dated 19 June 2020, 
detailed reasons whereof were delivered on 23 October 2020 . The Court 
quashed the Reference filed again st the petitioner and held that the 
process adopted in preparing the Reference was fraught with illegalities of 
such scale and degree that amounted to  mala fide  in law1 and declared 
that the proceedings initiated by the Council on the basis of that 
Reference, stood abated.2 The Court left the matter of its alleged violation 
of Section 116(1)(b) of the ITO by Justice Isa to be determined in the first 
instance by the hiera rchy of the concerned legal forums specified under 
the ITO. However, the Court, on its own, went on and  directed the 
Commissioner of Inland Revenue, Islamabad (“Tax Commissioner”)  to 
initiate proceedings against the family members of Justice Isa [but not 
against Justice Isa], under the ITO and directed the Chairman, Federal 
Board of Revenue (“FBR”) , to submit a report regarding the determination 
made in those proceedings by the Tax Commissioner to the Secretary, 
Council. The Secretary, Council was directed to place the said report 
before the Chairman, Council and the Chairman, Council to lay it before 
the Council, and the Council was asked to consider it in the matter of 
Justice Isa, in exercise of its suo motu  powers, as it may deem appropriate. 
A strict ti me-frame was also given for immediate compliance of each step 
of the impugned directions. The impugned directions are reproduced here 
for ready reference:  
Impugned directions  
4. Within 7 days of this Order, the concerned Commissioner of 
Inland Revenue shal l himself (and not some other officer exercising 
delegated powers) issue appropriate notices under the Income Tax 
Ordinance, 2001 (“2001 Ordinance”) to the spouse and children of the 
Petitioner to offer an explanation regarding the nature and source of the  
funds (separately for each property) whereby the three properties in the 
United Kingdom (viz., No. 40, Oakdale Road, London E11 4DL; No. 90, 
Adelaide Road, London E10 5NW; and No. 50, Coniston Court, Kendal 
Street, London W2 2AN) that are in the names of the spouse and the 
children were acquired. For purposes of this Order the Commissioner 
Inland Revenue having jurisdiction over the spouse of the Petitioner (who 
must be a Commissioner exercising jurisdiction and performing 
functions at Islamabad) shall be deemed also to be the Commissioner 
                                                
1 See the judgment under review, para 136.  
2 See ibid, para 137.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  5 
 
having jurisdiction over the children. (The spouse and children are 
herein after referred to as “the respondents”.) Any notices issued or 
proceedings taken (or proposed to be issued or taken) under the 2001 
Ordinance in r elation to any of the respondents in respect, or on 
account, of the properties aforesaid prior to the date of this Order stand 
terminated forthwith.  
5. The notices shall be served at the official residence of the 
Petitioner at Islamabad through courier service and such other means as 
may be considered appropriate and shall be deemed served on the 
respondents when received at the said address.  
6. The resp ondents shall furnish their replies to the notices along 
with such material and record as is deemed appropriate. In case any of 
them is outside the country, it shall be the responsibility of such person 
to timely file a response, and the proceedings before  the Commissioner 
shall not be adjourned or delayed for the reason of nonavailability in 
Pakistan of such person.  
7. Upon receipt of the replies (and of such additional 
material/record as may be filed in response to such clarification or 
explanation, if a ny, as the Commissioner may, in writing, have sought), 
the Commissioner shall give an opportunity of hearing to the 
respondents in person or through an authorized representative/counsel 
and shall thereupon make an order in accordance with the 2001 
Ordinanc e.  
8. The proceedings shall be concluded before the Commissioner 
within 60 days of the date of receipt of the notices as aforesaid, and the 
order shall be issued by him within 75 days of the said date of receipt, 
and no adjournment or extension in time wh atsoever shall be given as 
affects or extends the aforesaid periods.  
9. Within 7 days of the issuance of the order by the Commissioner, 
the Chairman, Federal Board of Revenue (“FBR”) shall submit a report (to 
be personally signed by him) to the Council th rough its Secretary (i.e., 
the Registrar of the Supreme Court) regarding the proceedings as 
aforesaid, appending thereto the entire record of the said proceedings. 
The Secretary shall forthwith place such report before the Chairman of 
the Council (i.e., th e Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan) who shall, in such 
manner as is deemed appropriate, have the report laid before the Council 
for such perusal, consideration, action, order or proceedings, if any, in 
relation to the Petitioner as the Council may determi ne. The receipt of the 
report, the laying of it before the Council and the action/proceedings, if 
any, or orders or directions, if any, as may be taken, made or given by 
the Council thereon shall be deemed, for purposes of Article 209 of the 
Constitution, to be in exercise of the suo moto jurisdiction as is conferred 
by that Article on the Council.  
10. If, within 100 days from the date of this Order, no report as 
aforesaid is received by the Secretary from the Chairman, FBR, he shall 
inform the Chairman of  the Council accordingly and shall, if so directed 
by him, write to the Chairman, FBR requiring an explanation as to why 
the report has not been received. If in reply the report is filed, then the 
matter shall proceed in terms of para 9 herein above. If a reply is 
received without the report or no reply is received, then the Secretary 
shall bring such fact to the attention of the Chairman of the Council who 
may direct that the matter be placed before the Council for such perusal, 
consideration, action, orde r or proceedings, if any, in relation to the 
Petitioner (or any other person as deemed appropriate) as the Council 
may determine. The action/proceedings, if any, or orders or directions, if 
any, as may be taken, made or given by the Council shall be deemed , for 
purposes of Article 209 of the Constitution, to be in exercise of the suo 
moto jurisdiction as is conferred by that Article on the Council. Without 
prejudice to the foregoing, if at any stage the report is received from the 
Chairman, FBR, then the ma tter shall in any case proceed (or be deemed 
to proceed, as the case may be) in terms of para 9 herein above.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  6 
 
11. For the removal of any doubts, it is clarified that any of the 
proceedings under the 2001 Ordinance as herein contemplated on the 
one hand, a nd before the Council in terms of paras 9 or 10 herein above 
on the other, are distinct and separate from each other. Accordingly, 
nothing contained in this Order shall affect or prejudice the right(s) of 
appeal of any of the respondents under the 2001 Ord inance, if they feel 
aggrieved by the order made by the Commissioner or (as the case may 
be) any order made or decision taken at any appellate stage. Any such 
appeal(s) shall be decided on the merits, in accordance with the 2001 
Ordinance. At the same time  (and needless to say), the consideration by 
the Council of any matter placed before it under either paras 9 or 10 
herein above shall not be affected by the filing or pendency of any appeal 
as aforesaid. But the Council may, if it deems appropriate, notice  such 
appellate proceedings or orders/decisions and may (for purposes only of 
the matter before it) make such orders or give such directions in relation 
thereto as it deems appropriate.  
It is against these directions of the Court that Mrs. Isa  (“petitioner”) , 
the spouse of Justice Isa  and other petitioners , namely,  Justice Isa, the 
Bar Councils , Bar Associations  and others, in whose constitution 
petitions these directions were made , have filed the present review 
petitions. It may be important to  mention  that we have treated Mrs. Isa  
as the main petitioner  in the present review proceedings , because  the 
contentions made , during arguments  before us,  mainly related to the 
contravention of her rights under the Constitution , law, and principles of 
natural justice , fair trial  and due process .  
Contentions of the parties  
4.  The petitioners, Mrs. Isa and Justice I sa, have appeared and 
argued in person, while the other petitioners have been  represente d 
through their learned counsel . They have mainly contended that : (i) the 
impugned directions have been made in contravention of the provisions 
of the ITO , particularly that of Section 122 thereof, thereby infringing 
rights vested in the petitioner after lapse of the prescribed time -perio d for 
making amendment in the tax assessment order; (ii) the Tax 
Commissioner, Islamabad has no jurisdiction to proceed in the tax 
matter of the petitioner; (iii) the impugned directions have conferred such 
power and jurisdiction on the Tax C ommissioner wh ich are  not vested in 
him by law; (iii) the impugned directions have been  made in violation of 
the right of the petitioner to be heard before taking any adverse action 
against her - a basic principle  of natural justice ; (iv) the impugned 
directions have been made in breach  of her  fundamental right to fair trial 
and due process guaranteed by Article 10A of the Constitution  and of her 
constitutional right to be dealt in accordance with law guaranteed  by 
Article 4 of the Constitution ; (v) the impugned direct ions have referred 
the tax matter of the petitioner , an independent person,  to the Council 
for action against her spouse, Justice Isa, without his  having any CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  7 
 
concern in her tax matters:  Justice Isa cannot be held liable to account 
for alleged tax-evasion (if any) by her independent spous e, under any law 
of the land or under  any clause in  the Code of Conduct prescribed for 
Judges of the constitutional c ourts; (vi)  this Court could not have is sued 
any direction to the Counci l to exercise its suo motu  jurisdi ction; (vii) the 
impugned directions  have been  made against the Constitution, law and 
principles of natural justice , and are therefore liable to be recalled in 
exercise of review jurisdiction ; and (v i) any  proceedings taken and order 
passed  by the Tax Commissioner and any  action made by  the Chairman  
FBR, of  preparing and sending  any report  to the Council being a 
superstructure  built on illegal  and void  impugned directions are  also 
liable to be quashed .   
5.  Two l earned Additional Attorneys -General  have appeared 
before the Court on behalf of some of the respondents, namely , President 
of Pakistan, Federal Government, Prime Minister  of Pakistan  and 
Attorney -General for Pakistan (“contesting respondents”)  and opposed  
the review petitio ns, supporting the impugned directions . Rest of the 
respondents ha ve not opt ed to appear and oppose the review petitions . 
Learned Additional Attorneys -General , to rebut the  contentions of the 
petitioners, have submitted  that: (i) the impugned directions do  not 
comprise any adverse order against the petitioner , Mrs. Isa ; therefore, 
there was no legal necessity to give her a hearing , as the Court has 
directed the Tax Commissioner to proceed against her in accordance wi th 
the law, i.e., the ITO ; (ii) the Court  has not, by the impugned directions, 
determined any civil right and obligation or any criminal charge against 
the petitioner; therefore, her fundamental right to fair trial  and due 
process  guaranteed by Article 10A of the Constitution has not been 
infring ed by the impugned directions; (iii) the petitioner was provided 
with hearing on 18 June 2020 when the Court heard her on  video link, 
before making the impugned directions on 19 June 2020 ; therefore, there 
has not been any violation of the principle of nat ural justice; (iv ) the 
Court has directed the Tax Commissioner to proceed against the 
petitioner in accordance with law; therefore, constitutional right of the 
petitioner to be dea lt in accordance with law guaranteed  by Article 4 of 
the Constitution has no t thereby been violated; (v) the public servant s, 
including the J udges, are answerable to their disciplinary authorities for 
the unaccounted for assets of their spouses and children; therefore,  the 
Court has legally and properly ordered for reporting  the results of the CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  8 
 
proceedings to be conducted by the Tax Commissioner regarding the 
foreign properties of the petitioner , to the Council ; (vi) the Court has not 
directed the Council to proceed against Justice I sa necessarily , rather 
has left it to the discret ion of the Council to  take such action or 
proceedings as deemed appropriate by the Council ; (vii) the impugned 
directions have lawfully been made by the Court in exercise of its powers 
under Article 187 of the Constitution for doing comp lete justice; ( viii) 
there is no apparent  error in the impugned directions; therefore, they 
cannot be recalled within the limited scope of the review jurisdiction ; and 
(ix) the Tax Commissioner could have, on  his own, taken all such 
proceedings against the petitioner which have been directed to be taken 
by the Court in the impugned directions; therefore, the proceedings 
conducted and order made by the Tax Commissioner unde r the ITO  
against the petitioner canno t be quashed even if the impugned directions 
are recalled . 
6.  We have considered  the ar guments of the parties , gone 
through the case law referred  and perused the record of the case 
minutely.   
Judicial power of dissenting Judges in review jurisdiction  
7.  As two of us (Maqbool Baqar  and Syed Mansoor Ali Shah,  
JJ.) and our learned brother, Yahya Afridi, J. , earlier d elivered  dissenting 
opinion s to the extent of  making the impugned directions,  we consider it 
appropriate to briefly state, at the very outset,  our understanding of  the 
judicial power to be exercised by the dissenting J udges in review 
jurisdiction.  Needless to mention  that the dissenting Judges  on the 
Bench that heard the case , sub ject to their availability, are necessary 
members of the Bench constituted to hear review petition filed against  
the majority judgme nt, i.e., judgment of the Court,3 in particular, when 
the Bench that first heard the case was a specially constituted Be nch for 
hearing that case.   
8.  Review jurisdiction is conferred on this Court by Article 1 88 
of the Constitution , which states that the “Supreme Court shall have 
power, subject to the provisions of any Act of Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament) 
and of any rules made by the Supreme Court, to review any judgment 
pronounced or any order made by it.” The phrase “any judgment 
                                                
3 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto  v. State PLD 1979 SC 741 (7 -MB). Views of two of us (Manzoor Ahmad Malik and 
Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, JJ.,), in this regard, expressed in Justice Qazi Faez Isa v. President of Pakistan  
PLD 2021 SC 639 and Cherat Cement Co. v. Federation PLD 2021 SC 327, are endorsed.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  9 
 
pronounced or any order made by it” used in the Article unambiguously 
means “ judgment or order of the Court .” In case of a split decision  (where 
there is dissent by one or  more members of the Bench), the majority 
judgment is the judgment of the Supreme Court in terms of Article 188 . 
While the majority and minority views of the judgment become part of 
the jurisprudenc e, to be read, analyzed and applied  in future, it is the 
majority  view, at the time, that attains the status of the j udgment of the 
Court.   
9.  The Judgment of the Court  is characterized as the  judgment 
of the entire Bench , rather than of the majority judges. The entire Bench 
means the full numeric strength of the Bench , including the dissenting 
judges. For instance, if a case is decided by a 4-3 majority of a 7 member 
Bench, the judgment of  the majority of 4 members, which b ecomes the 
judgment of the Court, is considered to be the judgment of a 7 member 
Bench of the Court, and not of a 4 member Bench. Any principle of law 
enunciated in such majority judgment of 4 members cannot be overruled 
in any other case  by a unanimous de cision of a 5, 6, or even 7 member 
Bench; this can be done only by a Bench larger than a 7 member Bench. 
Conversely, any principle of law enunciated in the unanimous judgment 
of a 5 member Bench can be overruled by majority of only 4 members 
sitting in a 6  or 7 member Bench. The extent of the judicial power of the 
members of a Bench in this regard is thus dependent upon the total 
numeric strength of the Bench.4 In the present  case, irrespective of the  
dissenting opinions of three members of the Bench, on the impugned 
directions , the majority judgment of the C ourt is to be  considered to be a 
10-member  Bench judgment. For the purpose of exercising review 
jurisdiction under Article 188, the judgment of the Court (10-member 
Bench judgment) is under rev iew, and  the internal difference  of opinion 
between members of the Bench  in majority  and minority is no t relevant.  
10.  As the judgment of the Court is considered to be the 
judgment of all the members of that Bench, irrespective of its being 
majority judgment or unanimous judgment, there can be no difference in 
judicial powers of the members who earlier delivered the majority or 
minority judgment  while hearing the review petition, under Article 188 of 
the Constitution, against the judgm ent of the Court, i.e., the majority 
judgment. This is because the j udgment of the Court is under review and 
                                                
4 Cherat Cement Co. v. Federation PLD 2021 SC 327; Shanti Fragrances v.  Union of India (2018) 11 SCC 
305. CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  10 
 
not the view of the majority judges . There is nothing in the Constitu tion 
or the Supreme Court Rules  1980 that restricts the judicial power of 
dissenting J udges in review jurisdiction in comparison to that of the 
Judges who delivered the majority judgment. T he dissenting J udges, 
subject to their availability, being necessary members of the review 
Bench possess the same judicial power as that of the o ther m embers of 
the Bench.5 The Judge whose opinion remained the minority view in the 
main case is as empowered to review the j udgment of the Court, as can a 
Judge who delivered the majority opinion. This is because under the 
review jurisdiction the judges enjoy the flexibility to change their view, 
they might continue to hold or reverse their  earlier view and thus 
subscribe to either the earlier majority or minority view. Adjudication is a 
deliberativ e process and the power of review, within its limited scope , 
allows the judge to reconsider his earlier opinion. Hence,  there can be no 
fetters on the exercise of his judicial power  as that would offend the 
fundamental constitutional value of independence of the judiciary .  
11.  We may, however, underline the distinction between the 
revisiting of a principle of law enunciated in a judgment delivered in one 
case by a larger Bench of this Court in any other case  and the review of 
its own judgment by a Bench o f this Court in the same case : in the latter  
situation , the review Bench with the same Judges, if available, and with 
the same numeric strength can review, within the scope of its review 
jurisdiction, any part of its judgment including any principle of law  
enunciated therein.    
Grounds of review  
12.  Rule 1 of Order XXVI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 
provides that subject to the law and the practice of the Court, the Court 
may review its judgment or order in a Civil proceeding on grounds 
similar to those mentioned in Order XLVII, Rule I of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 and in a criminal proceeding on the ground of an error 
apparent on the face of the record. Under Order XLVII, Rule I of the Code 
of Civil Procedure 1908, there are three grounds of  review: (i) the 
discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the 
exercise of due diligence, was not within knowledge of the applicant or 
could not be produced by him at the time when the judgment was 
                                                
5 Views of two of us (Manzoor Ahmad Malik and Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, JJ.,) in this regard, expressed i n 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa v. President of Pakistan PLD 2021 SC 639 and Cherat Cement Co. v. Federation P LD 
2021 SC 327, a re endorsed.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  11 
 
pronounced or order made, (ii) some m istake or error apparent on the 
face of the record, and (iii) any other sufficient reason. These grounds of 
review are, in fact, limitations on the power of review of this Court .  
13.  With th is understanding  that all members of the Bench (10 
members) enjo y equal judicial power in review jurisdiction , we approach 
the three core questions involved in the present review petitions, in the 
light of the respective contenti ons of the parties.  
Questions for determination  
14.  The core questions that arise out of the contentions of the 
parties, for our determination are:  
i. Whether the directions contained in paragraphs 4 to 11 of the 
order dated 19 June 20206 (“impugned directions”),  
supported by the detailed reasons of the major ity judgment 
delivered on 23 October 2020,7 (“judgment under review”)  
have been made by the Court without adhering to the 
principles of natural justice, fair trial and due process and by 
contravening the relevant provisions of the law and the 
Constitution;  
 
ii. If the impugned directions are found to have been so made, 
whether they can be recalled in exercise, and within the scope, 
of review jurisdiction; and  
 
iii. If the impugned directions are recalled, what will be the legal 
status and effect of any  proceedings taken, orders passed or 
actions made in pursuance of those directions?  
Question (i) as to  constitutionality and legality of the impugned 
directions  
15.  This Court as  back as in the year 1959 held in Chief 
Commissioner v. Dina Sohrab8 that “it cannot be disputed that it is a 
principle of natural justice that no one should be dealt with to his 
material disadvantage or deprived of liberty or property without having 
an opportunity of being heard a nd making his defence ”, and later 
observed in Aman Ullah v. Federal Government9 that “whenever a hearing 
has been provided it has to be meaningful .” We are, therefore, to 
determine  whether , in the present case, the impugned directions have 
the effect of causing  any “material disadvantage” to the petitioner, Mrs. 
                                                
6 Reported in PLD 2020 SC 346.  
7 Reported in PLD 2021 SC 1.  
8 PLD 1959 SC 45.  
9 PLD 1990 SC 1092. See also MFMY Industries v. Federation 2015 SCMR 1550 and Maqbool Ahmed v. 
District Officer PLD 2010 Lah 332  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  12 
 
Isa, a nd whether  a fair and “meaningful hearing ” was given to her before 
making the impugned direction s. 
(a)  Direction for tax proceedings against the petitioner  and 
“material disadvantage ” to her  
14.  The petitioner has argued that the impugned directions 
affected her rights that had vested in her after lapse of the period 
prescribed under the ITO for issuing, or making amendment in, the tax 
assessment order; therefore, such directions could not have been issued 
witho ut giving her an opportunity of fair hearing to put forth and explain 
her case against the issuance of such directions. She has submitted that 
under the ITO, the Tax Commissioner could not have issued any notice 
to her to explain her income, and make any a ssessment order for 
payment of tax against her, after lapse of a period of five years from the 
end of the tax year to which that income relates .  The learned Additional 
Attorneys -General , opposing the contentions of the petitioners, 
submitted that the Cour t has, by the impugned directions, directed the 
Tax Commissioner to proceed against the petitioner in accordance with 
the law, i.e., the ITO, and has not made any adverse order against the 
petitioner; therefore, it was not necessary to provide an opportuni ty of 
hearing to the petitioner before making the impugned directions.  
16.  A plain  reading of the relevant provisions of the  ITO, i.e., 
Section s 114, 116, 120, 121 and 122,  shows that Section 114 of the ITO 
requires certain specified persons to furnish a return of their income for 
a tax year, accompanied with, inter alia , evidence of payment of tax due 
as per return of income and a wealth statement as required under 
Section 116. It also authorizes the Tax Commissioner to require, by 
notice in writing, any person who, in his opinion, is required to file a 
return of income for a tax year but who has failed to do so, to furnish a 
return of income for that year, in respect of one or more of the last five 
completed tax years . The Tax Commissioner can, under Sect ion 120, 
make any adjustment in the income tax return filed by a taxpayer within 
six month s of filing of return,  or issue notice to the taxpayer informing 
him of the deficiencies in the tax return and directing him to provide any 
information, particulars, statement or documents till the expiry of one 
hundred and eighty days from the end of the financial year (six mo nths)  
in which return was furnished. If no such adjustment is made or no such 
notice is issued within the prescribed period  (six months) , the income tax 
return filed by the taxpayer is treated to be complete and the assessment CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  13 
 
of due tax made by the taxpay er is deemed to be the assessment made by 
the Tax Commissioner. Under Section 121, the Tax Commissioner can by 
himself issue the tax assessment order for a tax year within a period of 
five years after the end of that tax year  if the taxpayer has not filed the 
income tax return of that year. While under Section 122, he can amend a 
tax assessment order treated as such under Section 120 or a tax 
assessment order issued under Section 121 within a period of five years 
from the end of the financial year  in which he has issued or treated to 
have issued the tax assessment order to the taxpayer.  
17.  The foreign properties were purchased, in the present case, 
by the petitioner and her children in the years 2004 and 2013; their 
income and sources to purchase those pro perties obviously relate to 
those years or the years prior thereto. When this Court made the 
impugned directions to the Tax Commissioner on 19 June 2020, a per iod 
of more than five years had  lapsed since the end of those tax years to 
which their income and  sources of fund for purchase of those properties 
relate. Therefore, the impugned directions , prima facie,  affected the 
vested right of the petitioner, as this Court has, in several cases,10 held 
that after the expiry of the statutory period a vested right accrues to the 
taxpayer that his assessment will not be reopened.  
18.  The bar  of time -limit within which an assessment can be 
amended under Section 122 of the ITO , as held by this Court in  
Commissioner  of Income Tax v.  Eli Lilly Ltd. ,11 is a statutory recognition  of 
the protection against arbitrary p ower of reopening or amending a tax  
assessment after the expiry of the prescribed period. This statutory bar 
vests a right in the  taxpaye r that after efflux of the prescribed period , his 
tax assessment will not be reopened or amended. The power conferred by 
Section  122 on the T ax Commissioner , having the potential of adding to  
the tax liability of t he taxpayer , is more substantive than procedural; 
therefore, even any legislative amendment in the time -period prescribed 
in that Section cannot be applied retrospectively unless the Legislature 
gives that amendment retrospective effect by express words or necessary 
implication. Thus, there cannot be any cavil to t he proposition that the 
Court cannot undo the statu tory bar of time -limit provided in Section 
122 of the ITO by its order or direction. The submission of the contesting 
                                                
10 See Taxation Officer  v. Rupafil  2018 SCMR 1131; Commissioner  v. Eli Lilly 2009 SCMR 1279; 
Assistant Collector  v. Khyber Electric Lamps 2001 SCMR 838; Federation v.  Ibrahim Textile Mills 1992 
SCMR 1898; Commissioner v.  Estern Federal Union Insurance Co. PLD 1982 SC 247; Nagina Silk 
Mill v. Income -Tax Officer PLD 1963 SC 322.  
11 2009 SCMR 1279.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  14 
 
respondents that the impugned directions cannot be termed as an 
adverse order against the petitioner is, therefore, not valid.  
19.  This C ourt has persistently reiterated the well -established 
principle that the courts cannot and should not create any right, liability 
or obligation that is not founded in law. One may refer to the case of the 
State v. Ziaur Rehman12, in this regard. This princi ple is applied in the 
realm of taxation with even  greater force, and thus while construing 
taxing statutes the language used , as held in  Yousaf Rerolling Mills v. 
Collector of Customs,13 is not to be either stretched in favour of the State, 
or narr owed in favour of the taxpayer . While interpreting tax law s Courts 
must look to the words of the statute and interpret it in lig ht of what is 
clearly expressed and, in the words of Rowlett J.  in Brady Syndicate v. 
Land Revenue Commissioner14 quoted by Hamoodur Rehm an J.  in 
Nawabzada Amir Khan v. Collector of Estate Duty15, “in a taxing Act, one 
has to look merely at what is clearly said. There is no room for any 
intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no presumption as 
to a tax. Nothing is to be read in,  nothing is to be implied. One can only 
look fairly at the language used.”  
20.   The submission of the contesting respondents that the Court 
directed the Tax Commissioner to proceed against the petitioner in 
accordance with the provisions of the ITO, and n ot otherwise, also  
appears in correct. Had the Court directed the Tax Commissioner to issue 
notice to the petitioner after ascertaining his authority to do so under the 
ITO with the expression that “the Tax Commissioner shall, subject to the 
provisions of the ITO, issue notice to the p etitioner”, the submission of 
the contesting respondents might have carried weight. But the impugned 
directions did not leave any option with the Tax Commissioner to 
consider his legal authority before initiating proceedings in the tax 
matter of the petiti oner. Further, it was admittedly the Tax 
Commissioner, Karachi who had the jurisdiction, under Section 209 of 
the ITO, to proceed in respect of the income tax returns filed by the 
petitioner, but the impugned directions mandated the Tax 
Commissioner, Islam abad to proceed in the matter. And it was only after 
the impugned directions that the FBR transferred the cases of the 
petitioner and of her children to the Tax Commissioner, Islamabad vide 
                                                
12 PLD 1973 SC 49  
13 PLD 1989 SC 232  
14 [(1921) 1QB 64, 71]  
15 PLD 1962 SC 335  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  15 
 
its order dated 25 -06-2020 . The impugned directions have, thus, af fected 
the vested right of the petitioner which have accrued to her after lapse of 
the period prescribed under Sections 121 and 122 of the ITO for issuing, 
or making amendment in, the tax assessment order and have the effect 
of causing “material disadvanta ge” to the petitioner.  Therefore, it was 
necessary to provide her a fair and “meaningful hearing ” before making 
the impugned directions.  Whether she was provided with such a 
“hearing ” is the question, which we address hereunder.  
(b)  Hearing of the petitioner on video -link and the right of 
hearing  
21.  The contesting respondents have submitted that the 
petitioner was provided with a hearing on 18 June 2020 when the Court 
heard her via  video -link from her residence , before making the impugned 
directi ons on 19 June 2020, while the petitioner has argued that her 
voluntary statement made through  video -link does not constitut e a 
“meaningful hearing ” that justifies the  making of the impugned 
directions against her.  To decide whether a fair and meaningful h earing 
was given to the petitioner before making the impugned directions, it is 
necessary to know: What does a fair hearing envisage? And what are the 
necessary requirements so that a hearing may be said to be fair and 
meaningful?  
(c)  Essential constituents of a fair hearing  
22.  The right of hearing is one of the basic principles of natural 
justice , expressed in the maxim audi alteram partem,  i.e., no one is to be 
condemned unheard (right to be heard). The principles  of natural justice  
aim to secure justice or to prevent miscarriage of j ustice. Lord Denning, 
speaking for the Privy Council in Kanada v. Government of Malaya ,16 
described the two necessary characteristics of the right of hearing thus: 
“If the right to be heard is to be a real ri ght which is worth anything, it 
must carry with it a right in the accused man to know the case which is 
made against him. He must know what evidence is given and what 
statements have been made affecting him; and then he must be given a 
fair opportunity to correct or contradict them...It follows, of course, that 
the Judge or whoever has to adjudicate must not hear evidence or receive 
representations from one side behind the back of the other.”  Lord Morris 
reiterated and re -emphasized these essential requirem ents of the right of 
                                                
16 (1962) AC 322.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  16 
 
hearing in Ridge v. Baldwin .17 His lordship said: “It is well -established 
that the essential requirements of natural justice at least include that 
before someone is condemned he is to have an opportunity of defending 
himself and in orde r that he may do so that he is to be made aware of the 
charges or allegations or suggestions which he has to meet…here is 
something which is basic to our system: the importance of upholding it 
far transcend the significance of any particular case.”  
23.  Justice Muhammad Afzal Zullah,  speaking for this Court  in 
Pakistan v. Public at large18 referred to  various injunctions of Islam and 
instances contained in the Holy Quran and Sunnah of the Holy Prophet 
(PBUH) and observed: “Right to property and honour, in a ddition to life, 
were also declared sacred which means: not only that their violation is to 
be punished and/or compensated but also that it is to be prevented...All 
this cannot be possible without a notice and opportunity of hearing.  The 
denial of these safeguards for doing justice would amount to Zulm 
[injustice] and  Ziaditi  [wrong doing] against oneself as also the 
victim…Command [of hearing the arguments of both parties] is specific 
to the effect that when a public authority is to be exercised for resolving a 
controversy regarding rights and liabilities, the decision would not be 
rendered without proceedings in which the person affected is also 
afforded an opportunity of hearing …It is common principle which 
governs the administratio n of justice in Islam that in case of liability with 
penal or quasi -penal consequences and/or deprivation of basic rights a 
notice a s well as an opportunity of hearing, are of absolute necessity . 
This by itself has to be recognized  as a basic right.”19  
24.  Justice Sarkaria of the Indian Supreme Court also described 
these two facets of the rule as to right of hea ring as “universally 
respected”  in Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India .20 He observed that 
the “maxim audi alteram partem  has many facets. Two of them are: (a) 
notice of the case to be met; and (b) opportunity to explain. This rule is 
universally respected and duty to afford a fair hearing in Lord Loreburn's 
oft-quoted language, is ‘a duty lying upon everyone who decides 
something’, in the exercise of legal power. The rule cannot be sacrificed 
at the altar of administrative convenience or celerity; for, ‘convenience 
                                                
17 (1964) AC 40.  
18 PLD 1987 SC 304.  
19 Emphasis added.  
20 AIR 1981 SC 818.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  17 
 
and justice’ -as Lord Atkin felicitously put it - ‘are often not on speaking 
terms’.”21  
25.  Thus, the general c onsensus of judicial opinions, as noted by 
this Court in University of Dacca v. Zakir Ahmed ,22 seems to be that to 
ensure the principle of fairness embedded in the right of hearing, the 
person sought to be affected must at least: (i) be made aware of the 
allegations made against him, upon which basis the decision is to follow, 
(i.e., notice of the case to be met) and (ii) be given a fair opportunity to 
make any relevant statement putting forward his own case, and to 
correct or controvert any relevant stateme nt brought forward to his 
prejudice (i.e., opportunity to explain). In other words, in order to act 
justly and to reach at just ends by just means, a deciding authority is to 
comply with and implement, in all circumstances, these elementary and 
essential r equirements of principle of fairness and right of hearing. As 
Lawton, L.J. said in Maxwell v. Department of Trade23 that “doing what is 
right may still result in unfairness if it is done in the wrong way”.  
(d)  Status of hearing petitioner on video -link bef ore making 
impugned directions  
26.  In the light of the elementary and essential requirements for 
the fulfillment of the right of hearing, namely, (i) notice of the case to be 
met and (ii) opportunity to explain, we proceed to examine whether, in 
the pres ent case, these essential requirements of right of hearing were 
complied with by providing the petitioner an opportunity of hearing on 
video -link, before making the impugned directions.  
27.  The constitution petition No. 17/2019 wherein the impugned 
direct ions have been made was filed by Justice Isa on 7 August 2019 and 
decided by the Court on 19 June 2020. On 17 June 2020, when 
concluding arguments of the respondents were being heard, Justice Isa 
appeared in person, for the first time, in Court and verball y conveyed the 
request of his spouse desiring to make a statement in Court on video 
link. The said request was allowed by the Court on 18 June 2020 , and on 
the same day at 4:00 p.m. she addressed the Court via video -link from 
her residence and made her statement. The recording of her said 
statement was made and the transcript thereof was also prepared only 
for perusal of the Members of the Bench under order of the Hon’ble 
                                                
21 Internal double quotation mark converted into single.  
22 University of Dacca v. Zakir Ahmed PLD 1965 SC 90 (5 -MB) per Hamoodur Rahman, J.  
23 1974 QB 523.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  18 
 
Senior Member of the Bench, the master and in -charge of the orderly 
conduct of cou rt-proceedings. On the next day, i.e., 19 June 2020, the 
constitution petitions were decided and the impugned directions were 
made in the short order of the Court.  
28.  We have very carefully read the transcript of her statement 
as well as of the observat ions made by the Hon’ble Senior Member of the 
Bench. We do not find in it that his lordship or any other Hon’ble 
Member of the Bench asked her whether she had anything to say if the 
Court would direct the tax authorities to inquire into her sources of fund  
whereby she had purchased the foreign properties, and to conduct 
proceedings for determining her tax liability regarding those properties 
under the ITO. She was not informed of the action the Court was 
contemplating to take, nor was she given a chance to state her stance on 
that. Thus, she was not given “notice of the case to be met”, nor was she 
provided with an “opportunity to explain” why the Court should not 
make such directions. Both the very essential requirements of right of 
hearing were not complie d with before making the impugned directions. 
Hearing the petitioner on 18 June 2020 by the Court on  video -link before 
making the impugned directions on 19 June 2020, therefore, cannot be 
said to be a fair and “meaningful hearing ” in the context of making the 
impugned directions. While the independent, adult and married children 
of the petitioner (her son and daughter) were not heard at all, before 
making the impugned directions that related to and affected them also. 
The impugned directions must have come as a surprise to the petitioner 
and her children.  
(e)  Effect of violation of right of hearing (principle of audi 
alteram partem)  
29.  This Court has time and again reiterated24 that even in 
absence of any express provision in the statute, the principle o f audi 
alteram partem  is to be read into the relevant provision and applies in 
proceedings where adverse action is being considered to be taken against 
a person or if the contemplated action is going to affect any of his vested 
rights. The violation of this principle vitiates the proceedings and makes 
                                                
24 Ali Muhammad  v. State PLD 2010 SC 623; Asim Khan  v. Zahir Shah 2007 SCMR 1451; PIA v. Nasir 
Jamal 2001 SCMR 934.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  19 
 
the action taken therein to be illegal, as the violation of this principle is 
considered as  a violation of law.25  
(f)  Right of hearing and Article 10A of the Constitution  
30.  It may be pertinent to highlight here that after the insertion 
of Article 10A in the Constitution, “right of hearing” being a necessary 
component of “fair trial” and “due process” has become a fundamental 
right and is now to be read into every statute enacted by the Legislature 
by force of the constitutional  provision, which was earlier so read 
because of the judicial pronouncements. Article 10A is cited here for 
ready reference:  
10A-Right to fair trial  
For the determination of his civil rights and obligations or in any criminal 
charge against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial and due 
process.   
The expression “civil rights and obligations” used in Article 10A is of wide 
and expansive amplitude: it covers everything that has civil 
consequences. And “civil consequences”, in the words of L ord Denni ng,26 
“cover infraction of not merely property or personal rights but of civil 
liberties, material deprivations and non -pecuniary damages. In its 
comprehensive connotation, everything that affects a citizen in his civil 
life inflicts a civil consequence.” T he petitioner, in the present case, was 
deprived of her vested right by the impugned directions, without 
providing her an opportunity of fair and meaningful hearing, i.e., by 
giving her notice of the contemplated action (the impugned directions) 
and opport unity to explain why such action (the impugned directions) 
should not be made. The impugned directions are, therefore, vitiated  on 
this ground.  
(g)  Right of petitioner ( spouse of a J udge ) to be dealt with in 
accordance with law  
31.  We feel constrained to observe that the petitioner cannot be 
penalized and deprived of her constitutional right to be dealt  with in 
accordance with law merely because she is the spouse  of a J udge and 
action against her would establish the impartiality of the Court . We 
believe that public confidence in the impartiality and fairness of the 
court -process can be achieved only when Judges decide the matters 
presented before them  against all persons, whosoever they may be,  in 
                                                
25 Hazara Improvement Trust  v. Qaisra Elahi 2005 SCMR 678; Anisa Rehman v.  P.I.A.C. 1994 SCMR 
2232; Lilaram  v. Ghulam Ali 1991 SCMR 932.  
26 Howard v. Borneman (1974) 3 WLR 660.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  20 
 
accordance with law  without fear or favour . Judges are under oath to 
discharge their duties and perform their functions, honestly to the best 
of their ability and faithfully in accordan ce with the Constitution and  the 
law, and to do in all circumstances, right to all manner of people 
accordi ng to law without fear or favor, affection or ill -will. They  cannot 
deviate from their solemn oath even if any  popular action taken 
otherwise than in accordance with law helps paint the image of the Court 
in better light. Judges are to decide in accordance  with law and protect 
the fundamental rights rather than sacrifice these constitutional rights 
at the altar of expediency and image building of the Court.  
(h)  Scope of the powers under Article 187(1) of the Constitution  
32.  The learned Additional Attorney s-General have attempted to 
support the impugned direction s by ma king reference to the provision  of 
Articl e 187(1) of the Constitution  also. They  have submitted that this 
Court, under th e said constitutional provision , can issue any direction 
for doing complete justice. The petitioner s have opposed it with the 
contention that no reference to Article 187(1) of the Constitution was 
made by the Court for making the impugned direction s, therefore, the 
same cannot be treated to have been issued under th at provision  of the 
Constitution. They  have further submitted that even under the said 
Article, the Court could not have made the impugned direction s in 
breach of the right of hearing  of the petitioner, Mrs. Isa,  and conferred 
such authority and jurisdicti on on the Tax Commissioner which he did 
not have under the ITO.   
33.  So far as the contention of the petitioner s that no reference 
to Article 187(1) of the Constitution was made by the Court for issuing 
the impugned direction s, therefore, the same cannot be treated to have 
been issued under the said Article  is concerned, we do not find it tenable . 
If this Court is found to have power to issue the impugned direction s 
under Article 187(1) of the Constitution, the express mentioni ng of that 
Article while making the impugned direction s was not necessary. We are, 
therefore, to see only whether this Court could have issued the impugned 
direction s under Article 187(1) of the Constitution. We consider it proper 
to reproduce the provisio ns of Article 187(1) of the Constitution, for ease 
of reference, before appreciating the respective submissions of the parties 
on it:  
Article 187(1 ): CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  21 
 
Subject to clause (2) of Article 175, the  Supreme Court shall have power 
to issue such directions, orders or decrees as may be necessary for doing 
complete justice in any case or matter pending before it, including an 
order for the purpose of securing the attendance of any person or the 
discovery or production of any document.  
No doubt, this Court has been con ferred , under  Article  187(1) of the 
Constitution , very vast power  to issue “such directions, orders or decrees 
as may be necessary for doing complete justice in any ca se or matter 
pending before it”,  but the Court ordinarily  issue s such directions, orders 
or decrees , under Article 187, which are consequential or incidental to 
the matter adjudicated upon by the Court or to the relief prayed  for by 
the parties .  
34.  The question that needs consideration , in the present case, 
however  is whether the Court can issue any direction, order or decree 
against a person, under this Article, in contravention of provisions of 
some law. After deep deliberation, we find that the Court cannot do so. 
The main reason for our reaching this conclusion is that as per Article 4 
of the Constitution, to enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in 
accordance with law is the inalienable right of every person, and no 
action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any 
person can be taken except in accordan ce with law. The right to be dealt 
with in accordance with law assured by Article 4 of the Constitution 
stands at a high pedestal and even outshines fundamenta l rights 
guaranteed by Article s 9 to 28 of the Constitution, as this  right cannot be 
suspended during the proclamation and imposition of Emergency under 
Article 233 of the Constitution.27 Article  4 of the Constitution is the 
bedrock of the rule of law, and antithesis to the rule of men, in our 
country. It is a restraint on the executive and judicial organs of the State 
to abide by the rule of law.28 No person, authority, tribunal or court 
exercising executive or judicial powers can take any action against any 
person in contravention of any law. There is no exception to this 
principle, which equ ally applies to this Court  exercising its judicial 
powers , including the power under Article 187(1) of the Co nstitution. 
Under the said Article,  the Court can pass any order to do compl ete 
justice between the parties; however, it cannot make an order 
inconsistent with the fundamental rights or in contravention of any 
constitutional provision or any relevant statu tory law.29  
                                                
27 Federation v. Manzoor Elahi PLD 1976 SC 430; Federation v. Shauk at Ali PLD 1999  SC 1026.  
28 Federation v. Nawaz Sharif PLD 2009  SC 644.  
29 Dossani Travels v. Travels Shop PLD 2014 SC 1; Prem Chand v. Excise Commissioner AIR 1963 SC 
996. CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  22 
 
35.  The Tax Commissioner , Islamabad had no territorial 
jurisdiction under Section 209 of the ITO  and no authority and  power to 
issue a tax  assessment order under Section  121 or to amend a tax  
assessment order under Section  122 for a tax year after lapse  of a period 
of five years from  the end of that tax ye ar, against  the petitioner. The 
impugned direction s mandated him to do that which he could not have 
done under the law, i.e., the ITO. Needless to mention, that if an 
Authority has no jurisdiction in the matter under the law, the 
jurisdiction cannot be conferred on that Authority by an order of the 
Court;30 but the impugned direction s had the effect of doing  so. The Tax 
Commissioner  could not have proceeded after lapse of the statutory 
period , against any other person ; the petitioner has, it appears , been 
discriminated and deprived of her fundamental right to equality before 
law and equal protection of law guaranteed under Article 25  of the 
Constitution, by the impugned directions, in addition to negation of her 
right of hearing enshrined in fundamental right to “fair trial” and “ due 
process ” guaranteed under Article 10A and constitutional right to be 
dealt with in accordance with law  guaranteed by Article 4 of the 
Constitution. We, therefore, find that the impugned direction s could not 
have been made  by this Court in exercise of its power under Article 
187(1) of the Constitution.  
(i)  Constitutionality of r eferring the matter to the Supreme 
Judicial Council for exercise of its suo motu power  
36.  As to referring the result of tax proceedings to be conducted 
against the petitioner, through report of the Chairman FBR, to the 
Council for considering suo motu  action against Justice Isa, the 
petitioners have contended that the tax matter of the petitioner, an 
independent person, could not have  been referred to the Council for 
action against her spouse, Justice Isa, without his having  any concern in 
her tax matt ers; that Justice Isa cannot be held liable to account for 
alleged tax -evasion (if any) by her independent spouse, under any law of 
the land or under any clause in the Code of Conduct prescribed for 
Judges of superior Courts;  and that this Court could not have issued any 
direction to the Council to exercise its suo motu  jurisdiction. On the other 
hand, the contesting respondents have submitted that the public 
servants, including the J udges, are answerable to their disciplinary 
authoriti es for the unaccounted for asset s of their spouses and children,  
                                                
30 Badshah Begum v. Additional Commissioner 2003 SCMR 629.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  23 
 
therefore, the Court has legally and properly ordered for reporting the 
results of the proceedings to be conducted by the Tax Commissioner 
regarding the foreign properties of the petitioner, to the  Council; and  that 
the Court has  not direct ed the Council to proceed against Justice Isa 
necessarily, rather has left it to the discretion of the Council to take such 
action as deemed appropriate by it.  
37.  We have considered the respective content ions of the parties 
on this point carefully. We agree with the submission of the contesting 
respondents that this Court did not direct the Council to proceed against 
Justice Isa necessarily, rather left it to the discretion of the Council to 
take such acti on as deemed appropriate by the Council , but the question  
is whether any law or any clause in the Code of Conduct prescribed for 
Judges of superior Courts makes the Judges liable to account for the 
alleged tax -evasion (if any) by his or her independent spouse. No such 
law or clause in the Code of Conduct has been referred to us, during 
arguments. We, therefore, find the answer to the said question clearly in 
the negative.    
38.   The petitioner, Mrs. Isa, and her children being private 
citizen s, their tax matters had no nexus with the essential pre -requisite 
for invoking and maintaining any proceedings in the original jurisdiction 
of the Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, and were thus no t 
amenable to the jurisdiction  that was invoked and exercised thereunder 
through the short order dated 19. 06.2020. Further , the tax matter of the 
petitioner, Mrs. Isa , could  not have been referred to the C ouncil as the 
role and jurisdiction of the Council is limited to the matters relating to 
the conduct and capability of the superior Court Judges. It is not 
mandated to delve into the affairs of someone who is not a judge of a 
superior Court. The impugned directions tend to stretch the scope of 
jurisdiction  of the Council beyond the  constitutional mandate and vest in 
the Council the jurisdiction and auth ority not granted to it by the 
Constitution.  
39.  The impugned directions also create an  anomalous situation  
as they provide that the proceedings before the Council, as contemplated 
thereby, shall not be effected by the filing or pendency of any appeal 
under the ITO against the order/report of the Tax Commissioner, or 
against any order made or decisi on taken at any appellate stage. If i n the 
event the Council , on the basis of the repo rt submitted by the Chairman CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  24 
 
FBR in pursuance of the  impugned directions , recommends removal of  
Justice Isa, but subsequently  Mrs Isa , succeeds in h er challenge to the 
order of the Tax C ommissioner, and the said  order  is found not 
sustainable, the time for the retrieval may ha ve passed  as by then 
Justice Isa may have reached the age of superannuation. The in jury 
inflicted upon Justice Isa  and the dama ge suffered by this institution  will 
thus be irretrievable. In a reverse scenario where the Council  may not 
agree with the findings of the Tax Commissioner, but such findings are 
upheld by the forums , including this Court,  before which the Tax 
Commissioner’s finding s are amenable to correction, an  anomalous  and 
embarrassing situation may  occur.  
 (j)  Obligation of a Judge as to the  knowledge of  financial 
matters of his or her financially independent family 
members . 
40.  So far as t he submission of the contesting respondents is 
concerned, that the public servants, including the J udges, are 
answerable to their disciplinary authorities for the unaccounted for 
assets of their spouses and children . Nothing is there in any law or in the 
Judges ’ Code of Conduct which could possibly be stretched to hold a 
Judge li able for the conduct of his spouse  and children, or for that 
matter of anybody else, without there being any evidence to connect him 
with, and hold him responsible for such conduct . Needless to remind the 
salutary principle of law that everybody is  responsible for his own deeds 
or misdeeds, acts and omissions, and nobody incurs any liability on 
account of any wrong committed by any other person.31    
(k)  Infringement of the Independence of the Supreme Judicial 
Council  
41.   Another aspect of referring the matter to the Council by this 
Court for exercise of its suo motu  power is that it infringes the 
independence of the Council. Provisions of Articles 209 and 211 of  the 
Constitution e nsure the  independence of the Council : only  the President 
of Pakistan , acting in accordance with the constitutional procedure 
prescribed under Article  209 read with Article 48(1) , can direct the 
Council to inquire into the matter of alleged  misconduct or incapacity of 
Judges of the constitutional c ourts, and the proceedings before the 
Council cannot be called in question in any court including  this Court as 
provided in Article 211 of the Constitution except  when  the Council acts 
                                                
31 M/s Avia International  v. Assistant Collector of Customs 2004 PTD 997.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  25 
 
with mala  fide (in fact or in law), without jurisdiction or coram non j udice . 
No one before us had  argued  that the Council with mala  fide (in fact or in 
law) was not performing its constitutional duty under Article 209 of the 
Constitution; therefore, there was no occasion for this C ourt to direct the 
Chairman, Council to place the report of the Chairman, FBR regarding 
decision of the Tax Commission er in the tax matter of  Mrs. Isa  and ask 
the Council to even conduct “proceedings ” to decide whether or not it  will 
inquire into the matter of alleged misconduct against Justice Isa in 
exercise of its suo motu powers.  To uphold the independence o f judiciary 
and to protect the J udges of constitutional courts against unwarranted 
harassment and oppression, t he Constitution  has established and 
constituted the Council  to proceed and in quire  into the allegations of 
incapacity  or misconduct  against such J udges  independent of any 
extraneous influence , on direction of the President or in  exercise its suo 
motu powers. In Ikram Chaudhry v. Federation ,32 Chief Justice Ajmal 
Mian, a distinguished Judge of this Court , speaking for a five member 
Bench of this Court held:  
[Clause (5) of Article 209 of the Constitution] does not admit filing of a 
Constitutional petition for a direction to the Supreme Judicial Council or 
to the President to initiate proceedings of a judicial misconduct again st a 
Judge of a superior Court... This Court or a High Court cannot take upon 
itself the exercise to record even a tentative finding that a particular 
Judge has committed misconduct warranting filing of a reference against 
him under A rticle 209 of the Constitution.  
Therefore,  asking the Council , by the impugned directions, to conduct 
“proceedings” to d ecide whether or not  it will inquire into the matt er of 
alleged misconduct by  Justice Isa in exercise of its suo motu powers is 
also tantamount to interference into the independent functioning of the 
Council  and, thus, against the spirit of the provisions of Articles 209 and 
211 of the Constitution.  
(l)  Government Servants cannot file complaints against judges 
directly  
42.  Further, we not e that the impugned direction  to the 
Chairman,  FBR to submit report to the Council and asking the Council 
to consider that report for deciding to take any action thereon against 
Justice Isa have the effect of directing t he Chairman, FBR to file a 
complaint in the Council against Justice Isa, in the form of report. The 
impugned directions have thus authorized  the Chairman, FBR to do that 
which he cannot d o under the Constitution and  the law. H e being an 
                                                
32 PLD 1998 SC 103 (5 -MB).  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  26 
 
officer subordinate  to the Federal Government cannot make any 
complaint against a constitutional court J udge directly to the Council;  
only the Federal Government can do so and that too by the constitutional 
process of acting through the President. If the officers of the Federal or 
Provincial Government s or of the autonomous bodies or authorities 
under the control of such Governments are allowed or empowered to file 
complaints concerning or emanating from their official actions against 
Judges of the constitutional courts who, in exercise of their 
constitutional jurisdiction, make judicial review of official actions and 
inactions of such officers, there would be disastrous conse quences for  
the independence of judiciary.  This crucial aspec t could not be noticed at 
the time of  making the impugned direct ions, and it vitiates that direction  
of the Court being against the very fundamental right of the public for 
which enforcement this Court entertained the constitution petitions in 
the present matter, i.e., the independence of judiciary.  
Conclusion on  question (i)  
43.  The above discus sion, thus, leads us to conclude and answer 
question (i) in affirmative: the impugned directions are found to have 
been made by this Court without adhering to the principle  of natural 
justice , fair trial and due process , i.e., the petitioner’s right of hearing , 
guaranteed under Article 10A of the Constitution  and without adverting 
to, and in contravention of, the relevant pr ovisions of the  law, i.e., 
Sections  114-122 and 209 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001  and the 
scope of Article 187 in the context of Article 4 of the Constitution.   
Question (ii) as to recalling impugned directions in review jurisdiction  
44.  It would not  take long to answer  this question as the extent 
and scope of the review jurisdiction of this Court, in the light of the 
relevant provisions of the  Constitution and the  Supreme Court Rules, is 
well-settled by various pronouncements of this Court. Briefly stating, t he 
review jurisdiction is vested in this Court by Article 188 of the 
Constitution and is subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament and 
of any rules made by this Court.  The Parliament has not so far passed 
any Act on this subject; this Court has, however, made rules to regu late 
its power of review, which are contained in Order XXVI of the Supreme 
Court Rules, 1980. The relevant  Rule, for present purposes, is Rule 1 of 
Order XXVI  which states:  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  27 
 
Subject to the law and the practice of the Court, the Court may review its 
judgment  or order in a civil proceeding  on grounds similar to those 
mentioned in Order XLVII, rule I of the Code  [of Civil Procedure, 1908]  
and in a criminal proceeding  on the ground of an error apparent on the 
face of the record.  
This Rule has, subject to the law  and the practice of the Court, limited 
the review jurisdiction of this Court in criminal proceedings to one 
ground only, viz, an error apparent on the face of the record, while has 
made reference for review in civil proceedings to the grounds  mentioned 
in rule 1 of Order XLVII  of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which 
provides three grounds  for review: (1) discovery of new and important 
matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not  
within  knowledge  of, or could not be produced by , the party  seeking 
review  at the time when the decree was passed or order made; (2)  some 
mistake or  error app arent on the face of the record; (3) or any other 
sufficient reason. The third ground has been interpreted by the courts to 
be read ejusdem generis  in the context of two preceding grounds. It is 
notable that the ground, “error apparent on the face of the record”, is 
common for review in both civil and criminal proceedings. In the present 
case, it is this ground which has been agitated for praying  review of the 
order of the Court that contains the impugned directions. Therefore, the 
simple question before the Court is whether the errors identified above in 
making the impugned directions can be said to be the errors apparent on 
the face of the record.  
45.  The expression, “error apparent on the face of the record” , as 
observed by Hamoodur Rehman, J.  in Anwar Husain v. Province of East 
Pakistan33, cannot be define d with  precision or exhaustiveness, and 
there would always remain an element of indefiniteness inherent in its 
very nature.  It is to be determined in each case on the basis of its own 
peculiar facts.  Therefore , we woul d not attempt to define the said 
expression exhaustively either, and restrict ourselves to examine: 
whether any judgme nt pronounced or order made without providing a 
fair and meaningful hearing to the person affected thereby or without 
adverting t o, and in contravention of, relevant provisions o f law and the 
Constitution can be termed “an error apparent o n the face of the  record”.  
46.  The Federal C ourt of British India held in Raja Prithwi Chand 
v. Sukhraj Rai34 that the “indulgence by way of review is granted mainly 
owing to the natural desire to prevent irremediable injustice being done 
                                                
33 PLD 1961 Dacca 155.  
34 AIR 1941 FC 1.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  28 
 
by a Court of last resort as where by some accident, without any blame, 
the party has not been heard and an order has been ina dvertently made 
as if the party had been heard.” We find these observations of the Federal 
Court very relevant to the circumstances of the present case. In the 
present case, we acted on the assumption that we had heard the 
petitio ner, Mrs. Isa, on  video -link on 18 June 2020 before  making the 
impugned directions, but it has been revealed to us during hearing of the  
present review petitions that the said hearing did not meet even the very 
elementary and essential requirements of the right  of hearing. This Cou rt 
has held in Anisa Rehman v.  P.I.A.C .35 that the violation of principles of 
natural justice is equated with the violation of a provision of law, as they 
are to be read into the relevant provision of every statute even if not 
expressly incorporated therein . We may add that after recognition of the 
right to fair trial and due process as a fundamental r ight by insertion of 
Article 10A in the C onstitution, violation of the principles of natural 
justice , which are the necessary components of the right to fair trial and 
due process, is now to be taken as a violation of the fundamental right as 
well. In Federation v. Nawaz Sharif ,36 this Court held that “non - hearing 
of petitioners is an error on the face of record meriting interference in 
review jurisdiction.”  
47.  So far as any judgment pronounced or order made without 
adverting  to, and in contravention of, th e relevant provisions of law or  
Constitution is concerned, there is plethora of judici al opinions37 
enunciated  by this Court on treating it as an error apparent on the face 
of the record  that warrants the review of that  judgment or order . We do 
not want to burden this judgment with reproduction of extracts from all 
such opinions, however, would like to narrate  briefly  the principle s of law 
on which they are based , viz, their ratio decidendi .  
48.  The obedience to the Constitution and law is , under Article 
5(2) of the Constitution,  the inviolable obligation of every citizen, 
including the persons holding posts in the legislative, judicial or 
executive organs of the State. This obligation of the J udges of the 
constitutional courts is further emphasized  by the  oath they take before 
assuming charge of their posts,  to discharge their duties and perform 
their functions in accordance with the Constitu tion and law, and to 
                                                
35 1994 SCMR 2232 . 
36 PLD 2009  SC 644.  
37 See Muhammad Amir v. Controller of Estate Duty PLD 1962 SC 335; Zulfikar  Ali Bhutto v. State PLD 
1979 SC 741; Suba v. Fatima Bibi 1996 SCMR 158; Abdul Ghaffar v. Asghar Ali PLD 1998 SC 363.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  29 
 
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution . Moreover, the persons 
whose matters are presented before the m for determi nation also have a 
constitutional right to be treat ed in accordance with the law,  guaranteed 
to them by Article 4 of the Constitution.  Therefore, whenever J udges of 
these courts are pointed out , in review  jurisdiction conferred by the 
Constitution or law,  something in their judgment or order to be in 
conflict with the Constitution or any law of the land , it becomes their 
duty to unhesitatingly correct  that error. Duty of the Judges of the apex 
Court of the country is more thoughtful and profound in this reg ard, as 
there is no other court which can correct their error, and the principles 
of law enunciated in their judgments are, under Article 189 of the 
Constitution, binding on all other courts in the country . Therefore, 
whenever they find that their judgment or order of w hich review is 
sought was pronounced  or made without adverting to, and in 
contravention of, any provision of law or the Constitution, they must 
correct the error considering it their inviolabl e constitutional obligation 
and duty, not a favour or concession to the party seeking review.  
49.  In the present case , although this Court made the impugned 
directions in good faith to ensure the accountabi lity of a constitutional 
court J udge and to uphol d the public trust in the impartiality of the 
Court, but as the se directions  were made by the Court, on its own , 
without putting to the parties on notice, without informing them what 
the Court was contemplating to do and without inviting and hearing their 
arguments on the matters dealt with therein, the above -noted legal and 
constitutional aspects of the impugned directions with their ramifications 
were not present in the mind of the Court while making the impugned 
directions. If the Court had heard the arg uments on the matters dealt 
with in the impugned directions and the legal position relating thereto 
had been debated and appropriately placed before it, the Court would n ot 
have made the said directions as the Court never intends to act contrary 
to law.  
50.  The impugned directions were in no way a relief 
consequential or incidental to the matter adjudicated upon by the Court, 
i.e., the constitutionality and legality of the Reference filed against 
Justice Isa, or to the relief prayed for by the parties, i. e., the quashing of 
the Reference or dismissal of the constitution petitions. The impugned 
directions must have come as a surprise to the parties being unexpected, 
as they were beyond the scope of the case before the Court, on a matter  
that was not debated  in the course of the hearing.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  30 
 
51.  Likewise, d irecting for speedier proceedings in the tax matter 
of Mrs. Isa to be conducted by a Tax Commissioner who had no 
jurisdiction to proceed in her tax matters under the law was 
unwarranted. The impugned directio ns singled out Mrs. Isa and Justice 
Isa for special treatment by directing initiation of proceedings into their 
matters by the tax authorities and the Council in accordance with a 
procedure that was not provided by the law and the Constitution; their 
funda mental right to equality before the law and equal protection of law 
guaranteed by Article 25 of the Constitution was thus infringed by the 
impugned directions.  
52.  This Court, in its concern to enable the early resolution of 
the matter, made the impugned directions without noticing the relevan t 
provisions of the IT O and without considering the consequences of 
ensuring accountability of a constitutional court Judge through a 
procedure that is not envisioned by Article 209 of the Constitution. “To 
seek to be  wiser than the law is the very thing by good laws forbidden.”38 
However, to err is human; J udges presiding courts including the apex 
one are no exception. Courts are, therefore, as much human institutions 
as any other and share all human susceptibilities t o error. Owning his 
mistake on realization does not diminish one’s prestige or ability; it 
perhaps enhances both. A Judge, therefore, should not hesitate to review 
his decision if it is established not to be right. Because it is better to 
return to what is  right than to clinging onto what is wrong.39 
Conclusion on question (ii)  
53.  We, therefore, find no difficulty to conclude and answer 
question (ii) in affirmative: the impugned directions having been made 
without providing a fair and meaningful hearin g to the petitioner, Mrs. 
Isa, thus violating the principle of natural justice, and without adverting 
to, and in contravention of , the relevant provisions of  law and the 
Constitution, definitely fall within the scope of the well-established 
ground of revie w, namely, “error apparent on the face of the record”; thus 
they can be recalled by this Court in exercise of its review jurisdiction 
under Article 188  of the Constitution read with rule 1 of Order XXVI of 
the Supreme Court Rules, 1980.  Exercising that jur isdiction, we recall 
the impugned directions.  
Question (iii) as to legal  status of actions made  in pursuance of 
impugned directions , and conclusion on this question   
                                                
38 Greek Philosopher Aristotle said.  
39 Second Islamic Caliph Umar (r.a.) wrote it to Abu Musa al -Ash`ari.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  31 
 
54.  The question is quite simple and has an easy answer. We are 
of the view that the answer to this question lies in the same principle on 
the basis of which this Court, in the judgment under review40, declared 
the proceedings initiated by the Coun cil to stand abated on quashing  of 
the Reference filed by the President. This Court held that the show cause 
notice issued by the Council derived its substance from the quashed 
Reference and without the Reference the show cause notice was just a 
blank piece of paper which could not become the basis for any 
subsequent inquiry against the petitioner , Justice Isa . No one has 
disputed the said decision of this Court, in the present review 
proceedings. Actually, the moment the foundation is removed, the entire  
structure collapses. The principle, having been enunciated by this Court 
in many cases,41 is now well -settled  that when the basic order is without 
lawful authority, then the entire  superstructure  built on it falls on  to the 
ground automatically. Thus, any proceedings taken, orders passed or 
actions made in pursuance of the impugned directions being a 
superstructure bu ilt on those directions loses their legal status and 
effect,  when their very foundation, viz, the impugned directions , is found 
to have been laid without lawful authority . They have, therefore, no legal 
status and effect.   
55.  These are  the reasons for our short order dated 26 April 
2021, which is reproduced below for completion of the record:  
For the reasons to be recorded later, captioned Review Petitions are 
allowed and the directions contained in paras 4 to 11 of the impugned 
short order dated 19.06.2020 passed in Const. Petition No.17/2019 and 
other connected matters, alongwith supporting d etailed reasons given in 
the majority judgment of the same date, are recalled and set -aside. All 
the subsequent proceedings, actions, orders, information and reports in 
pursuance of the directions contained in the short order dated 19.6.2020 
and the detail ed reasons thereof, are declared to be illegal and without 
any legal effect. Resultantly, any such proceedings, actions, orders or 
reports cannot be considered or acted upon and pursued any further by 
any forum or authority including the Supreme Judicial C ouncil.  
Our learned brother, Manzoor Ahmed Malik, J., (who has since retired) was 
a signatory to the above short order; therefore, following the precedents of 
Al-Jehad Trust v. Federation  (PLD 1996 SC 324) and CJP Iftikhar  
Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 61), the office 
is directed to place these detailed reasons recorded in support of that order 
before his lordship, for his consideration whether he agrees with the 
detailed reasons.  
                                                
40 See para 137.  
41 See Yousaf Ali  v. Muhammad Aslam PLD 1958 SC 104; Executive District Officer v. Muhammad 
Younas, 2007   SCMR   1835; Atta -ur-Rehman v. Umar Farooq PLD 2008  SC 663; Province of Punjab v. 
Border Area Committee PLD 2011  SC 550.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  32 
 
Right of a Judge  to be dealt with in accordance with law in the matter of 
his accountability  
56.  Before parting with the judgment, we consider it appropriate 
to re-emphasize that we strongly believe that judicial independence and 
judicial accountability are two sides of the same coin and one cannot 
exist without the other - to compromise on judicial accountability is to 
compromise on independence of judiciary – but our only concern in the 
present matter is that a constitutional court Judge in the matter of his 
accountabil ity, or for that matter his spouse, must be dealt with in 
accordance with the law. As it is said that injustice anywhere is a threat 
to justice everywhere; whatever affects one directly, affects all 
indirectly,42 so would the accountability of one Judge in a manner not 
provided by the Constitution have adverse impact upon the 
independence of all Judges, and thus destroy the independence of the 
judiciary as an institution. The constitutional guarantee of the right to be 
dealt with in accordance with law, under Article 4 of our Constitution, is 
available not only to every citizen of the country but also to every other 
person for the time being within Pakistan. We are clear and firm in our 
view that this constitutiona l guarantee cannot be curtailed or limited in 
the case or matter of any person whosoever he may be and whatever the 
allegations against him may be. We think it would not be out of place to 
cite some observations which were recently made in Naveed Asghar43 
case by two of us (Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel and  Syed Mansoor Ali 
Shah, JJ) and our learned brother Manzoor Ahmed Malik, J. : 
An accused person cannot be deprived of his constitutional right to be 
dealt with in accordance with law, merely because he is alle ged to have 
committed a gruesome and heinous offence. The zeal to punish an 
offender even in derogation or violation of the law would blur the 
distinction between arbitrary decisions and lawful judgments. No doubt, 
duty of the courts is to administer justi ce; but this duty is to be 
performed in accordance with the law and not otherwise. The mandatory 
requirements of law cannot be ignored by labelling them as technicalities 
in pursuit of the subjective administration of justice. One guilty person 
should not be taken to task at the sacrifice of the very basis of a 
democratic and civilised society, i.e., the rule of law. Tolerating acquittal 
of some guilty whose guilt is not proved under the law is the price which 
the society is to pay for the protection of the ir invaluable constitutional 
right to be treated in accordance with the law. Otherwise, every person 
will have to bear peril of being dealt with under the personal whims of 
the persons sitting in executive or judicial offices, which they in their 
own wisdo m and subjective assessment consider good for the society.  
This was our approach towards the rule of law in case of persons who 
were alleged to have committed a gruesome and heinous offence; we 
cannot deal with the case of a Judge any differently, who beca use of his 
unblemished character and honest performance of his duties both at the 
Bar and on the Bench during a life -long period of about forty years,    
                                                
42 Dr. Martin Luther King said.  
43 Naveed Asghar v. State PLD 2021 SC 600.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  33 
 
enjoys great respect in the legal fraternity. The members of almost all the 
Bar Associations across th e country hold Justice Isa as an honest, 
independent and impartial judge, with impeccable integrity. It may also 
be noted here that the various petitioners who earlier challenged the 
filing of Reference against Justice Isa, and now the impugned directions,  
include the premier Bar bodies like Supreme Court Bar Association, 
Pakistan Bar Council, all the four provincial Bar Councils and High 
Court Bar Association Quetta, Quetta Bar Association, Sindh High Court 
Bar Association, Karachi Bar Association, Peshawa r High Court Bar 
Association, and Senior Lawyers like Mr. Abid Hassan Minto. All the 
above are the main stake -holders in the judicial system and are best 
suited to form and express their opinion about the integrity and ability of 
a Judge. In addition to th ose named above, Pakistan Federal Union of 
Journalists is also a petitioner; they certainly are the people who have 
their fingers on the pulse of the people of this country.  
57.  We are fully conscious of the fact that it is the impeccable 
integrity and hi gh standard of ethics and transparency that engenders 
the public’s confidence in the judiciary. It is in order to achieve and 
maintain the public confidence, trust and perception about the 
independence, impartiality and integrity of the superior Court Judg es, 
that our Constitution has provided an elaborate scheme, for the 
accountability of the Judges under Article 209, which need s to be 
adhered to strictly  as rightly observed in the judgment under review,44 
that “infringements of Article 209 erode the indepe ndence of the 
judiciary .” But unfortunately our chequered history has seen numerous 
attempts to trample upon judicial independence during both, civilian as 
well as military governments. Nonetheless, we must not become prisoner 
of our past and must now obvi ate any attempt to damage the judiciary.  
58.  History is witness to the fact that the fundamental rights, 
particularly of those who are the most vulnerable, becomes the first 
causality in societies where the judiciary comprises those who were 
compromised a nd thus susceptible to being influenced from those 
wielding power and influence. The edifice of the judicial independence 
rests on the assumption that every Judge besides being fair and 
impartial is fiercely independent and is free to uphold his judicial v iews. 
This judicial freedom is fundamental to the concept of the rule of law. 
Any attempt to muffle judicial independence or to stifle dissent shakes 
the foundation of a free and impartial judicial system, thus eroding 
public confidence on which the entire  edifice of judicature stands. Public 
                                                
44 Para 16.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  34 
 
confidence is the most precious asset of this organ of the state, which 
controls neither the sword nor the purse. A judge whose decisions are 
dictated not by the fidelity to the letter and spirit of the law but based o n 
what he deems to be palatable to the Government would cause 
irretrievable damage to the public confidence in the judiciary, and 
consequently jeopardize its credibility and moral authority. Judges 
should not be, in the words of Lord Denning, “diverted fro m their duty by 
any extraneous influence, nor by hope of reward nor by fear of penalties, 
nor by flattering praise, nor by indignant approach”.     
59.  We believe that the rule  of law and the independence  of 
judiciary are conceptually interwoven: without an independent judiciary, 
expecting the rule of law is a sheer farce. And the rule of law and the 
independence of the judiciary are the only guarantee to the maintenance 
and preservation of a thriving democracy. We reiterate what two of us 
(Maqbool Baqar a nd Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, JJ.) and our learned 
brother, Yahya Afridi, J., said in their order of 19 June 2020 while 
disposing of the constitution petitions in the present matter:  
One of our pivotal Constitutional values is that the independence of 
judiciar y shall be fully secured. The same Constitution also ordains that 
to enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance with law is 
the inalienable right of every citizen. Therefore, it is reiterated that in our 
constitutional democracy, neither t he petitioner judge, nor any other 
judge, or any individual or any institution, is above the law. The doors of 
the constitutional forum i.e., Supreme Judicial Council are always open, 
either on its own motion or for anyone who has a genuine and a bonafide 
grievance, amenable to the jurisdiction of the Council against a Judge of 
the Constitutional Court. At the same time, it is equally important, that a 
Judge like any other citizen of Pakistan enjoys the inalienable 
constitutional right to be treated in acco rdance with law. These 
fundamental values are to be protected at all cost in order to uphold the 
majesty and supremacy of the Constitution and to honour the people of 
Pakistan who have adopted and given to themselves this Constitution.  
 
We proclaim that no  one is above the law, but at the same time declare 
that no one can be denied his right to be dealt with in accordance with 
the law. If Mrs. Isa, or a spouse of any other Judge, does not comply with 
the tax law, she must be dealt with in accordance with th e law, and if 
Justice Isa, or any other Judge, breaches any clause of the Code of 
Conduct prescribed for Judges of the constitutional courts, he also must 
be proceeded against but only in accordance with law and not otherwise.  
 
 
 Sd/- 
(Maqbool Baqar)  
Judge  
 
I agree.  
Sd/- 
 (Manzoor Ahmad Malik)  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  35 
 
Judge  
 
Sd/- 
 (Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel)  
Judge  
 
Sd/- 
 (Syed Mansoor Ali Shah)  
Judge  
 
Apart from Civil Review Petition No.296 of 
2020, all other Civil Review Petitions are 
allowed and the reasons for the same are 
recorded in my separate note.   
Sd/- 
(Yahya Afridi )
Judge  
 
Sd/-  
 
 
Islamabad,  
Released on  29.01.2022 . 
Approved for reporting.  
 (Amin -ud-Din Khan)  
Judge  
 
  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  36 
 
YAHYA AFRIDI, J.: – Every judgment pronounced by the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan is a considered, solemn and final pronouncement on 
all points raised and decided in the case.45 However, under Article 188 of 
the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973  (“Constitution”) 
read with Rule 1 of Order XXVI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980  
(“Rules”)  this Court is vested with the jurisdiction to review its judgment, 
in certain circumstances. The judicial consensus of this Court is that a 
judgment passed on an erroneous assumption of material facts, or 
without adverting to a provision of law o r Constitution, or without 
noticing an undisputed construction of law and Constitution amounts to 
an error apparent on the face of the record, and thus justifies positive 
exercise of the review jurisdiction.46  
 
2.  After careful and cautious consideration of the directions of this 
Court to the officials of the Federal Board of Revenue (“FBR”),  the Hon’ble 
Chairman and learned Secretary of the Supreme Judicial Council 
(“Council”) , contained in paragraphs No. 4 to 11 of the short order dated 
19.06.2020 (“impu gned directions”) , I find that the same have been made by 
us without appropriately considering the scope of the ouster clause of 
Article 211 of the Constitution and the relevant provisions of the Income 
Tax Ordinance, 2001 (“Ordinance”) . These two crucial omissions on our 
part are the marked and distinct “errors apparent on the face of the 
record” and thus, warrant the positive exercise of the review jurisdiction 
of this Court.  
3. To start with, we need to appreciate the exclusivity of the 
constitutional d omain of the Council secured under Article 211 of the 
Constitution, which expressly commands all courts, including this Court, 
                                                
45 Abdul Ghaffar v. Asghar Ali (PLD 1998 SC 363) [5 -MB]; Government of Punjab v. Aamir Zahoor -ul-
Haq (PLD 2016 SC 421) [5 -MB]  
46 Muhammad Boota v. Member (Revenue) BOR (2010 SCMR 1049)  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  37 
 
not to interfere in the proceedings of the Council. The said ouster 
provision reads:  
 
211. Bar of Jurisdiction.  
The proceedings before the Council, its report to the President and the 
removal of a Judge under clause (6) of Article 209 shall not be called in 
question in any court.  
No one  can doubt the wide -ranging power vested in this Court under 
Article 184(3) or Article 187(1) of the Constitution, to issue appropriate 
directions, while disposing of a case. However, where the Constitution 
under Article 211 expressly forbids all courts, including this Court, not 
to interfere in the proceedings of the Council, then the authority of th is 
Court under Article 184(3) or, for that matter, under any other Article of 
the Constitution, has to yield to such definite ouster.   
4. The very essence of the ouster clause provided in Article 211 is to 
curtail the jurisdiction of the courts, including this Court, to protect and 
preserve the autonomy and supremacy of the “proceedings” of the 
Council against judicial interference. The term  “proceedings” as used in 
Article 211, has been astutely elaborated in the case of Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan47, wherein it was observed that the word 
“proceedings” does not stand alone or is unqualified in the said provision 
but st ands restricted and qualified by three other words, “before the 
council”.48 Accordingly, the ouster of this Court’s jurisdiction applies to 
all proceedings that may take place before the Council. If the Council is 
to decide  on whether or not it should exercise its suo moto  powers, such 
a decision would be a “proceeding” before the C ouncil and thus protected 
under Article 211 against any judicial intrusion. This constitutional 
protection exalts the position of the Council and establishes its legally 
lofted supremacy in matters relating to initiating and proceeding with 
inquiries against the Judges of the Superior Judiciary. And unless the 
                                                
47 PLD 2010 SC 61.  
48 Ibid, para 67.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  38 
 
very proceedings  of the Council to proceed against a Judge of the 
Superior Judiciary is positively adjudged  to be  coram non judice , mala 
fide or without jurisdiction , Courts are to jealously maintain the 
constitutional independence of the Council .  
5. In view of this constitutional mandate, any directions of this Court 
setting steps for the Council, and for that matter, f or its Hon’ble 
Chairman and learned Secretary, to follow or to refrain from following 
and that too, without first adjudging its actions or inactions to be coram 
non judice , mala fide or without jurisdiction would amount to excessive 
exercise of jurisdiction by this Court under Article 184(3) and Article 
187(1) of the Constitution. Such directions of the Court amount to 
usurping the exclusive constitutional jurisdiction vested in the Co uncil 
under Article 209 and protected under Article 211 of the Constitution.  
6. To sum up, it would be safe to state that this Court did not have 
the jurisdiction to issue the impugned directions to the Council to 
consider initiating, or otherwise, an inq uiry against the Petitioner Judge 
based on the “information” received from the tax officials of the FBR. If 
the instructions of the Court to the Council to consider the report of the 
tax officials, as vehemently argued by the contesting respondents, are 
not strictly considered or taken as “directions” to the Council, even then 
the same has the effect of making this Court a “complainant”, and not 
the “adjudicator” in the matter. Similarly, if this Court issues direction s 
to the contrary, that is, refraining the Council from considering 
"information" obtained, this Court would then too be exceeding its 
mandated constitutional jurisdiction.   
7. Another important aspect that escaped the notice of this Court, 
while issuing the impugned directions to the tax offi cials was that the 
impugned directions , in effect, created a parallel regime alien to the CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  39 
 
scheme envisaged under the Ordinance. The Ordinance provides an 
intricate mechanism for the tax authorities to proceed in various matters 
relating to taxpayers, which  range from procedural guidelines, specific 
timelines and jurisdiction available to the concerned authorities, while at 
the same time, it also provides protection to the person being assessed, 
adhering  to the settled principles of ‘due process’ and ‘natura l justice’.  
 
8. This Court has, in the judgment under review, passed binding 
directions to the tax officials to proceed in a set manner, overlooking the 
provisions of the Ordinance relating to taking cognisance of “definite 
information”; scrutiny of infor mation and assessment of income tax 
returns; and territorial jurisdiction.49 Moreover, in making the impugned 
directions, we also lost sight of the procedure provided in the Ordinance, 
as to how tax officials are: (i) to proceed against a tax filer that has  
undeclared income and assets or mis -declared the same and within what 
time period; (ii) to determine the source of funds for purchasing the 
undeclared assets, whether generated in Pakistan or in some foreign 
country; and (iii) above all, to which tax year  the undeclared local assets 
or source of funds and the undeclared foreign assets and source of funds 
are to be added to and assessed.50   
9. With the force and guidance of the impugned directions of this 
Court, and that too, against persons not party in th e constitution 
petitions, expecting the probe by the tax authorities to abide by the “due 
process” provided under the Ordinance, would be a far cry. In the 
circumstances of the case,  the matter of probe against the spouse and 
children of the Petitioner Jud ge should, I think, best have been left to the 
concerned tax authorities to proceed under the Ordinance, without any 
                                                
49 Section 209 of the Ordinance.  
50 Section 111 of the Ordinance.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  40 
 
specific directions. By giving directions to the tax authorities to proceed 
with the matter on the basis of a procedure and timeline foreig n to the 
Ordinance, this Court has ultimately subdued the procedure prescribed 
under the Ordinance by expanding its role, inadvertently, as ‘legislator’ 
rather than ‘adjudicator’.  
10. Much was argued from both sides about whether Mrs. Sarina Faez 
Isa, who  was not a party to the proceedings, was provided with a fair 
“hearing” befitting the bare threshold to suffice the principles of natural 
justice, before her case was referred to the tax authorities. One should 
not expe ct a consensus of a ten -member B ench on this factual 
controversy, as to whether Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa was provided with a fair 
“hearing”, and that too, based solely on her informal statement made 
while addressing the Court via video link on 18.06.2020. Therefore, in 
these review proceedings, i t would be appropriate to remain focused on 
the core issues involved in the constitution petitions, and not be 
distracted by the factual controversy, as to whether Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa 
was provided with a fair and adequate opportunity to be heard before 
directing the tax officials to scrutinise her foreign assets. For, when a 
Court sits to review its own judgment or order, it does not hear a new 
case but only reconsiders its decision on the issues involved in the case 
already heard and decided, within the l imits of its review jurisdiction.  
11. Another error that crept in while making the impugned directions 
is the distraction from the fundamental issue of alleged misconduct of 
the Petitioner Judge qua the non -disclosure of foreign assets of his 
spouse, in his wealth statement, filed with the income tax returns under 
Section 116 of the Ordinance. Though this was the main controversy, the 
impugned directions directed the tax officials to proceed against the 
spouse and children of the Petitioner Judge regarding the subject foreign 
properties, instead of directing the tax officials to proceed against the CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  41 
 
Petitioner Judge to determine his liability, if any, in accordance with the 
Ordinance. Under the Ordinan ce,51 when a tax filer fails to furnish 
adequate justification for an asset, the same is then deemed as the tax 
filer’s asset procured through unexplained income chargeable to tax, and 
the tax is charged accordingly by adding that income under the head 
“Income from other Sources”. Thus, in case the spouse and children of 
the Petitioner Judge fail to adequately justify the sources of fund for 
purchasing the foreign assets, the same would be deemed even then, 
under the Ordinance, to be owned by them, and not b y the Petitioner 
Judge. Our concern, in the constitution petitions, wherein the impugned 
directions have been given, was with respect to the independence of the 
judiciary and the accountability of the judges in the context of alleged 
misconduct of the Peti tioner Judge, which has, in my opinion, been 
detracted from, by making the impugned directions against his family 
members.  
12.  In view of the above deliberations, I find that the impugned 
directions affecting the rights of Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa, her son a nd 
daughter, have been passed by this Court in excess of jurisdiction, and 
are, therefore, recalled. Consequently, the “superstructure” of 
subsequent proceedings, actions, orders and reports built on the legally 
faulty “foundation” of the impugned directio ns would fall and have no 
legal effect on the rights and obligations of Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa, her son 
and daughter.  
13. As for the effect of the above declaration qua the allegation of 
misconduct against the Petitioner Judge, suffice it to state that it d oes 
not diminish or dilute the constitutional authority of the Council to 
consider, on its own motion, an “information” received from “any source”, 
whatever it may be, including the “information” contained in the report 
                                                
51 Section 111 of the Ordinance.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  42 
 
received from the tax official, for deciding to initiate an inquiry, or 
otherwise, into the conduct of the Petitioner Judge. In this regard, we 
should not lose sight of clause 5 of Article 209 of the Constitution, which 
clearly provides that “information from any source” can form the basis o f 
an inquiry by the Council against a Judge of the Superior Judiciary. The 
legal significance and practical implication of the insertion of the word 
“any” prefixing the word “source” in clause 5 of Article 209 of the 
Constitution has, in fact, expanded the  pool from which the Council may 
obtain “information” to initiate an inquiry into the conduct or capacity of 
a Judge of the Superior Judiciary. To interpret the word “any” used in 
clause 5 of Article 209 of the Constitution in a manner that would dilute 
the authority of the Council and restrict the information it can or cannot 
consider would amount to defeating the very command of the 
Constitution. Therefore, the Council, “on information” emanating from 
“any source” can proceed, on its own motion, with an i nquiry into the 
capacity or conduct of any Judge of the Superior Judiciary. The decision  
on the question,  whether to commence the inquiry or otherwise, is a 
matter that is within the exclusive domain of the Council. This Court , or 
for that matter any other  Court, lacks the jurisdiction to restrict this vast 
authority vested in the Council by the Constitution - the supreme law of 
the land.  
14. Before concluding, I think it is proper to make clear that the 
present order, by no means, seeks to curtail the lawf ul authority of the 
President, the Council and the tax officials to proceed against any Judge 
of the Superior Judiciary, including the Petitioner Judge, in accordance 
with law as mandated by Article 4 of the Constitution. We cannot 
champion the rule of law  if we breed complacency in judicial 
accountability, a feature that seeks to uphold and bolster the rule of law. 
Thus, it is important to ensure that there are no artificial impediments to CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  43 
 
ensuring accountability of judges, provided accountability is pursu ed in 
accordance with law. This exposition of authority, in particular, of the 
tax officials, however, should in no way detract them from their statutory 
duty to remain steadfast in ensuring the confidentiality of the 
information of a tax filer as mandated  under section 216 of the 
Ordinance which, as noted in the judgment under review, was blatantly 
breached in the case of Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa: the tax officials on the 
unlawful directions issued by the Chairman ARU, Barrister Shahzad 
Akbar with the concurre nce of the Federal Law Minister, Dr. 
Farogh  Naseem, breached the statutory confidentiality of Mrs Sarina 
Faez Isa’s tax returns. I feel constrained to observe that allowing the said 
delinquents to continue in such important positions of authority by the 
worthy Prime Minister, and that too after this Court has unanimously 
declared their actions to be in violation of the Constitution and law, 
particularly the provisions of section 216 of the Ordinance entailing 
penal consequences,52 belies the most elementary principles of “good 
governance”, and expose the worthy Prime Minister ’s complicity in the 
commission of the said violations.  
15. As far as Civil Review Petition No.296 of 2020 is concerned, that is, 
in my view,53 not maintainable, as the locus standi  of the  Petitioner 
Judge to invoke the original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 
184(3), as well the review jurisdiction therein, stands eclipsed till he 
holds the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan ; for he owes 
an obligation under clause 8 of Article 209 of the Constitution to observe 
the Code of Conduct issued by the Council for Judges of the Superior 
Judiciary, that, inter alia , requires him to avoid being involved in 
litigation, for himself or even on behalf of others, which includes public 
                                                
52 See Judgment of Umar Ata Bandial J, paras 85 and 136(x); Judgment of Maqbool Baqar J, para 65; 
Judgment of Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J, paras 38 and 81(ii); Judg ment of Yahya Afridi, J., paras 47 and 52.  
53 See my view recorded in detail in my minority judgment delivered on 23 October 2020 in Constitution 
Petition No. 17/2019 of the Petitioner Judge.  CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  44 
 
interest litigation  under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . The object is 
to avert any chance of a Judge of the Superior Judiciary being placed in 
a position , where his conduct may be seen as unbecoming of a Judge, 
glimpses of which were seen during  the proceedings of the present review 
petitions.  
16. In summation of the above discourse, my considered opinion on 
the essential issues raised  in the present review petitions are that:  
i. This Court cannot pass any direction  that would, in essence, 
prompt or pre -empt the Council to proceed in a certain manner or 
refrain it to proceed in any manner as it would, in fact, amount to 
judicial intervention in the “proceedings before the Council”, and 
thereby offend the express manda te of Article 211 of the 
Constitution, unless the very “proceedings” are determined to be 
coram non judice , mala fide  or without jurisdiction, which has not 
been established in the case in hand;   
ii. The impugned directions of this Court to the Council to con sider 
the Report of the tax officials amounts to judicial interference in 
the “proceedings before the Council”, and thus violates the 
autonomy and supremacy of the “proceedings” of the Council 
against judicial interference  envisaged under Article 211 of th e 
Constitution;  
 
iii. The Council is, however, on its own motion, competent to consider  
or refuse to consider  “information” received from “any” source, be it 
the Report of the tax officials, to determine whether to inquire or 
not inquire into the conduct of the  Petitioner Judge or otherwise;  
 
iv. The impugned directions to the tax officials to inquire into the 
affairs of the spouse and children of the Petitioner Judge, setting 
out the manner and the timeframe in which they are to proceed, 
violate and are alien to, t he provisions of the Income Tax 
Ordinance, 2001, and have subdued the procedure prescribed 
there under;  
 
v. The President and the Council have the authority, and are free to 
proceed against any Judge of the Superior Judiciary, including the 
Petitioner Judge for alleged misconduct, in accordance with Article 
209 of the Constitution;  
 
vi. The tax officials are competent to proceed against the Petitioner 
Judge or any other Judge of the Superior Judiciary, serving or 
retired, his spouse or/and children, without fear or favour, in CRP No. 296 of 2020, etc  45 
 
relation to his or her tax affairs only in accordance with the 
provisions of the Income Tax Ordinance,  2001 and not otherwise  
on the basis of unlawful directions ; 
 
vii. Section 216 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001, commands 
confidentiality of the  information of a tax filer, and breach thereof 
exposes the delinquent to penal consequences under sections 198 
and 199 of the Ordinance. Such consequences are attracted in the 
present case to those giving the unlawful directions, namely , 
Chairman ARU, Bar rister Mirza Shahzad Akbar with the 
concurrence of the Federal Law Minister, Dr. Farogh  Naseem ; the 
tax officials executing the unlawful directions in breach of section 
216 of the Ordinance;  and finally, the worthy Prime Minister, who 
despite clear and una nimous finding of misdoings of the named 
delinquents by  this Court, retained them in position s of authority, 
thereby  blatantly expos ed himself to complicity in the commission 
of the said violation .  
 
viii. The Petitioner Judge or any other serving Judge of the S uperior 
Judiciary lacks the locus standi  to invoke the original jurisdiction 
of this Court under Article 184(3), as well as the review jurisdiction 
therein, as their right to invoke the same stands eclipsed, till they 
hold the office of a Judge of the Supe rior Judiciary, essentially to 
avert a position where their conduct may be seen as unbecoming of 
a Judge, as ordained in Code of Conduct issued by the Council for 
Judges of the Superior Judiciary.   
 
17. These are the detailed reasons for my short order dated 
26.04.2021 , which read : 
 
For the reasons to be recorded later, all review petitions except 
C.R.P. No. 296 of 2020, are allowed and the directions contained 
in paragraphs No. 4 to 11 of the order dated 19.06.2020 and detail 
judgment dated 23.10.2020 p assed in Constitution Petition No. 17 
of 2019 and other connected petitions are recalled. Consequently, 
all the subsequent proceedings, actions, orders and reports made 
in pursuance of the said directions  are declared to be of no legal 
effect and/or conseq uences.  
 
Sd/- 
Judge  
  
 