IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Civil Petition No. 1839 of 201 8 
(Against judgment dated 3.4.2018 
passed by Peshawar High Court  
Peshawar in W.P. No.2614 -P of 2016)  
 
Fayaz Khan  
   …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
Govt. of Pakistan through Secretary Aviation Cabinet 
Secretariat, Aviation Division, Islamabad & another  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Muhammad Bashir Khan, ASC  
 Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
    
For the Respondent(s):  N.R.  
 
 Date of hearing:  14.1.20 20. 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
                      Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. -Fayyaz Khan,  
petitioner,  Corporal /Guard in Airport Security Force,  posted  at 
Bacha Khan International Airport Peshawar , was proceeded 
against by virtue  of Section 7 -A of the Airport Security Force Act , 
1975  ( Act No. LXXVII of 1975) ; he had come all the way to B enazir 
International Airport Islamabad  on 19.12.2015 to facilitate one 
Zishan to get on board  Flight TK-711, en  route to Bahrain ; with the 
assistance of Corporal Asad Abbas Khan, the passenger was 
extended special protocol, including exemption from body search , 
however,  in the passengers’ lounge,  few paces away , he was 
intercepted by the staffers  at Anti Narcotic Force Counter ; found in 
possession of heroin concealed in capsules , he was taken into 
custody . As investigation  progressed , petitioner along with Asad 
Abbas Khan was taken on board, in consequence whereof, he was 
dismissed from service on  4.4.2016  by a Summary Court Martial ; 
departmental appeal met with no better fate  and it is in this 
background that the petitioner attempted before the Peshawar 
High Court Peshawar through a Constitutional petition, dismissed 
on 13.4.2018,  vires whereof are being assailed through the present 
petition.  Civil Petition No. 1839 of 201 8 
 2
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the 
petitioner unsuspectingly extended traditional courtesy to a family 
acquaintant  and as such was not actuated by any mens rea  calling 
for his dismissal from service; it is next argued that there is no 
evidence to legally drive home the charge against the petitioner 
inasmuch as the statement of  Asad Abbas Khan, meted out same 
fate, could not have been relied upon without placing h im in an 
extremely disadvantageous position. Being a civilian, decision of 
his fate by a Summary Court Martial was absolutely unwarranted, 
concluded the learned counsel.  
3.  Heard.  Record perused.  
4.  Argument that the petitioner was not subject to the 
Pakistan Army Act , 1952  (Act No. XXXIX of 1952)  is entirely beside 
the mark, as it is admitted at all hands that he was a 
corporal/guard , employed in the Airport Security Force . By virtue 
of Section 7-A of the  Airport Security Force Act , every 
officer/member of the force, is subject to the Pakistan  Army Act  
and, therefore, wa s competently proceeded against by a duly 
constituted tribunal , findings whereof cannot be upset unless 
shown to have been carried out without jurisdiction , coram  non-
judice  or mala  fide, situations, conceivably out of the realm of 
possibility ; view taken by the learned High Court is inconsonance 
with the law declared by this Court in the case of District Bar 
Association , Rawalpindi  & others  Vs. Federation of Pakistan  & 
others (PLD 2015 SC 401). Argument on lack of evidence does not 
hold water either; each step the petitioner had taken while 
escorting Zishan, the drug -pusher whom he had facilitated to get 
on board a Bahrain bound international flight  was captured, by 
the close circuit TV cam eras, installed at the airport ; the latter was 
caught red -handed  with the contraband  as well as boarding 
card/air ticket; he cannot escape the preponderance of evidence 
pointing inexorably upon his culpability by merely clamouring a 
loud denial . Petition fails. Leave declined.    
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad   
14th January , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 