IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT:  MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ  
  MR. JUSTICE  UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
  MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
  MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 57 OF 201 6 
(Under Article 184(3) of the C onstitution)  
AND 
C.M.A.NO.681 -K OF 2018 IN CONST .P.NO.57 
OF 2016  
(Applicat ion for amendment  of petition ) 
AND 
C.R.P.NO.440 OF 2016 IN C .M.A.NO.5135 
OF 2016  IN C.R.P.142 OF 2015 IN 
CONST.P.NO.104 OF 2011  
(On review of this Court’s order dated  24.8.2016  
passe d in C.M.A.No.5135/2016 ) 
 
AND 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.24 OF 2018  
(Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution)  
AND 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.30998 -S OF 2018  
(Regarding shortage of water supply in Karachi ) 
 
AND 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.50363 -P OF 2010  
(In the matter r egarding acute shortage of water 
supply in Karachi ) 
 
AND 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.37 OF 2018  
(Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution)  
AND 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.3 8 OF 2018  
(Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution)  
 
Const.P.57/2016:  Barrister Zafar ullah Khan Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan etc.  
  
C.M.A.681 -K/2018:  CMA for amendment in Const itution  Petition  
  
C.R.P.440/2016:  Engineers Study Forum (Regd.), through its 
President Mian Fazal Ahmad Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan, etc.  
  
Const.P.24/2018:  Agha Qas im Raza Vs. Federation of Pakistan 
through Secretary Ministry of Water Islamabad 
and others  Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 2 :-
H.R.C.50363 -P/10:  Application by Malik Abdul Latif Khokhar  
  
Const.P.37/2018:  Rana Ilamuddin Ghazi Vs. Federation of Pakistan, 
through Secretary Cabinet Division , Islamabad 
and others  
  
Const.P.38/2018:  Sutlej  Ravi Water Forum through its Chairman 
Zia Shahid Vs. Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretar y Interior, Government of Pakistan, 
Islamabad.  
  
In attendance:  
For the petitioner(s)/  
applicant(s):  Barrister  Zafarullah Khan, ASC  
(In Const.P.57/2016)  
 
Nemo  
(In Const.P.24/201 8) 
 
Nemo  
(In Const.P.37/2018)  
 
Nemo  
(In C.R.P.440/2016)  
 
Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC  
(In Const.P. 38/201 8) 
 
Malik Abdul Latif Khokhar, ASC  
(In H.R.C.50363 -P/2010)  
 
Nemo  
(In C.M.A.5788/2018)  
  
For Federation:  Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan, Attorney General for 
Pakistan  
Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Addl.A.G.P.  
Assisted by: Barrister Asad Rahim Khan  
  
For Provinces:  Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, Addl.A.G. Punjab  
Ms. Sehar Chaudhry, Law Officer, Irrigation, 
Punjab  
 
Mr. Shehryar Qazi, Addl.A.G. Sindh  
Mr. Jamal Mustafa Syed, Secy. Irrigation, Sindh  
Mr. Khalid Mehmood, M.D. KWSB, Sindh  
 
Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl.A.G. Balochistan  
 
Barrister Qasim Wadood, Addl.A.G. KPK  
  
For LJCP:  Dr. Muhammad Rahim Awan, Secretary  
  
On Court’s call:  Mr. Shams -ul-Mulk, ex -Chairman WAPDA  
Mr. Zafar Mehmood, ex -Chairman WAPDA  
Mr. Mujeeb -ur-Rehman Pirzada, ASC  
On Court’s notice:   
For M/o Planning & 
Development:  Mr. Shoaib Ahmed Siddiqui, Secretary  
Mr. Naseer Ahmed Jillani, Sr. Chief (Water)  
Mr. Arshad Ali, Joint Secretary  Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 3 :-
For M/o Water 
Resources:  Mr. Shumail Ahmed Khawaja, Secretary  
Syed Muhammad Mehar Ali Shah, Joint 
Secretary/Commissioner Indus Water  
  
For M/o Finance:  Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan, Secretary  
  
For M/o Climate 
Change:  Mr. Yousa f Naseem Khokhar, Secretary  
  
For WAPDA:  Lt. Gen. (R) Muzammil Hussain, Chairman  
Mr. M. Babar, Deputy Director  
Mr. Shahzad Asif, Director  
  
Date of hearing:  4.7.2018  
 
ORDER  
  MIAN SAQIB NISAR, CJ. – None could have highlighted the 
importance of water m ore eloquently than the British poet W. H. Auden 
in his poem titled ‘First Things First’ :- 
 
“Grateful, I slept till a morning that would not say  
How much it believed of what I said the storm had said  
But quietly drew my attention to what had been done   
—So many cubic metres the more in my cistern   
Against a leonine  summer —, putting first things first:  
Thousands have lived without love, not one without water. ” 
 
The significance of water encompasses all,  and therefore so does the 
probl em of water scarcity , both nationally and globally. The dire water 
shortage has led to the recognition  of a right to water itself, for can there 
be any life at all without water?  All living organisms on this planet are 
dependent on water for their survival. More than 6 0% of the human body 
itself comprises of water. It is well -known that human beings can survive 
longer without food than without water, subject to varying weather 
conditions. Animals, plants and even the smallest of organisms require  
water. The absence of water is on e of the primary reasons why , even if a 
planetary body were to have an atmosphere, there would be no life . 
Water governs plant  growth , and animal and human settlement. It is Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 4 :-
around large rivers and associated water bodies such as the Nile  and 
Indus rivers,  and in Mesopotamia (constituted by  the Euphrates and Tigris ), that 
ancient  civilizations were established. Water  is used for and in things , 
without count,  including  domestic  purposes , irrigation , power generation  
and transport. Allah (SWT) has highlighted  the significance of water in 
the Holy Quran as under: - 
 
“Did the disbelievers not observe that the heavens and the 
earth were closed, then We opened them? And We created 
from water every living thing. Would they still not 
believe?” (21:30)  
 
“Allah has cre ated every moving creature from water. So, 
some of them move on their bellies; and some of them move 
on two legs, and some of them move on four. Allah creates 
what He wills. Surely, Allah is powerful over everything.” 
(24:45)  
 
The foregoing verse has been explained by Muhammad Asad in “The 
Message of the Quran” as under: - 
 
“39. The statement that God “made out of water every 
living thing” expresses most concisely a truth that is 
nowadays universally accepted by science. It has a 
threefold meaning: (1) Water  – and, specifically, the sea – 
was the environment within which the prototype of all 
living matter originated; (2) among all the innumerable – 
existing or conceivable – liquids, only water has the 
peculiar properties necessary for the emergence and 
develo pment of life; and (3) the protoplasm, which is the 
physical basis of every living cell – whether in plants or in 
animals – and represents the only form of matter in which 
the phenomena of life are manifested, consists 
overwhelmingly of water and is, thus,  utterly dependent on 
it. Read together with the preceding statement, which 
alludes to the unitary origin of the physical universe, the Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 5 :-
emergence of life from and within an equally unitary 
element points to the existence of a unitary plan underlying 
all cr eation and, hence, to the existence and oneness of the 
Creator.”  
 
Unfortunately, man has started to  take this blessing  for granted and 
rarely thinks of con serving it. Water is often misused or used  negligently 
and extravagantly. Allah (SWT) has warned huma n beings in the 
following  words:- 
 
“And We sent down water from the sky in due measure, 
then We lodged it in the earth, and of course, We are able 
to take it away.” (23:18)  
 
“Say: Tell me, Should your water vanish into the earth, 
who will bring you a flowi ng (stream of) water?” (68:30)  
 
Life changes substantially when man does not have access to water at 
his convenience for even one day . The Old Kingdom of Ancient Egypt 
(approximately 4200 years ago)  and the Maya Civilization (250 – 900 AD in Mexico)  
collap sed due to droughts that re sulted  in little or no food or water. More 
recently, many countries such as Somalia, Venezuela and Kenya have 
also witnessed extreme weather conditions brought on by drought  that 
ultimately affected  plants, animals and humans ali ke with no water to 
drink or grow food. The lack of water can paralyze and mark the death of 
a people ; therefore , water is  essential for survival. Water is  life and  life is 
water .  
2.  For the last several decades, there has been reference to the 
right to clean water, as stemm ing from the right to life  enshrined in the 
Constitution as a fundamental right . On a national level, various 
judgments including those reported as General Secretary, West 
Pakistan Salt Miners Labour Union (CBA) Khewra, Jhelum Vs. The Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 6 :-
Director, Industries and Mineral Development, Punjab, Lahore  (1994 
SCMR 2061) , Suo Motu Case No.10 of 2010 (Contamination of Water 
of Mancher Lake due to Disposal Effluent from MNV Drain now 
converted into RBPOD)  (2011 SCMR 73)  and Shahab Utso Vs. 
Governme nt of Sindh through Chief Secretary and other  (2017 
SCMR 732)  robustly discuss how clean and safe drinking water is 
necessary for the existence  of life, and that contaminated and polluted 
water poses a threat to human existence.  The oft-quoted words of Sal eem 
Akhtar, J. in the case of Ms. Shehla Zia and others Vs. WAPDA  (PLD 
1994 SC 693) , where the immediate context was regarding  the hazards 
of electromagnetic fields , are equally germane  here:- 
 
“Article 9 of the Constitution provides that no person shall 
be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law. 
The word ‘life’ is very significant as it covers all fac ets of 
human existence. The word ‘life’ has not been defined in 
the Constitution but it does not mean nor can it be 
restricted only to the ve getative or animal life or mere 
existence from conception to death. Life includes all such 
amenities and facilities which a person born in a free 
country, is entitled to enjoy with dignity, legally and 
constitutionally.”  
 
Therefore w ater is a  resource  to which everyone is entitled , is 
indispensable to those  who wish to lead a dignified life,  and forms the 
basis of many other rights including the right to life, health and quality 
of life. It is a fundamental right  that emanates from the right to life 
enshrin ed in Article 9 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 (the Constitution) . In the global context, numerous 
international resolutions, conventions, and declarations also highlight 
the importance of water. The most apt description  is the following extract  
from General Comment No.15  (2002) : The Right to Water (A rticles 11 and Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 7 :-
12 of the International Covenant  on Economic, Social and Cultural 
Rights ) (adopted at the 29th Session of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
on 20 January 2003  contained in Document E/C.12/2002/11) , to which we fully 
subscribe :- 
 
“Water is a limited natural resource and a public good 
fundamental for life and health. The human right to water 
is indispensable for leading a life in human dignity. It is a 
prerequisite for the rea lization of other human rights.”  
 
3.  All economies of the world are dependent upon water as a 
resource for the livelihood of its people and for their sustained 
development. In the case of Pakistan, being an agrarian economy, t he 
importance of water can never be overstated, particularly when it relies 
upon a single source, i.e. the Indus River s and its tributa ries, to cater to 
almost all of its water requirements.  Pakistan is now facing a water 
crisis. As per the National Water Policy of Pakistan, our per capita 
surface water availability has declined f rom 5,260 cubic meters per year  
in 1951 to approximately 1,000 cubic meters in 2016. According to the 
World Resources Institute  in its report titled ‘Ranking the World’s Most 
Water -Stressed Countries in 2040 ’, Pakistan is at number 23 out of the 
top 33 water -stressed countries in 2040. The Pakistan Council of 
Research in Water Resources has opined that Pakistan may run dry by 
2025 if the present conditions continue. They assert  that Pakistan 
touched the ‘water stress line’ in 1990, and crossed the ‘water scarcity 
line’ in 2005, and that relatively little has been done to improve the 
supply or use of water.  This indicates that it is pertinent that Pakistan 
immediately begin to adopt m easures to solve the problems that 
contribute to water scarcity . Though the issue of alleviating water 
shortage is essentially within the realm  of the executive, as mentioned Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 8 :-
above the right to w ater forms part of the fundamental right to life and 
thus must be guaranteed to the citizens of Pakistan. As the custodians of 
the Constitution , the judiciary must ensu re that such right is enforced, 
particularly considering  the grim and precarious situation that Pakistan 
is in at the moment. Hence, the Supreme Cour t of Pakistan decided to 
act upon this issue immediately by exercising its power under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution which culminated in the short order of even 
date in which the instant matter was disposed of in the following terms: - 
 
“1. That the ne ed for water reservoirs is not only expedient but 
also sine qua non  for the survival of the people and economy 
of Pakistan. All those present in the Court including officials 
of the various departments and experts on the subject are 
unanimous in this regar d. They are also unanimous on the 
point that according to the decision of the Council of 
Common Interest the Diamer Bhasha Dam and pursuant to 
the approval of the ECNEC both the said and Mohmand Dam 
must be built on urgent basis by the Federal Government 
and in this regard there is no dispute or discord of any 
nature amongst the Provinces;  
2. That right to life is a fundamental right and without water 
there can be no existence of life. The establishment of water 
reservoirs is therefore not a question of jus t quality of life 
rather the very existence thereof. Therefore, in terms of the 
provisions of Article 184(3) of the Constitution read with 
Article 9 and as guardians of the fundamental rights of the 
people of Pakistan, this Court has the jurisdiction to is sue 
necessary directions to the Government for the practical 
enforcement of the primordial right to life. Accordingly, we 
direct the Federal and Provincial Governments, WAPDA and 
all the Executive Authorities in Pakistan who are responsible 
or have nexus/c onnection with the building of the afore -said 
dams and all matters connected thereto, to take all 
necessary steps for the commencement of construction and 
early completion of these dams. A comprehensive report in 
this regard with detailed timelines and mil estones shall be Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 9 :-
submitted to this Court within a period of t hree weeks  by the 
Committee formed herein below;  
3. For the construction of these dams and also for oversight of 
execution of their works, we hereby constitute an 
Implementation Committee headed  by the Chairman WAPDA 
and for the time being comprising experts and officials of the 
Federal and KPK Governments including the following 
persons:  
(i) Additional Secretary (Budget), Finance 
Division, Federal Government;  
(ii) Joint Secretary, Water Resources Divisi on, 
Federal Government;  
(iii) Joint Secretary, PM Office (to be nominated 
by Secretary to PM);   
(iv) Senior Chief (Water), Planning Division, 
Federal Government;    
(v) Chief Secretary Gilgit -Baltistan;  
(vi) Senior Member Board of Revenue, KPK  
(vii) Additional Chief Secretary (De velopment), 
KPK; 
(viii) The Committee can co -opt any members/  
experts.  
 
4. Under the provisions of Article 78 of the Constitution, any 
funds deposited in the Public Account of the Federation can 
be dedicated for a specified project or purpose. We therefore 
direct  the establishment of an account, for the time being in 
the name of the Registrar of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, 
for collecting funds donated by the people of Pakistan for the 
construction and establishment of the aforementioned dams;  
5. In the foregoi ng behalf we accordingly appeal to the Nation 
for making its contributions, whether in the shape of foreign 
currency or in Pakistani rupees, directly to the said account. 
The funds in the said account shall be utilized solely for the 
construction and estab lishment of the aforementioned dams 
and shall for the time being be operated under the orders of 
this Court on the recommendations of the Implementation Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 10 :-
Committee. It is made clear that the funds in this account 
shall not under any circumstance or for any reason be 
diverted or utilized for any purpose other than the 
construction of the afore -noted dams. For avoidance of doubt 
it is directed that no questions shall be asked by any 
authority or department including, but not limited to the tax 
authorities, rel ating to the source of funds contributed to the 
afore -noted account. The utilization of the said funds shall 
be subject to audit a s per directions of this Court.”  
 
4.  For the purposes of historical and geographical context, 
known for being the largest con tiguous irrigation system of the world, the 
Indus River s system spans over a total area of 20 million hectares out of 
which Pakistan covers 52% in terms of its distribution  (the remaining is 
covered by Afghanistan, China and India) . The  Indus Rivers compri se of the Indus, 
Jhelum,  Chenab, Beas, Ravi and Sutlej and their water come s into the 
lower riparian Pakistan from the upper riparian India. These rivers have 
glaciated headwaters and snowfields that, combined with monsoon 
runoff and groundwater aquifers, form the major sources of water for 
Pakistan. Water s uspension by India occurred soon after Partition which 
ultimately led to the signing of the Indus Water Treaty  (the Treaty)  between 
the two countries  in 1960 . Amongst other things , the Treaty :- (i) allocated 
the eastern rivers of Ravi, Sutlej and Beas to India (Article II)  and the 
western rivers of Sindh, Chenab and Jhelum to Pakistan  (Article III) ; (ii) 
gave both countries the right of conditional usage of water of each other’s 
rivers provided that such usage d id not lower the quantity of and natural 
flow of the river(s)  of the other country  (Article IV) ; (iii) p rovided for a 
transition period, i.e. 01.04.1960 to 31.03.1970 (extendable, but not beyond 
31.03.1973)  during which  Pakistan was to receive the w aters of the eastern 
rivers for unrestricted use and  India was required to limit its withdrawals 
for agricultural use, limit abstractions for storages and make deliveries to Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 11 :-
Pakistan from the eastern rivers  (Article II) ; and  (iv) a llowed Pakistan to 
constr uct and bring into operation a system of works which would 
accomplish the replacement, from the western rivers and other sources 
of water supplies for irrigation canals in Pakistan which on 15th August 
1947 were dependent on water supply from the eastern r ivers [Article 
IV(1)].  
5.  Over the years, water disputes arose between the two 
countries on account of India attempting to build several dams including  
Salal Dam, Wullar Barrage/Tulbul Navigational Project, Baglihar Dam, 
Kishenganga Da m, Nimoo Bazgo and Chutak Dams, with Pakistan 
objecting to them broadly on the premise that the construction of such 
dams adversely affected  the flow of the various Indus Rivers on which 
they are situated. In the meantime, Pakistan only built two major  dams, 
i.e. Mangla and Tarbela dams in 1967 and 1976  respectively . Although  
according to the International Commission on Large Dams  the total 
number of dams and reservoirs in Pakistan over the height of 15 meters  
have increased to 164,  unfortunately, no other major dam has been built 
by Pakistan on the western rivers since then. This has resulted in low 
storage capacity which is one of the major causes of water shortage, 
particularly in a country such as Pakis tan where rainfall is seasonal. 
While it is true that India as the uppe r riparian state has an obligation 
not to inflict unreasonable harm on the lower riparian state Pakistan, the 
responsibility of the latter regarding optimal water management is often 
ignored and overlooked. It must not be forgotten that the Treaty is about  
shared water resources and so is the concept of upper and lower riparian 
states and their rights and responsibilities . Furthermore, Pakistan has 
ratified the International Covenant on Econom ic, Social and Cultural 
Rights in 2008, and according to Articles  11 and 12 thereof, Pakistan is Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 12 :-
required to better manage its territorial water resources in order to 
secure the right to water of its citizens . 
6.  Pakistan’s storage capacity relative to other arid countries is 
very low considering the average annual flo w as depicted in the chart 
below  produced by the International Commission on Large Dams :- 
 
River 
Basins  Average Annual Flow (maf)  Usable Storage (maf)  % Storage  
Colorado  12 59.62  497 
Nile 47 132 281 
Sutlej, Beas 
and Ravi  32 11.32  35 
Indus Basin  145 13.86 10 
World 
Average  20,000  8,000  40 
 
According to the presentation of the Ministry of Water Resources, 
Government of Pakistan  given in Court, t he respective storage capacity of 
the three main reservoirs  in Pakistan , i.e. , Tarbela, Mangla and 
Chashma, loc ated on the western rivers is as under: - 
 
Reservoir  Live Storage (maf)  Loss/Gain  
(Original)  (Present)  (maf)  (%) 
Tarbela  9.68 6.17 -3.51 -36 
Mangla  5.34 7.41 +2.07  +39 
Chashma  0.72 0.28 -0.44 -61 
Total  15.74  13.86  -1.88 -12 
 
With an average flow of w ater of 137  million acre feet  (maf), a present live 
storage of 13.86 maf gives Pakistan  a percentage storage capacity of 
approximately 10.12% which roughly corresponds to the figure of 10% 
given in the previous table. According to Syed Muhammad Mehar Ali 
Shah, Joint Secretary  Ministry of Water Resources and the 
Commissioner Indus Water, the economic value of 1 maf of water is Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 13 :-
approximately USD 500 million and post -Tarbela, Pakistan is wasting an 
average amount of 29 maf every year which totals  a whopping co st of 
USD 14.5 billion per year. Furthermore, the shortage of dams results in 
greater flooding and over the years, Pakistan has  incurred total direct 
losses of USD 38,053 million  from 1950 to 2015 , with 50% of it being 
incurred in the recent years as shown  below: - 
 
 
 
These figures serve as a warning to every Pakistani citizen , particularly 
the members of the executive (Federal and Provincial) , within whose ambit the 
issue of water falls, about the  severity of the  shortage of water storage 
capacity in Pakis tan. As per  Syed Muhammad Mehar Ali Shah the 
optimum storage capacity for Pakistan is about 23 to 25 maf. Accordingly 
we require an increase of at least  10 to 12 maf of storage from our 
present live storage of 13.86 maf as mentioned above . It is pertinent to 
note that this is without taking into account the continuous reduction in 
water storage capacity that occurs due to sedimentation  in existing dam 
reservoirs . By way of illustration, the reservoir at Tarbela has lost 
approximately 36 % of its live storage  capacity  due to sedimentation , from 
the original live storage capacity of 9.68 to the present live storage 
capacity of 6.17 maf as indicated in the table immediately above . Thus Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 14 :-
these issues also need to be taken into consideration . Therefore 
increasing o ur water storage capacity by building new storage facilities  
including dams and reservoirs is imp erative and the  need of the hour.  
7.  When we talk about viable storage solutions , reference is 
often made to Kalabagh Dam . This dam  was to be built on the Ind us 
River with a live storage capacity of 6.1 maf.  The idea of Kalabgha Dam 
goes as far back as August 1956, when a  preliminary feasibility report 
was prepared by an American consultant , according to which the project 
was found to be technically and economi cally feasible. Then in 1966, 
another preliminary feasibility report was prepared by an American 
consultant for the World Bank. Subsequently in 1975, a Pakistani 
consultant, namely Associated Consulting Engineers  (ACE)1 in association 
with Harza Engineerin g Company of USA , prepared a feasibility report 
which the World Bank appraised  in 1980. In 1983, a final Planning 
Report was  prepared by Kalabagh Consultants (a consortium of five national and 
international consultants retained by the World Bank)  which als o found the project to 
be technically and economically feasible. Several panels of experts, both 
international and local, reviewed the Planning Report and reached the 
same conclusion as regards the project’ s technical and economic  
feasibility. Thereafter i n 1988, the project was ready for invitation to 
tender . Despite the fact that this dam could significantly redress the 
water and electricity needs of the country , there has been great 
resistance again st its construction in the past . However , there is 
evide nce to suggest that many of the fears and misgivings held by 
various people are misconceived and not well -founded, being based on 
certain preconceived premises and presumptions. Particularly, we find 
that many of the concerns raised would not in themselves  be remedied 
by resisting the construction of Kalabagh Dam, but through strict 
                                       
1 ACE’s website  states that  the following steps have been taken with respect to Kalabagh Dam: survey and 
investigations, pre -feasibility/feasibility studies, detailed design and tender  documents.  Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 15 :-
adherence  to the terms agreed upon by all the Provinces in the Water 
Apportionment Acc ord, 1991 in letter and spirit, i.e. to distribute water 
to the Provinces in accordance wit h their respective shares provided 
therein.  All the Provinces must honour this agreement. Accordingly, 
considerable headway in political concerns about the Kalabagh Dam 
project was made in the 1990s by the Council of Common Interests (CCI), 
the highest exe cutive forum under the Constitution for recording 
concurrence of the federating units of matters involving their common 
interest. Nevertheless, imperceptible vested interests have managed to 
block progress in implementation. In 201 3 the learned Lahore High  
Court , whilst seized of resulting executive lethargy in the matter in the 
case of Syed Feroze Shah Gillani Vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2013 Lah 659) , had passed  the following order: - 
 
“1. Senior Joint Secretary (CCI) of the Ministry of Inter -
Provincia l Coordination, Government of Pakistan has 
apprised the Court of two decisions by the Council of 
Common Interest ("CCI") regarding the Kalabagh Dam 
project. The first is dated 16 -9-1991 when express approval 
for construction of Kalabgah Dam multipurpose pr oject 
was given. Thereafter, on 9 -5-1998 the CCI re -visited the 
project when the Natural Water Resources Development 
Program (NWRDP) headed by the Ministry of Water and 
Power was directed to prepare for detractors a document 
explaining the issues involved in the construction of 
Kalabagh Dam and addressing political and technical 
concerns about it. It was also directed that supplementary 
projects in support of the Kalabagh Dam be prepared to 
mitigate its effect. Neither the said decisions nor the project 
have thereafter received much attention of the Federal 
Government. On behalf of the petitioner, it is pointed out 
that a technical study undertaken in 2004 by 
representatives of all four Provinces has endorsed and 
approved the feasibility of Kalabagh Dam.  
 Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 16 :-
2-A.  In the circumstances and for detailed reasons to 
follow, the Federal government is directed that in the 
performance of its duty under Article 154 of the 
Constitution, it shall in letter and spirit take steps to 
implement the decisions of the CCI dated  16-9-1991 and 9 -
5-1998 regarding Kalabagh Dam.  
 
3. Bona fide steps by the Federal Government in the 
foregoing behalf are necessary so that the fate of the 
project is not sealed on the basis of presumptions and 
surmises when in the light of the material on  record the 
project is admittedly feasible both technically and 
economically. It is therefore directed that whilst 
implementing the afore -noted CCI decisions the Federal 
government shall faithfully strive to explore and devise an 
administrative framework a nd safeguards that allay the 
apprehensions, political or otherwise, nurtured by 
concerned quarters about the Kalabagh Dam project.”  
 
We observe with great dismay that no progress has been made in this 
regard. Unfortunately, we have been apprised by various  stakeholders 
including Mr. Shams -ul-Mulk , ex-Chairman WAPDA and an eminent 
expert and scholar in the field of water resources and power , that at 
present all the Provinces of Pakistan still entertain apprehensions on this 
front. We must iterate that d ams, particularly those  that are  large in size 
and magnitude, are national  projects to be carried out for the collective 
benefit  of the whole nation and not for the advantage of one specific 
group of persons  at the cost of another . The importance of dams 
increa ses manifold when countries face near drought -like circumstances.  
While it is part of human nature to have differences with each other , 
right now Pakistan needs the people to put aside minor differences or 
suspicion s for the common good . No doubt Pakistan is a Federation 
comprising  of Provinces  and Acceding Territories , but the needs of 
Pakistan and its citizens as a whole supersede those of any one person or Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 17 :-
group of persons. The precarious , highly vulnerable and fragile situation 
of water insecurity in Pakistan is aggravated by climate change  which 
was never anticipated earlier . The present conditions in Pakistan demand  
that its citizens put the nation’s needs at the forefront. Therefore the 
Court beckons all Pakistani citizens to honour public interest  and the 
common good  and strive harder to work towards forging unanimity with 
respect to the construction of Kalabagh Dam. The four brothers must 
bury their perceived differences and put their heads together earnestly 
and sincerely to ensure water security fo r the prosperity of Pakistan and 
our future generations. Let it not be said that we failed them.  
8.  In the meantime, there is still need to ensure that immediate 
steps are taken to address the problem of water insecurity on account of 
deficient and also d iminishing water storage capacity  in the country . In 
this context when asked as to what is Pakistan’s next best option for 
which steps can be taken as soon as possible, Mr. Shams -ul-Mulk and 
other stakeholders categorically called for the speedy  constructi on of any 
other dam. They unanimously agree, along with the consent of all the 
Provinces of Pakistan, that Diamer -Bhasha and Mohmand Dams are 
projects that are ready  for implementation immediate ly. Acco rding to the 
Ministry of Water Res ources, CCI approved  the construction  of Diamer -
Bhasha Dam on 18.07.2010;  the Executive Committee of the National 
Economic Council (ECNEC)  approved the PC-1 for land acquisition and 
resettlement for the said dam  on 02.03.2015, and PC -1 for the dam along 
with the financing pla n was approved by ECNEC on 17.04.2018. ECNEC 
has also issued its approval for Mohmand Dam. Syed Muhammad Mehar 
Ali Shah stated that the storage capacities of the Diamer -Bhasha and 
Mohmand Dam s are 6.4 and 0.7 maf respectively, rendering a total 
increase in  storage capacity of 7.1 maf. Therefore considering all of the 
above, we find that the construction of these two dams would be a n Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 18 :-
excellent start for efforts to resolve the issue of water shortage and 
insecurity in Pakistan. However at the cost of repetiti on we cannot stress 
this enough,  that this process needs to be started straightaway for as 
Pakistan becomes drier , the cost s (both direct and opportunity  costs ) associated 
therewith increase with every passing minute  and that too at alarming 
rates . Accordi ngly, we direct the Federal and Provincial Governments, 
WAPDA and all the Executive Authorities in Pakistan who are 
responsible or have nexus/connection  with the building of the afore said 
dams and all matters connected thereto, to take all necessary steps for 
the commencement of construction and early completion of these dams.  
9.  According to the information received from the Chairman, 
WAPDA, the cost estimate for Diamer -Bhasha and Mohmand Dams are 
as follows: - 
 Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 19 :-
He urged the Supreme Court to direct unint errupted flow of funds and 
full support of the Federal Government.   
10.  Needless to say that construction of  the Diamer -Bhasha and 
Mohmand Dams  is a national cause . The y are to be built for the benefit 
of the citizens of Pakistan  who undeniably  have a sta ke therein.  They 
should be able to contribute to this national project which will not only 
instill in them a sense of ownership and belonging, but also inculcate in 
the Executive a sense of responsibility, accountability and obligation 
towards the citizens . This ‘pennies from many ’ model  can go a long way 
(financially and otherwise)  in contributing to this national developmental 
project  which should , as far as possible,  be completed with local 
resources.  To pre -empt the concerns of skeptics, reference is ma de to the 
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD)  which is stated to be the 
largest dam in Africa . The c onstruction of GERD began in 2011 for which 
revenue was earned through different fundraising scheme s including 
bond sales, athletic events and lottery dr aws. As of today GERD i s 
approximately 60% complete  and is expected to be completed with 
domestic funds only. Drawing on this example and with the intention of 
aiming high, the Supreme Court has taken the initiative to establish the 
‘Supreme Court of Pakis tan Diamer -Bhasha and Mohmand Dams Fund’ 
vide short order of even date, whereby people from all walks of life were 
encouraged to contribute showing their resolve to this project.  
11.  We never realized and were surely overwhelmed by the huge 
public respon se in the form of generous donations for this national cause 
and the nation’s confidence reposed in and respect extended to the  
Supreme Court of Pakistan. The trust placed by the public became 
manifest as their contributions were made with the clear expect ation that 
the Supreme Court shall control disbursements of funds to ensure that  
these are applied judiciously and economically towards the project. Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 20 :-
Therefore we are inclined to establish a Fund Disbursement Committee 
in order to ensure that the amounts de posited in the fund are utilized 
solely for the purposes of the project, and are not misused, misapplied or 
misappropriated. The said Committee shall comprise of experts of high 
integrity and repute drawn from various relevant professions to supervise 
and oversee all the steps taken towards implementation of the 
development project. The Committee shall discharge the duties assigned 
to it as a trustee . Monies shall only be released from the Fund account 
as reimbursements to the Government of Pakistan at the brick and 
mortar stage of the project rather than as direct payments to consultants 
or contractors and/or executing agencies . These payments shall be made 
after the corresponding bills/payment certificates and the works carried 
out have been strictly verif ied and approved by the Committee and a 
release order is issued by the Registrar of this Court. Till verification and 
disbursement by such Committee, the mon ies in the Fund shall be 
invested in some profit -bearing scheme so that the amount collected does 
not lose its value over time due to inflation. In order to honour the 
nation’s trust, the entire process shall be under oversight of two 
monitoring judges of this Court to be appointed by the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan specifically for this project. The acco unts of the Funds shall be 
audited by the Auditor  General of Pakistan biannually and his report 
shall be displayed on the website of the Supreme Court of Pakistan . The 
members of the Committee shall be paid an honorarium as approved by 
the monitorin g judge s of this  Court.   
To safeguard the trust reposed by the public in the Fund, it is 
directed that the contribution (s) thereto shall enjoy tax free status. For 
this purpose the Federal Board of Revenue , the Government of Pakistan 
and the Provincial Government s shall issue such notifications, 
instructions and orders that ensure that both the contributors to the Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 21 :-
Fund and the amounts they have deposited therein enjoy complete 
exemption from tax or scrutiny (unless there are reasonable ground s to believe that 
such contributions represent the proceeds of crime ). We are certain that with their 
unbreakable resolve , generosity, and strong will to make a better 
Pakistan for themselves and generations to come, the Pakistani nation 
will be able to build the two aforementi oned dams . Drawing upon the 
words of W. H. Auden, it is such cisterns that will help us combat those 
leonine summers because as a nation we will not be able to survive 
without water.   
12.  However the struggle and effort by state and society to rectify 
the issue of water shortage and insecurity should not be limited to the 
construction of more dams and reservoirs. We must be cognizant of 
numerous other causes of water shortage. We aim to broadly identify 
these  hereinbelow. First, is the erratic flow  of the western rivers.  Most of 
the Indus waters come from the snow and ice melt from the high 
mountain headwaters and monsoon  rains. The variation in the melting of 
snow and the rainfall over the various seasons leads to erratic supply of 
water in the rivers. Thi s issue has intensified over the years, and will 
continue to do so, because of climate change resulting in more extreme 
episodes  of excess flow and shortage.  
Secondly, there is an i ncreasing gap in supply and demand  of 
water . According to the Provisional Summary Results of the 6th 
Population and Housing Census -2017 conducted by the Pakistan Bureau 
of Statistics,  Pakistan’s population has an annual growth rate of 2.40%.  
As per the Census -2017, the total population  of Pakistan  is 207,774,520  
in 2017 . However , the ‘World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, 
Key Findings & Advance Tables ’ produced by the United Nations, 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division in 2017 Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 22 :-
provides that such figure is expected to rise to 244,248,000 by 2030 , 
306,940,000 by 2050 and 351,943,000 by 2100.  This increase will not 
only occur in rural but urban areas as well resulting in an increase in 
the demand for water for dome stic, industrial and  agricultural usage.  
Thirdly, there is the phenomenon of u nsusta inable use of 
groundwater . Due to the increase in the demand for water the number of 
tube wells ha s also increased , be it for industrial, agricultural or 
domestic use. Particularly with respect to agric ulture, farmers have 
started to  pump groundwater due t o the unpredictability associated with 
canal water supplies. As per the Report on Water Problems (Issues & 
Solutions) by Mr. Zafar Mahmood, Former Chairman , WAPDA (June, 
2018) , the contribution of groundwater to irrigated agriculture has 
doubled in the las t 40 years, i.e. from 25.6 to 50.2 m af. Furthermore, 
most private groundwater exploitation remains unmonitored  and 
unregulated . This has resulted in groundwater depletion because water 
is being pumped out of the ground faster  than it is replenished, thereb y 
draining our aquifers.  
Fourthly, unfortunately Pakistan has a poor  irrigation 
infrastructure . It also lacks a dequate surface drainage which diverts or 
ensures the orderly removal of excess water from the surface of the land 
through constructed drains or  improved natural channels, along with the 
requisite modelling of land . Furthermore, substantial amounts  of water 
are wasted due to insufficient  canal lining. For sake of illustration, as 
pointed out in Mr. Zafar Mahmood’s report, out of an average annual 
inflow (1976 -2015) of 145 maf, 101 maf is diverted to canals out of which 
40 maf is lost during conveyance  resulting in an availability of only 61 
maf; out of the 40 maf lost, 4 maf is due to evaporation and 36 maf is 
lost through percolation (20 maf in sa line areas and 16 maf in sweet water areas) .  Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 23 :-
Fifthl y, our soil suffers from salinization. The water diverted from 
the Indus River to the canal system for irrigation brings in more salts 
than those that flow out to the sea  resulting in a net addition of sa lts 
stored in the Indus Basin. A portion of these salts accumulates in the 
irrigated land and its underlying aquifers. This phenomenon negatively 
affects the total supply of water.  
The sixth is the improper disposal of waste. Many industrial and 
municipal  estates in Pakistan lack adequate facilities for the treatment of 
waste. Such untreated waste, when left unmonitored, contaminates the 
groundwater when it seeps into the aquifers , causing various water -
borne diseases.  
Seventhly , there is un regulated grow ing of crops . The crop -growing 
pattern in Pakistan does not correspond to its water situation. Most of 
the farmers continue to grow water -intensive crops including wheat, 
cotton, rice, sugarcane, oil seed and banana with water requirements 
higher than that  of other crops .  
Finally , Pakistan’s coastal areas suffer from sea-water intrusion . 
Reduction in the inflow of the Indus Rivers due to various factors 
including climate change and deforestation result s in the movement of 
sea water into fresh water aquifer s contaminating them which reduces 
the amount of sweet groundwater available for consumption.  
13.  The aforementioned issues are all pressing ones and also 
need to be tackled  alongside the increase in water storage capacity.  We 
propose certain  steps that  should be taken to address the issue of water 
scarcity . The first is improvement of infrastructure and equipment . 
Pakistan needs to employ me thods to efficien tly use its freshwater 
sources in order to ensure a sustainable wat er supply. Methods of water 
conservation such as zero tillage, precision land levelling, bed and furrow Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 24 :-
planting, and efficient irrigation systems including sprinkler and drop 
irrigation systems would go a long way in reducing water wastage. 
Adequate drainage systems to control salinity would help control soil 
salinization. Canal lining would also substantially reduce water seepage . 
Regulation is required in various areas. For example, the kinds of crops 
that are grown in Pakistan should be regulated, perhaps with a shift in 
focus from wa ter-intensive crops to crops that do not require a lot of 
water, e.g. cool season legumes. Dry farming can also be introduced and  
promoted.   
Secondly, g roundwater extraction for all types of use, namely, 
industrial, commercial and agricultural must also be regulated. Timely 
monitoring via metering should be adopted . However , private 
groundwater extraction for domestic use in the urban areas sh ould be 
done away with entirely, with the municipal authorities being the only 
provider  of water. Then there should be regulations pertaining to waste 
treatment. All industrial and municipal entities should be required to 
treat their wastewater before disposal. Recycled  water can then be used 
for toilet flushing, industrial processes, irrigation and recharging the 
groun dwater.  
Thirdly, a nd importantly , water pricing for every use should be 
rationali sed. Water should be priced to reflect the true cost of providing 
water for various purposes. This will encourage more responsible use of 
water and have the effect of  reducin g water wastage and increasing  water 
supply.   
Fourthly, to encourage responsible use of water , efforts should be 
made to reduce its quantity that is unaccounted -for. This can be done by 
installation of meters for the Indus River System Authority to monitor . Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 25 :-
Fifthly , there should be active environmental upgradation. 
Forestation would not only help protect groundwater sourc es but also 
reduce the impact of climate change.  
Sixthly,  the practice of rainwater harvesting should be adopted. 
Rainwater should be col lected from hard surfaces such as roofs and 
stored for on -site reuse for various purposes. In rural areas, it can be 
used for irrigation, whereas in urban areas, it can be used to wash cars, 
water gardens and even flush toilets. Rainwater harvesting would reduce 
the strain on the water supply.  
Seventhly , there should be capacity building of the various 
concerned organizations including the Ministry of Water Resources, 
Government of Pakistan, Pakistan Commissioner for Indus Waters, 
Water and Power Developme nt Authority , Indus River S ystem Authority, 
and Pakistan Council of Research in Water Resources . With greater 
amount of cooperation and coordination between them , the problem of 
water shortage can be resolved more swiftly through concerted efforts.  
Finall y, the public should be educated in water issues and 
conservation techniques and methods of efficient use of water through 
awareness campaigns . The verses from the Holy Quran mentioned earlier 
in this opinion tell us to follow a balanced way of life and re frain from 
excessive and extravagant use of earth’s resources, particularly water. 
Abdullah bin Amr narrated that the Holy Prophet (PBUH) passed by Sa’d 
when he was performing ablution and is reported to have said: - 
 
“What is this extravagance?  Can there b e any 
extravagance in ablution? Yes, even if you are on the bank 
of a flowing river.” (Sunan Ibn -e-Maja, Hadith No.425)  
 Constitution Petition No.57 of 2016 etc.  -: 26 :-
Certain practical conservation techniques include simple sustainable 
home living methods such as closing taps when water is not needed,  
avoiding the us e of hose pipes to wash cars or water plants, and taking 
short showers instead of long baths, etc. To this end, a wareness can be 
inculcated immediately through print and electronic (including social)  media. 
As a long -term measure, awareness  about water conservation should be 
imparted in school so as to change the mindset of our future generations.    
14.  The aforementioned remedial measures are not intended to 
be exhaustive . It is an attempt to broadly illustrate the minimum that is  
expected  of Governmen t, both Federal and Provincial , and the relevant 
organizations to curb the menace of water shortage in the short and long 
run. Perhaps as a starting point the Federal and Provincial Governments 
should begin adopting and implementing the Nation al Water Policy of 
Pakistan  on an immediate basis . Together as a nation, we can bring 
Pakistan out of this bleak situation. Let us realize  the worth of water and 
put first thi ngs first before it is too late.  
 
 
 
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
4th of July, 2018  
Approved for Reporting  
Waqas Naseer/*  