IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
   Present  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
   Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
 
   
  SUO  M OTO  CASE  NO.  18  OF  2010  
(Suo Moto Action regarding violati on of Public 
Procurement Rules, 2004 in procurement loss of billions 
of rupees of exchequer caused by National Insurance 
Company Ltd.)  
 
 
On Court Notic e:   Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, 
     Attorney General for Pakistan   
 
For Establishment Division:  Mr. Sohail Ahm ed, Secretary  
 
For M/o Information:   Mr. Taimoor Azmat Osman,  
     Acting Secretary  
 
For M/o Interior:    Nemo     
 
For the FIA:    Nemo  
 
Date of hearing   : 25.7.2011  
 
 
O R D E R  
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — Brief facts of the  case 
are that on 0 6.05.201 0, a letter was addressed to Mr. Ayaz Khan 
Niazi, Chairman, National Insurance Company Limited  (NICL),  by 
Transparency International Pakistan, copy of which was also forwarded 
to Registrar of this Court. The summarized allegations leveled in the 
letter are as follows: - 
“1. Procurement of 803 kanal – 19 Marla Plot in Lahore 
reportedly belonging to Ex-MNA Mr . Habibullah 
Warraich, which had  market value of Rs.300, 000/- per 
Kanal, whereas NICL was  buying it at Rs.2,000,000/ - 
per Kanal.   2 
2. 27000  sft. Office space i n Dubai in Liberty tower was 
purchased in July 2009 @ UAE Dirham 2,700 per sft. , 
against the market price of AED 1,200 per sft. alleged ly, 
causing loss to exchequer of Rs.900 million.  
3. 10 Acre plot purch ased in Korangi Deh Phihai, in A ugust 
2009 @ Rs.90,000 ,000/ - per acre, against maximum 
market price of Rs.20,000,000/ - per acre, causing l oss 
Rs.70,000,000/ - per acre.  
4. Award of Contracts of painting works and furniture to 
M/s Casa Bella Lahore, Karachi  for Rs.26.987 million 
and at Islamabad  for Rs.9 .31 millio n, who was not a 
license holder of Pakistan engineering Council. The 
tender for Karachi was for 6 floors but the Contractor 
has been asked to paint only 4 floors.  
5. Land was purchased in Lahore in the year 2009 from 
Mr. Mohsin Warraich  for Rs.1.5 billion , whose market 
value was Rs.30 million  causing l oss to Exchequer 
Rs.1.2 billion.”  
 
Similar application  was submitted by one Asif Ahmed.  
2. The matter was registered as HRC. No.3379 -S/2010 and vide 
letter dated 12.02.2010, report was called from Chief Secretar y 
Punjab, who submitted his report on 4.3.2010 stating therein that 
NICL intended to purchase a piece of land for developing a housing 
colony at Lahore at exorbitant price to benefit a few persons , who 
were behind the deal.  
3. Vide letter dated 24.3.2010 report was called from Secretary 
Board of Revenue, Punjab, who in his  report dated 2.4.2010 narrated 
the same answer as was given by the Chief Secretary, Punjab . 
Thereafter, vide order dated 26.4.2010 the matter was referred to 
Chairman NAB for conducting discreet inquiry and report. The 
Chairman NAB, submitted reports dated 19.5.2010, 1.6.2010 and 
14.6.2010. In the light of the reports submitted by the authorities, t he 
matter was then registered as SMC No.18/2010 and was fixed  before 
the Court  on 12.10.201 0.  3 
4. On 12.10.2010, when the matter was taken up in Court  as Suo 
Moto Case , the Secretary Commerce was directed to lodge criminal 
complaint/report with F.I.A. , in respect of above transactions against 
all concerned, as a result whereof a case FIR No.24/20 10 dated 
12.10.2010 under section s 409, 420, 109 PPC read with 5(2) PCA was 
registered with FIA Circle, Lahore. However, this Court feeling 
dissatisfied with the above proceedings, directed the FIA to accelerate 
the proceedings;  cause arrest of the accused , particularly the 
influential persons ; and to register cases regarding other inciden ts.   
5. On 09.12.2010 Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, the then Director, FIA 
submitted a report stating therein that at Lahore , another FIR No. 
29/2010 was registered against Ay az Khan Niazi and others, whereas, 
in FIR No.24/2010, one Habibullah Warraich was arrested and Rs.1 .4 
billion were recovered from him , whereas , steps were being taken to 
cause arrest of Mohsin Habibullah Warraich. The complete details of 
the recoveries and  investigation are  not being given here so it may not 
cause any prejudice to either of the parties. In the meanwhile 
influential persons tried to interfere in the investigation to get the 
favorable  results.  
6. It is to be noted that  when  under the supervi sion of Mr. Zafar 
Ahmed Qureshi the investigation  was likely to make effective progress, 
he was abruptly transferred to National Police Foundation as Managing 
Director, on the pretext that after his promotion in Grade 21 he could 
not continue as a Director  in FIA . An exception on his transfer was 
taken by this Court and competent authorities were compelled to allow 
him to continue investigation of the case. Thus, o n 25.01.2011 Mr. 
Qamaruzzaman  Chaudhry , Secretary, Ministry of Interior, Government 
of Pakista n placed on record the notification dated 24.01.2011, issued 
by the Government of Pakistan whereby Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, 
was appointed as Additional Director General, FIA in addition to his 
other assignment to supervise investigation of NICL case at Lah ore.  
7. Mr. Zafar Ahme d Qureshi, Addl. D.G. submitted report on 
17.2.2011, according to which, FIA had collected incriminating 
evidence against Mohsin Warraich, Habibullah Warraich, Moonis Elahi 
and Raja Muhammad Ali in accordance with law. He, however,  4 
expressed that during discharge of his function , he was threatened of 
dire consequences  by some persons . He recorded his statement in 
open Court that in case of his unnatural death, Chaudhry Shujat 
Hussain, Chaudhry Pervez Elahi, Chaudhry Wajahat Elahi, Moo nis 
Elahi, Major Habibullah Warraich and Mohsin Habib Warraich , would be 
responsible for the same . In this regard directions were issued to the 
Attorney General for Pakistan to take all necessary steps to ensure 
that Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi would be  allowe d to conduct the 
investigat ion of the  cases freely without facing any threat or 
consequences from anyone. In response to this situation CMA No.1710 
of 2011 titled as Ch. Shujaat Hussai n v. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi  was 
moved wherein a request was made that Mr. Z afar Ahmed Qureshi be 
proceeded against as he had made a false statement before this Court 
noted above. This application is pending for decision.  
8. On 21.3.2011, Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, Addl. D.G. FIA 
submitted report mentioning therein that in case FIR  No.24 /2010 with 
regard to land equal to 804 kanals, an amount of Rs.1,686,3 00,000/- 
had been recovered and Challan against the accused persons  had been  
forwarded to the court of competent jurisdic tion; in case FIR 
No.29/2010  an amount of Rs.80,0 00,000/ - had been recovered and i n 
FIRs No.  46/2010 and 05/2011, accused including Ch. Moonis Elahi 
had been arrested and interim Challan had been  forwarded to the 
court of competent jurisdiction. However, he submitted that he was 
being maligned unnecessarily in the  media by some of the arrested 
persons. A C ivil Miscellaneous Application  No.874/2011 was also filed 
on behalf of Ch. Shujat Hussain and others  containing the prayer for 
transfer of investigation from Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi  to some other 
officer . 
9. On 14 .4.2011 Mr. Zafar  Ahmad Qureshi , Addl. Director General 
had provided following breakup of the recovered amounts relating to 
NICL: - 
“(i) FIR No.24 of 2010: An amount of Rs.  1.686 3 Billion 
against the property measuring 804 Kanal has been recovered 
and trans ferred to the account of NICL.  
(ii) FIR No.29 of 2010: Commercial plot measuring 20 kanals 
at Airport Road, Lahore was purchased by NICL for an excessively  5 
exorbitant price Rs.  1.06 Billion which by all surveyor report, was 
highly in flated price. An amount  of Rs. 8 0.400 million was 
recovered and deposited in account of NICL.  For the balance 
amount of Rs.42 Million, postdated cheques were deposited by 
one Muhammad Akram Warraich (uncle of Mohsin Habib 
Warraich) before the learned Special Judge (Central) Laho re. 
These postdated cheques and interest thereon was made 
recoverable by six monthly installments in a period of about five 
years. ”  
 
10. It is pertinent to mention here that on 25.1.2011, when the 
Court inquired the reason for not arresting Amin Qasim Dad a, who wa s 
one of the directors of NICL, Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi explained that 
as per version of Moazzam Jah, Director FIA, Karachi, Amin Qasim 
Dada used to sit with DG, FIA in his camp office, therefore, he could 
not cause his arrest. This statement was confirmed by Mr. Moazzam 
Jah. In the said circumstances the Court was constrained to observe 
that “ it seems that instead of allowing his Director to make progress in 
the case, he (DG, FIA) is providing shelter to the accused persons ”. On 
making such statem ent and his decision to proceed against influential 
persons noted above, they started creating trouble for him to 
investigate the case smoothly.  
11. During investigation of the case the FIA officials contacted with 
Serious Organized Crime Agency (SOCA), UK  for obtaining the 
information regarding the foreign currency accounts of Moonis Elahi , 
one of the accused in FIR No. 46/2010 , and according to reports  
available on record  he had an account in EFG Private Bank, UK having 
balance of £ 1,1,38792.53  and another account in Barclays Bank in 
the name of Beenish Khan (wife of Mohsin Habib Warraich) having a 
balance of £ 102,307.63 (transferred from the account in EFG Private 
Bank Ltd.) . The then D.G. FIA, Waseem Ahmed kept the said 
informat ion pending with him for 21 days and this fact has been 
verified by Mirza Sultan M. Saleem , Director, FIA  in his statement 
recorded before the investigation  team . Later on he was also 
transferred from FIA.  
12. Malik Muhammad Iqbal was posted in place of W aseem Ahmad , 
DG FIA. He,  instead of facilitating Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi in  6 
accomplishing the task assigned to him by this Court , to probe into 
corruption cases , wrote a letter  dated  15.4.2011 to the Secretary , 
Ministry of Interior , Government of Pakistan,  contents whereof are 
reproduced hereinbelow:  
 
 
“OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL  
FEDERAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY  
ISLAMABAD  
 
No.PS/DG/FIA/2011/208    April 15, 2011  
The Secretary, Ministry of Interior,  
Government of Pakistan,  
Islamabad  
 
Subject:  NOTIFICATION  
  Kindly refer to your office Notification 
No.3/6/2011 -Estt (FIA), dated 09 -02-2011, in pursuance of 
the Notification issued by the Government of Pakistan, Cabinet 
Secretariat, Establishment Division No.F.12/3/81 -E-3(Police) 
dated 24 -01-2011 with respect to posting of Capt. (R) Zafar 
Ahmed Qureshi, (PSP/BS -21) as member of the FIA against 
the post of Additional Director General/FIA to supervise the 
investigation of NICL case at Lahore.  
2. It will not be out of place to mention that the interim 
challans in NIC L cases have been submitted in the Court of 
competent jurisdiction on 11 -04-2011 and a report thereof has 
already been submitted in the Honourable Supreme Court of 
Pakistan on 14 -04-2011 by the said officer.  
3. The matter is brought to your notice for furt her 
necessary action.  
Sd/- 
Malik Muhammad Iqbal, PSP  
Director General/FIA”  
 
13. In view of the letter reproduced hereinabove, as is evident, the 
Ministry of Interior sent a letter dated 16.4.2011 to the Establishment 
Division stating therein  that “please f ind enclosed a reference received 
from Director General, Federal Investigation Agency (F.I.A) regarding 
the latest position of investigation in NICL case at Lahore”. Accordingly 
the Establishment Division , on 18 .04.2011, issued following 
Notification: -  7 
 
 
“F.No.12/3/81 -E-3 (Police)  
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN  
CABINET SECRETARIAT  
ESTABLISHMENT DIVISION  
**** 
Islamabad, the 18th April, 2011  
 
NOTIFICATION  
Capt. (Retd) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi  (PSP/BS -21) was posted as 
Additional Director General, Federal Investigation Age ncy, 
under Ministry of Interior, in addition to his present assignment 
as Managing Director, National Police Foundation, to supervise 
the investigation of NICL case vide this Division’s Notification of 
even number, dated 24 -01-2011.  
2. The Director General , Federal Investigation Agency has 
intimated that the recoveries have been made and the Chalan 
submitted in the said case.  Therefore, the additional charge of 
the officer as Additional Director General, Federal Investigation 
Agency is hereby withdrawn wit h immediate effect.  
     
             -Sd- 
(Shahzad Asif)  
Section Officer to the  
Government of Pakistan ” 
 
14. The Court was prima facie  of the opinion that Malik Muhammad 
Iqbal, D.G. FIA by sending a letter dated 15 .04.2011, reproduced 
herein above, had created obstacles in investigation of the case which 
was being conducted by Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi , in pursuance of 
directions of this Court and in this manner ha d disturbed, disobeyed 
and disregarded the order/direction of this Court; and had interfered 
with, the process of law and due course of judicial proceedings by 
getting the Additional D G FIA , disassociated from the investigation , 
therefore,  vide order dated 10.05.2011, show cause notice of 
contempt of Court was issued to him under Article 204 of the 
Constitution read with section 3 & 5 of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance (Ordinance V) of 2003 to explain as to why he should not 
be proceeded against for the violative acts detailed therein interfering 
in the affairs of this Court by approaching the Governm ent authorities 
for the purpose of getting notification dated 18.4.2011 issued on the  8 
basis of which an officer taking deep interest in recover y of a huge 
amount of the public exchequer , had been disassociated from the 
investigation.  
15. Malik Muhammad Iq bal, DG, FIA initially filed his explanation to 
the show cause notice vide C.M.A. No.1836 of 2011 , then filed reply to 
the show cause notice. In his reply he also mentioned that o n 
29.4.2011, well before the order passed by this Court on 10 .5.2011, 
he wrot e to the Secretary, Ministry of Interior specifically requesting 
that the notification in question may be withdrawn and the earlier 
notification of 24 .1.2011 be restored, “so that Mr. Zafar Ahmed 
Qureshi may complete the investigation as Member of FIA by a djusting 
him against the post of Additional Director General FIA in addition to 
his present assignment ”. However, the authority did not accept his 
request and Mr. Zafar Qureshi was not transferred back.  
16. On 03.06.2011 after having discussed the case at  some length, 
charge was framed against Malik Muhammad Iqbal, DG FIA  who 
submitted reply which reads as under :- 
 
“Respectfully submitted that the undersigned holds the apex court 
in the highest esteem and respect. I do not want to contest the 
charge. Howev er, most respectfully I submit that it was not my 
intention or object to undermine the authority of this Hon’ble 
Court and subvert its orders/directions. I stand by my earlier 
statement dated 14.5.2011 submitted through my counsel Mr. 
Makhdoom Ali Khan. I humbly and respectfully seek mercy and 
clemency of the august Court and by way of extenuating 
circumstance I submit that I am superannuating on 14.07.2011 
and I shall immediately proceed on leave and not serve.”  
 
On the same date, notice was issued to the Secretary Interior to 
appear along with record of the case  including the  summaries , on the 
basis of which case was forwarded to the Secretary Establishment for 
issuing the notification, disassociating Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi from 
the said case. Secretary E stablishment was also asked to remain in 
attendance with complete record.  
17. On 8.6.2011, Mr. Abdul Rauf Chaudhry, Secretary Establishment 
appeared and stated that he had not floated any summary to the 
competent authority/Prime Minister regarding  transfe r of Mr. Zafar 
Ahmed Qureshi , and the notification  dated 18.4. 2011 was issued  9 
without any summary on the verbal orders of the competent authority 
on 18.4.2011 at about 10/11 pm., confirmation of which was sought 
by him on 20.4.2011 from the Prime Minister’ s Secretariat’s (Public) .  
18. Above contempt matter was reserved for judgment, which was 
to be announced on 16.6.2011 but on this date  notices for Contempt 
of Court were  ordered to be issued to M/s Qamar Zaman Ch., 
Secretary, Ministry of Interior; Abdul R auf Ch. Secretary, 
Establishment Division; and Khushnood Lashari, Principal Secretary to 
the Prime Minister for willful defiance of the orders of this Court 
passed on 24.1.2011 by withdrawing no tification dated 18.4.2011.  A 
separate Criminal Original Petit ion No.50/2011 was registered against 
the above named three officers . However, it was further observed that 
the judgment in the contempt matter with regard to Muhammad Iqbal, 
D.G. would be announced after hearing above named officials.  
19. This Court invariably exercises restrain t instead of passing any 
coercive order but in view of above circumstances it having been left 
with no option , was constrained to pass order dated 1.7.2011 
suspending  the operation of notification dated 18.4.2011, issued by 
the Gove rnment of Pakistan, Cabinet Secretariat, Establishment 
Division, whereby services of Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi were 
withdrawn as Additional Director General, FIA. The incumbent D.G. FIA 
was directed to extend all necessary assistance to him. Concluding 
para of the order dated 1.7.2011 is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“In the facts and circumstances when such like honest and 
upright officer. Who has always upheld the national interest 
and had taken all manner by issuance of the notification dated 
18.4.2011 by the E stablishment E -3(Police) dated 18.4.2011 
issued by the Government of Pakistan, Cabinet Secretariat, 
Establishment Division till further orders. The incumbent D.G., 
Qureshi for carrying out investigation of the cases registered at 
Lahore in respect of N.I.C .L scam and any other matter 
connected and related thereto in terms of earlier notification 
dated 24.1.2011 issued by the Establishment Division. No 
interference of any nature whatsoever shall be caused either by 
D.G., FIA or by any other authority and he would take over the 
charge of the investigation of the cases of N.I.C.L. scam at 
Lahore immediately and would be free to take all such steps  10 
and adopt all measures in discharge of his duties necessary for 
conducting transparent investigation. He shall, how ever, be 
submitting fortnightly reports to Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim 
in Chambers for perusal.”   
20. After passing of the order dated 1.7.2011, on the same day the 
following members of the investigation team working under the 
supervision of Mr. Zafar Ahm ad Qureshi were transferred to different 
places  by the incumbent D.G , FIA:- 
(i) Mr. Javed Hussain, Dy. Director  
(ii) Mr. Muhammad Ahmad, Assistant Director  
(iii) Mr. Khalid Anees, Assistant Director and  
(iv) Mr. Muhammad Sarwar, Inspector  
 
On the next day i.e. 2.7.2011 Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi was served 
with a notice to explain within 24 hours of the receipt of the 
explanation that the news item was flashed in the electronic media on 
2.7.2011 mentioning that he had written a letter to D.G. FIA to the 
effect  that transfer orders of various officers of FIA were irregular and 
asked him to withdraw the said orders forthwith, but he had failed to 
contradict the said news, giving the impression that the said news was 
correct. After receipt of explanation, Mr. Zafa r Ahmad Qureshi was 
suspended and proceedings were initiated against him  vide order 
4.7.2011, which is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
 
“No.1/7/2011 -Secy(1)  
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN  
MINISTRY OF INTERIOR  
<> <> <>  
Islamabad, the 4th July, 2011  
 
ORDER OF SUSPENSION  
I am directed to inform you that on appearance of a news 
item on 2.7.2011 on the electronic media your comments were 
noted and keeping in view the decorum and smooth running of 
the institution of the Federation you were required to explain 
your position vide .No.F.12( 3)81E -3(Police), dated 2.7.2011, 
issued by Establishment Division as to why you should not be 
proceeded against under the Government Servants (Efficiency 
and Discipline)  Rules 1973 for misconduct. Prima -facie your said  11 
actions are in sheer violati on of provisions of rules 18 and 22 of 
the Government Servant (Conduct) Rules 1964.  
 You were accordingly given a fair chance of rendering an 
explanation within 24 hours on receipt of the above letter and it 
was made abundantly clear that failing this it s hall be presumed 
that you have no explanation  to offer and you would render 
yourself liable to be proceeded against under the rules.  
 That you submitted your explanation within stipulated 
time which was examined at the competent level and after due 
consid eration  was found  unsatisfactory. In view of the foregoing, 
competent authority has been pleased to order to place you 
under suspension by exercising powers unde r Rule 9 of the 
Government Servants ( Efficiency and Discipline ) Rules 1973 with 
immediate effec t.  
 Detailed charge sheet and statement of allegations shall 
follow.  
 
(FIDA HUSSAIN AFRIDY)  
Deputy Secretary”  
 
21. The matter came up before this Court on 7.7.2011 when copy of 
the explanation, reply and the suspension order dated 4.7.2011 were 
produced i n Court. At that stage learned Attorney General was 
confronted with the news items published in all the leading 
newspapers wherein it was mentioned that on account of some 
political intervention action against Zafar Ahmad Qureshi has been 
initiated and he had been placed under suspension, learned Attorney 
General stated that till he took instructions, departmental proceedings 
against Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi would not be undertaken. D.G. FIA 
was also directed to reverse the transfer orders of the 
officers/me mbers of the investigation team of Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi immediately and post them at the places where they were 
directly performing their duties pending decision of this matter.  
22. Despite of restraining order dated 7.7.2011 fresh proceedings 
were ini tiated against Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi on the basis of some  
other  notice. As such vide order dated 13.7.2011 all notices and or 
communications issued to Mr. Zafa r Ahmad Qureshi were suspended 
and the Secretary Interior or any other authority competent in t hat  12 
behalf was restrained from proceeding departmentally against him 
without prior permission of this Court.  
23. On 14.7.2011 it was brought to the notice of the Court  that 
officers/members of the investigation team of Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi had been tra nsferred and posted back to the places where 
they were performing duties.  
24. One issue, which requires determination is , as to whether in 
order to nullify the order of this Court dated 01.07.2011 , reproduced 
hereinabove  whereby Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi wa s reposted as Add.  
DG FIA to conduct/supervise the investigation  in NICL cases , was 
ordered to be proceed ed departmentally  in pursuance of letter dated 
2nd July, 2011 originated under the signature of Mr. Tehsin Anwar Ali, 
DG FIA. A perusal of this letter indicates that the allegations against 
Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi were that he had  leaked the official 
information to private channels about issuance of  letter by him to 
D.G., FIA for cancellation of transfer  orders in respect of some FIA 
officials . It was fu rther alleged that the said letter was issued without 
lawful authority and the copy of the same was sent to the Registrar of 
this Court and Secretary Interior without following proper channel. At 
this stage it would be appropriate to reproduce the latter d ated 
2.07.2011 issued by Mr. Zafar Ahme d Qureshi, which reads as under :- 
 
“The Director General  
Federal Investigation Agency  
Islamabad  
 
Subject:  Notification for transfer/posting orders No.A -
793/Admn/2011 dated 01.07.2011  
 Reference to your notification, t he following officials which 
were working as a team in N.I.C.L scam under the direct 
supervision of the undersigned has been transferred vide letter 
no.No.A -793/Admn/2011 dated 01.07.2011 may please be 
cancelled immediately in compliance of the order of th e Honourable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan No.S.M.C. No.18/2010, etc. –SCJ dated 
01.07.2011 (Copy enclosed). In which it has been directed  
“No interference of any nature whatsoever shall be caused either 
by D.G. FIA or by any other authority and he would take over the 
charge of the investigation of the cases of N.I.C.L scam at Lahore 
immediately and would be free to take all such steps and adopt all 
measures in discharge of his duties necessary for conducting 
transparent investigation.”  
  From  To 
1. Mr. Javed 
Hussain,  
Deputy Director 
(BS-18) Corporate Crime 
Circle, FIA, 
Punjab, Lahore  FIA, ACC, D.I. 
Khan, KPK Zone   13 
2. Mr. Muhammad 
Ahmed, Asstt. 
Director (BS -17) FIA, ACC Punjab 
Zone, Lahore  FIA, AHTC, 
Turbat 
Baluchistan 
Zone.  
3. Mr. Khalid Anees,   
Asstt. Dire ctor 
(BS-17) FIA, ACC Punjab 
Zone, Lahore  FIA, ACC  
Peshawar,  
Zone.  
4. Mr. Muhammad  
Sarwar , 
Inspector (BS -16) FIA, CBC Punjab 
Zone, Lahore  FIA, AHTC, 
Gowadar, 
Baluchistan 
Zone.  
 
The subject  transfer of N.I.C.L member team intentionally at far 
flung place s amounts to create hindrance and obstacles in the 
smooth process of investigation, which amounts to the non -
compliance of order of the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan.  
Please ensure strict compliance.  
 
Signature of joining officer  
(Capt.(Ret )Zafar Ah mad Qureshi)PSP  
Managing Director, National Police Foundation   
 
25. In pursuance of letter dated 2.7.2011 issued by Te hsin Anwar 
Ali, D.G. FIA, letter of explanation dated 2.7.2011 was issued by Afzal 
Latif, Joint Secretary (E), Cabinet Secretariat, Estab lishment Division 
to Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi , which reads as under: - 
 
“Subject:  EXPLANATION  
  The electronic media on the evening of July 2, 2011 
has been consistently carrying news items alleging that you have 
written a letter to Director General, FIA to  the effect that the 
transfers ordered by him of various officers of the FIA are 
irregular  and illegal and have asked the Director General, FIA to 
withdraw the said orders forthwith.  
2.  This news in the electronic media has not been 
contradicted by you, g iving the impression that the said news 
reports are correct.  
3.  Prima facie, your action s appear to violate provision 
of Rules 18 & 22 of the Government Servant (Conduct) Rules, 
1964.  
4.  You are hereby directed to explain why should not be 
proceeded agai nst under the E&D Rules, 1973, for misconduct.  
5.  Your explanation should reach the undersigned within 
24 hours of receipt of this letter, failing which it shall be presumed 
that you have no explanation to offer and you shall be liable to be 
proceeded aga inst under the Rules.  
 
(Afzal Latif)  
Joint Secretary(E) ” 
 
26. In response to the said letter, Zafar Ahmad Qureshi gave the 
following explanation: - 
 
“Subject:  EXPLANATION  
 Please refer to your two letters No.F.12(3)81e3(Police), 
dated 2.7.2011 (copies enclo sed).  14 
2. It is correct that I wrote a letter to DG FIA 
No.A/234/NPF/11/950 -52, dated 2.7.2011 (copy 
enclosed)whereby I requested that the officers working earlier 
assisting the investigation of NICL scam and the transfer of these 
officers who were assistin g me in the investigation of NICL scam 
should be cancelled as it would not be possible for me to complete 
the investigation of NICL scam as directed by the honourable 
Supreme Court of Pakistan (copy enclosed). However, I did not 
give the press release of t he news as I am a Government Servant 
and habitually avoid contact with the press.  
 
(Zafar Ahmad Qureshi)  
Managing Director/  
ADG FIA at Lahore  
3.7.2011”  
 
27. As far as the issue of committing misconduct by  Mr. Zafar 
Ahmed Qureshi  is concerned, it has to be examined in the background 
of the case a s well as the event s that have taken place after passing of 
the order dated 01.07. 2011, detail s of which have already been stated 
hereinabove, more particularly the registration of criminal cases vide 
FIRs No. 46/201 0 dated 27 .12.2010 and 05/2011 dated 27.1.2011 
against one Moonis Elahi son of Perve z Elahi, on account of which he 
was arrested and was subjected to investigation  along with other 
accus ed. It is pertinent to mention here that the  interim challan was 
submi tted in the said case s but in the meanwhile Malik Muhammad 
Iqbal, the then D.G. FIA , against whom matter for contempt of Court 
is pending and has been reserved for announcement of judgment, 
managed to ensure his disassociation from the case s. Detailed fact s in 
this behalf have already been noted in the preceding paragraphs .  
28. Facts noted hereinabove, Prima facie , support to infer that after 
registration of FIRs against Moonis Elahi  and others , efforts were 
accelerated to disassociate Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qure shi from the 
investigation of the said case s. It is to be noted that during the 
investigation  of the case s, Mr. Zafar Ahmed  Qureshi approached to 
Serious Organized Crime Agency (SOCA) , UK, through  Mirza Sultan M. 
Saleem, the then Additional Director NCB/In terpol FIA Headquarters, 
and succeeded in obtaining  information from SOCA about the bank 
account of M oonis Elahi with EFG Private Bank Ltd. , having a balance 
of £ 1,138,792.53, in the name of a company owned by him and 
another account in Barclays Bank in the name of Beenish Khan (wife of 
Mohsin Habib Warraich) having a balance of  £ 102,307.63 (transferred  15 
from the account in EFG Private Bank Ltd.). This fact has b een 
disclosed in the report submitted in the Court on 25 .07.2011 in 
pursuance of earlier directions made by this Court. The report further 
indicates that the said amount has been allegedly transferred from 
NICL transactions . The said fact has also been adm itted by the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan during hearing of the case.  
29. Above facts , inter alia,  if proved in Court of law, can entail 
serious consequences. As such it was felt necessary for vested interest 
to block re -association of Zafar Ahmad  Qureshi, with the cases in 
pursuance of ord er of this Court dated 1.7.2011, t herefore, allegedly 
efforts continued at different levels . This fact ha d also received 
sufficient corroboration  from the reports published in print media  on 
5.7.2011  and 6.7.2011 , wherein it has been reported that the 
suspension of Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi  from service  was a result of 
political intervention . Abstracts from some of the leading newspapers 
are given below for reference: - 
05.07.2011  
 
THE NEWS INTERNATIONAL  
 
SC snubbed as Qureshi suspended for ‘talking’  
 
In what appears to be a direct rebuff to the Supreme Court, the 
government has once again thwarted the SC’s efforts to force the 
investigation of the Rs.5 billion NICL scam through a particular 
officer, by suspending Add itional Director General FIA, Zafar 
Qureshi, within 72 hours of his reinstatement, on the ruse of 
talking to media without departmental authorisation.  
… Qureshi had been forcibly brought back to head the 
investigations when the supreme court, on July 1st, cancelled his 
earlier transfer orders and forced the executive to reassign the 
multi-billion rupee National Insurance Company Limited scam to 
him. The Supreme Court had also directed the DG FIA, on Friday 
to provide full assistance to Qureshi in investigat ions. … 
 
The case was of particular import to the ruling PPP for two 
reasons. Firstly, it involved Moonis Elahi, the scion of the Gujrat 
Chaudrys whose support is critical for the government to survive 
in parliament; and secondly, the Gillani led executive  appears in 
no mood to accept the precedence of the judiciary directing the 
executive on how to run its house.  
 
……… Another source however insisted that the decision to 
suspend Qureshi had actually been taken in a meeting between 
Prime Minister Yusuf Raza  Gillani, Rehman Malik and Chaudry 
Pervez Elahi . 
 
THE NEWS INTERNATIONAL   
 
The four options Qureshi was given but rejected  
  16 
One of the most powerful ministers summoned the FIA Additional 
Director General Zafar Qureshi on Sunday and gave him four 
options: l eave the country immediately; go on a long leave; tell 
the Supreme Court in writing that he cannot continue with the 
NICL investigation for personal reasons; and, if all the three are 
not possible, then bail out Moonis Elahi, the son of the Chaudhry 
Pervez  Elahi, the new coalition partner of the PPP government , 
The News has learnt.  
 
Credible interior ministry sources told The News that the minister 
told Qureshi that because of his investigations, the government 
alliance was in danger and the government migh t fall as a result 
of the completion of his investigations.  Hence, he (Qureshi) 
should not be a part of destabilising the government.  
 
It was also learnt that the Chaudhrys of Gujrat have made it clear 
to the government that if Qureshi came back to Lahore  and 
started his work on the NICL scam, the PML -Q will no more be a 
part of the PPP government. It is also worth mentioning that 
besides Moonis Elahi, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani’s son is 
also involved in the NICL scam worth billions of rupees . Accor ding 
to experts, the finding of crucial evidence by Qureshi against the 
sons of the two top leaders was the major reason for the 
formation of the new alliance of PPP with the PML -Q. 
 
THE EXPRESS TRIBUNE INTERNATIONAL  
 
NICL lead officer: Reinstated by the c ourt, ousted by the 
government  
 
The rigmarole over the posting of an additional director general of 
the FIA, which has played out over the last few months between 
the executive and judiciary, has taken yet another twist.  
 
Finally reinstated on Friday by th e Supreme Court to the post of 
the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA)’s lead investigator of a 
multibillion rupee scam, Zafar Qureshi was sent packing once 
again on Monday – this time in the form of a suspension.  
 
…… In the meeting with Malik on Sunday, so urces The Express 
Tribune that Qureshi had allegedly given three options: Go on 
long leave, declare that Moonis Elahi was “not guilty” or face 
severe action . 
 
It was said that Qureshi did not respond favourably.  
Qureshi had refuted charges of interacting w ith the media, 
explaining that copies of the order were sent to the secretary 
interior, DG FIA and the registrar of the Supreme Court, saying 
that this increased the chance of it being leaked to the media. He 
also explained that he had not done anything on  his own and he 
was only complying with orders of the apex court. He said that he 
had neither called any press conference nor issued any press 
statement in this regard.  
 
THE DAILY DAWN  
 
NICL scam investigator suspended   
 
The government on Monday suspended Zafar Hussain Qureshi, an 
Additional Director General of the Federal Investigation Agency 
who was investigating the National Insurance Company Limited 
(NICL) financial scam in which the elder son of federal minister 
Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi is the main accus ed. 
 
The Supreme Court had ordered bringing back Mr Qureshi to the 
NICL investigations – the assignment from which he was removed  17 
in April this year, apparently to appease PML -Q leaders Chaudhry 
Shujaat Hussain and Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi.  
 
………… According t o sources in the prime minister’s secretariat, 
the decision to suspend Mr Qureshi was taken after a meeting 
earlier during the day between the prime minister and the 
Chaudhrys. Interior Minister Rehman Malik attended the meeting, 
too. 
 
According to the sou rces, the government had assured PML -Q 
leaders that it would help secure the release of Mr Moonis Elahi 
once the party joined the ruling coalition . 
 
THE DAILY NATION  
 
Govt suspends Zafar Qureshi  
 
In yet another ugly turn in NICL corruption scandal investig ation, 
the federal government Monday night suspended a competent 
senior FIA officer, Zafar Ahmad Qureshi, on the pretext of his 
“speaking to media”.  
 
……… Significantly the suspension order for Zafar Ahmad Qureshi 
was issued after Senior Minister Prevaiz El ahi accompanied by 
Minister for Interior Rehman Malik called on Prime Minister Yousuf 
Raza Gilani. Prevaiz Elahi’s son Moonis Elahi is involved in the 
scam and he has been under detention for the last few months.  
 
With his restoration orders the apex court  had also directed FIA 
DG to facilitate ADG Qureshi in NICL scam investigation. But 
instead of facilitating the ADG, the DG on the very same day 
transferred all investigation team members assisting the ADG in 
the NICL case to remote and difficult posts . An FIA officer said 
that he was suspended only to teach him a lesson.  
 
THE DAILY TIMES  
 
Additional FIA DG Zafar Qureshi suspended  
 
National Police Foundation Managing Director and Federal 
Investigation Agency Additional DG Capt (r) Zafar Ahmad Qureshi 
has be en suspended after his explanation for his comments on 
the media were termed unsatisfactory after examination by the 
concerned authority. The competent authority has placed Qureshi 
under suspension by exercising power under rule 9 of the 
Government Servant s (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 1973 with 
immediate effect. According to the suspension order issued on 
Monday by the deputy secretary of the Interior Ministry, after 
approval from the competent authority, the said officer submitted 
his explanation wit hin stipulated time as given to him by the 
competent authority to explain the matter, which was found 
unsatisfactory. ……… The Supreme Court had only a few days 
back ordered reinstatement of Qureshi, who was suspended 
earlier by the government.  
 
06.07.2011  
 
THE NEWS INTERNATIONAL  
 
Qureshi had evidence of foreign accounts  
 
Suspension of FIA’s Zafar Qureshi has not only prevented the 
possible progress in NICL case but has also halted the suspended 
officer from pursuing an enquiry against his juniors for creati ng 
hurdles in his NICL probe, documents reveal.  
  18 
Zafar Qureshi wanted to proceed against the former DG FIA 
Waseem Ahmed for not cooperating and providing information 
about the foreign currency accounts of Moonis Elahi, received by 
the FIA headquarter from Serious Organized Crime Agency 
(SOCA) UK, which delayed the process to reach its logical 
conclusion.  
 
Sensing the gravity of the situation as Zafar Qureshi had started 
expanding his area of investigation former DG FIA Malik Iqbal 
stopped him from further p ursuing the matter by expressing his 
displeasure to Zafar Qureshi and stating that “under the pretext 
of investigation, you have started inquiries about the conduct of 
FIA officers”.  
 
THE NEWS INTERNATIONAL  
 
Interior Ministry says no options offered to Qur eshi 
 
The Interior Ministry has denied that Minister Rehman Malik gave 
four options to FIA officer Zafar Qureshi when they met in 
Islamabad, as reported by The News on Tuesday.  
 
The spokesman termed the news item false and concocted and 
clarified that Min ister for Interior had offered no such options to 
his subordinate Mr Zafar Qureshi. …… Mr. Qureshi met in the 
presence of secretary interior only on matters pertaining to 
National Police Foundation which was pre -arranged.  
 
Ahmad Noorani Adds:  Federal Inter ior Minister Rehman Malik in 
his clarification confirmed his meeting with Zafar Qureshi. The 
News story was based on credible information and was cross -
checked from different interior ministry sources . It is astonishing 
why Rehman Malik discussed matters r elating to National Police 
Foundation with Zafar Qureshi while he was working as ADG in 
FIA. The News will welcome any legal proceedings in this behalf 
and will present all kind of evidence in a court of law regarding 
Rehman Malik’s meeting with Zafar Qure shi and his offer of the 
four options as were mentioned in The News story and are 
reproduced in the Interior ministry clarification. The News stands 
by its story.  
 
30. From perusal of the above reports,  it stands  prima facie  
established that Mr. Zafar Ahme d Qureshi , after passing of order dated 
1.7.2011 by this Court allegedly  was given four options by the Federal 
Interior  Minister , reference of which has been made  in the news 
reports.  In addition to it , the news  items  also indicate that the political 
perso nalities joined their heads together for the purpose of flouting the 
order of this Court. Prima facie , the order of suspension of Mr. Zafar 
Ahmad Qureshi, based on vague assertions of addressing to media and 
thereby committing misconduct, is tantamount to make the order of 
this Court dated 1.7.2011 suspending the order of his transfer, 
ineffective.  In this behalf pictures of political persons having a 
meeting , have also been published.  It is to be noted that the news 
published in the above noted newspapers have not been rebutted 
except in one of the news papers i.e. The News International, where  19 
the Ministry  of Interior has contradicted the stand taken by the 
newspaper but  the newspaper  stood by its stor y.  Therefore, a 
question for determination has arisen.  At the same time the facts 
narrated hereinabove le ad us to believe that the suspension of Mr. 
Zafar Ahmad Qureshi is not based on reasonable and fair ground.  
31. The situation bec ame bad to worst when immediately after 
happening of the above said incide nts, a campaign  was launched 
against the judiciary by a specific group for the purpose of 
undermining the authority  of the Court . Transcription of advertisement 
is as under:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Secretary Information was directed to  personally look into the 
matte r and take necessary steps to ensure that the dignity of the 
judiciary is not undermined. In the meanwhile he had not submitted 
report, therefore, office ha d put up a not e as such he was directed to 
appear and submit report. Initially he made an attempt to  offer 
explanation but he was told in clear words that he had to submit 
report fixing the responsibility upon the specific group which ha d 
launched campaign against judiciary on the electronic media . On 
26.7.2011 Acting Secretary, Ministry of Information a nd Broadcasting 
submitted his report stating that he had telephonic conversation and 
had also wrote letters to the heads of the TV Channels and endorsed 
the copy of the same to the Chairman, Pakistan Broadcasters 
Association to assist M/o Information in th at matter  and to  provide the 
requisite detail of the perpetrators of the advertisement in question . 
He also assured that the M/o Information and Broadcasting is ready to  20 
sit with the private TV channels to work out a mechanism to prevent 
such unfortunate i ncidents in future.  
32. The above facts indicate that  allegedly political intervention has 
been made to make the judicial order dated 1.7.2011 passed by this 
Court ineffective. Under the circumstance s learned Attorney General 
was asked during the hearing of the case to obtain  reaction of the 
Interior Minister through Interior Secretary , reaction of Chief Executive 
through Principal Secretary as well as reaction of Secretary 
Establishment. Despite availing opportunities twice no progress was 
made in this beh alf. Inasmuch as , on the last date of hearing i.e. 
25.07.2011 another request was made for the adjournment of the 
case but not in so many words , therefore,  prima facie presumption 
had been  drawn that the material published by print media , referenc e 
of whic h has been made herein before , establishes  that the order dated 
1.7.2011 has been made ineffective due to alleged political 
expediency,  otherwise the functionaries could have denied these facts 
in black and white. We had observed about non filing of reactio n by 
the functionaries noted above in the order dated 25.07.2011 as well.  
33. It is to be noted that move to keep Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi 
disassociated from the investigation of the cases succeed ed as without 
legal and regular manner he was suspended, whe reas, there are cases 
pending before this Court noted below wherein, in very serious issues 
no suspension order has been passed: - 
? Maulvi Iqbal Haider v. Capital Development Authority (PLD 2006 
SC 394),  
? In the matter of:Human Rights Case No.4668 of 2006  (F-9 Park 
case)  (PLD 2010 SC 759),  
? In Ref: Suo Moto Case No.5 of 2010 (LNG case)  (PLD 2010 SC 
731).  
34. It is a matter of fact that through judicial verdict Mr. Kamran 
Lashari, former Chairman CDA was required to be proceeded against 
departmentally in Maulvi Iqbal Haider ’s case as well as in  F-9 Park’s 
case but presently he is performing as Secretary in one of the 
departments of the present regime. Whereas in instant case despite 
passing of order a person was suspended within the shortest possible  21 
time and apparently there was no object except to disassociate him 
from the investigation of the case  as it has been observed hereinabove  
because  the competent authority was not interested that he should 
continue with the investigation of the case s arising out of F IRs No .24, 
29 & 46/2010 and 05/2011 etc.   
35. It is important to note that the basis on which Mr. Zafar Ahmed 
Qureshi was suspended , does not seem to be sufficient to take 
extreme step against him because he ha d written letter on noticing 
that his members of the team had  been transferred factually in 
resentment of order of t his Court dated 01.07.2011, whereby  the DG 
FIA was directed to cooperate  with the investigation team but instead 
of considering his request in pursuance of observations of this Court in 
positive terms, these officers were t ransferred . Therefore, on 
07.07.2011, D.G. FIA was called upon to withdraw/reverse th eir 
transfer  orders but instead of obeying th e said order, on 11.07.2011  
he left for U.K. , although the orders dated 01.07.2011 and 07 .07.2011 
had been served upon him and the latter order was also passed in 
presence of the Attorney General  for Pakistan as well as Director Law 
Muhammad Azam Khan. Thus he proceed ed to defy the directions  of 
the Court,  therefore, the  Court had to intervene  by issuing the 
directions to Mr. Manzoor Chaudhry, Acting D.G. FIA to comply with 
the order dated 7.7.2011 and place on record the required notification 
of the transfer of the aforesaid officials. In the meantime, for violation 
of the order of the Court d ated 07.07.2011 matter was referred to the 
Secretary Establishment for initiating proceedings of misconduct 
against D.G. FIA for non -compliance of the order of the  Court dated 
07.07.2011. We were told that summary ha d been sent to the 
competent a uthority b ut no response ha d been rec eived. Contrary to 
it, he was holding the post of DG FIA whereas on the other hand Mr. 
Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, who had obeyed the Court order and stood for 
the rule of law despite threats etc. , advanced to him by the  political 
figures noted hereinbefor e and had shown his commitment to 
discharge his duties strictly in accordance with law , had been 
suspended for no other purpose except to make the order dated 
1.7.2011  ineffective .   22 
For achieving the object the functionaries had not only taken the 
stand on the basis of week plea but also accepted the political 
pressure as is evident from the facts noted hereinabove. It is equally 
important to note that  in the order dated 14 .07.2011 notice was 
issued to Tehsi n Anwar Ali, D.G. FIA  to expla in as to why  instead of 
burdening the exchequer the  costs of the transfer of these officers to 
different places may not be recovered from him. This notice was also 
served upon him but he did not opt to appear or to file reply desp ite 
issuing repeated direc tions, during the hearing of the case, to appear 
before this Court through Ch. Manzoor Ahmed, Additional Director 
Genera l, FIA as well as the Attorney General . In this behalf the 
Registrar of this Court was also directed to establish contact with him 
to attend the Court but despite  efforts of the Court , he not only failed 
to appear before the  Court  but also left Islamabad , although  initiall y 
impression was given that he wa s coming to attend the Court. 
Contents of the report received from the Registrar in th is behalf  are 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“As per Court direction to direct DG, FIA to appear before Bench 
No.I, initially call was made on telephone No.9260093 at about 
12:00 noon, the Operator (Mr. Nisar) responded that DG, FIA is 
on the way to reach the Su preme Court. After a while the same 
number was contacted again to inquire about the DG, FIA, this 
time the said Operator changed his statement by saying that DG, 
FIA has not come to the Office today, and in his knowledge he has 
gone to the Supreme Court in  connection of some case.  
Mr. Iqbal, PA/LDC was also contacted on the above -said phone 
number who responded that he has no information about the DG, 
FIA. He was asked to give the contact number of a responsible 
officer through whom DG, FIA can be contacte d and he gave the 
number of Mr. Waseem Ahmed, Chief of Staff to the DG, FIA. He 
was contacted on his mobile number i.e. 0300 -8433555 who 
stated that he is on leave at Lahore but according to his 
information DG, FIA has left for Karachi in the morning. When  he 
was contacted again at about 12:30 pm, he responded that DG, 
FIA is in the flight for Karachi and will land there after half an 
hour, after which he will convey the Order to him.  
The DG, FIA was contacted several times on his cell number 
(03008456468)  but was not responding.  
Submitted.  
       25.7.2011 ”  23 
36. From the above noted facts , it is not difficult to deduce  that 
different  device s have been adopted to make the order of th e Court  
dated 1.7.2011  ineffective with clear intention not to implement the  
same  and even if th e said  order is implemented , he (Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi) would be helpless to investigate  the criminal cases  as his 
team had been transferred to far flung areas of provinces of KPK and 
Balochistan. As has already been observed that ord inarily this Court 
does not intervene in the functioning of the Executive but it has been 
empowered, while exercis ing the powers of judicial review , to examine 
the administrative orders as well. Admittedly the competent authority 
has been vested with the d iscretion to pass administrative orders but 
such discretion has to be exercised in accordance with law. In the 
instant case there were certain allegations against Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi and a show cause notice was issued , which was replied by 
him. On the basis of material, without con sidering the reply filed by 
him, the person who called for his explanation though not empowered 
for the same under Government Servants ( Efficiency & Discipline) 
Rules, being in grade -21. Without prejudice to the proceeding, no  such 
notice to call for his explanation within 24 hours was warranted under 
the E & D Rules. It has also been admitted by the learned Attorney 
General that it was not issued under Rule 6 of the E & D Rules, 1973 
for misconduct rather the same was issued t o get his response about 
the allegations. It is evident from the record that the order of 
suspension was issued by the person who was not competent as the 
verbal orders  were  obtained from the competent authority , later on  
confirmed by the Principal Secreta ry to the Prime Minister. Admittedly, 
no incriminating material was produced except a letter and even 
without considering the fact that whether reply was given or not.  
37. It is well settled principle of law  that where a procedure has 
been provided for do ing a thing in a particular manner that thing 
should be done in that manner and in no other way or it should not be 
done at all; indeed it impliedly prohibits doing of thing in any other 
manner; the compliance for such thing in no way could be either 
ignored or dispensed with. Reference in this behalf may be made to 
the cases of E.A.Evans v. Muhammad Ashraf (PLD 1964 SC 536), Atta 
Muhammad Qureshi v. The Settlement Commissioner (PLD 1971 SC  24 
61), Muhammad Yousaf Khan v. Muhammad Ayub (PLD 1972 
Peshawar 151) and Dost Muhammad v. Government of Balochistan 
(PLD 1980 Quetta 1). Be that as it may, in absence of any material 
available on record the competent authority has exercised the 
discretion. There are certain norms for exercise of discretion. We are 
not chall enging the discretionary powers of the executive but the same 
have to be exercised judicially and in reasonable manner as held in the 
case of Tariq Aziz -ud-Din: in re  (2010 SCMR 1301) . The authorities 
cannot be allowed to exercise discretion at their whims , sweet will or 
in an arbitrary manner; rather they are bound to  act fairly, evenly and 
justly. Reference may be made to the case s of Abid Hussain v. PIAC  
[2005 PLC (CS) 1117], Abu Bakar Siddiqu e v. Collector of Customs  
(2006 SCMR 705),  Walayat Ali v. PIAC  (1995 SCMR 650) .   
38. In the case of Sharp v. Wakefield  [1891 AC 173] Lord Halsbury 
has observed that when it is said that something is to be done within 
the discretion of the authorities , it means  that something is to be done 
according to the rules of r eason and justice, not according to private 
opinion, according to law and not humour. It is to be, not arbitrary, 
vague, and fanciful, but legal and regular. And it must be exercised 
within the limit, to which an honest man competent to discharge of his 
office ought to confine himself.  The said case was relied upon by 
Indian Supreme Court in the case of  Union of India v. Kuldeep Singh  
[2004(2) SCC 590 ].  
 In the cases of State of U.P. v. Mohammad Nooh  (AIR 1958 SC 
86), Pratap Singh v. State of Punjab  (AIR 1 964 SC 72) and Fashih 
Chaudhary v. D.G. Doordarshan  [(1989) 1 SCC 189] , it has been held 
that i f the act complained of is without jurisdiction or is in excess of 
authority conferred by statute or there is abuse or misuse of power, a 
Court can interfere. In  such an eventuality, mere fact that there is 
denial of allegation of mala fide or oblique motive or of its having 
taken into consideration improper or irrelevant matter does not 
preclude the court from enquiring into the truth of allegations leveled 
again st the authority and granting appropriate relief to the aggrieved 
party. Referenc e in this behalf may be made to the case of M.I. 
Builders Pvt. Ltd. v. Radhey Shyam  [(1999) 6 SCC 464] wherein it has  25 
been held that the decision is unlawful if it is one to w hich no 
reasonable authority could have come.  In the case of Delhi Transport 
Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress  (AIR 1991 SC 101 ) the Court 
held that the d iscretion enjoyed by the persons holding high offices 
should not be left t o the good sense of ind ividuals and  repelled the 
presumption that person holding high office does not commit wrong. 
Relevant paras therefrom are  reproduced as under: - 
"There is need to minimize the scope of the arbitrary use of 
power in all walks of life. It is inadvisable to de pend on the good 
sense of the individuals, however high -placed they may be. It is 
all the more improper and undesirable to expose the precious 
rights like the rights of life, liberty and property to the vagaries 
of the individual whims and fancies. It is t rite to say that 
individuals are not and do not become wise because they occupy 
high seats of power, and good sense, circumspection and 
fairness does not go with the posts, however high they may be. 
There is only a complaisant presumption that those who oc cupy 
high posts have a high sense of responsibility. The presumption 
is neither legal nor rational. History does not support it and 
reality does not warrant it. In particular, in a society pledged to 
uphold the rule of law, it would be both unwise and impo litic to 
leave any aspect of its life to be governed by discretion when it 
can conveniently and easily be covered by the rule of 
law..............  
25. The "high authority" theory so -called has already been 
adverted to earlier. Beyond the self -deluding and self-asserting 
righteous presumption, there is nothing to support it. This 
theory undoubtedly weighed with some authorities for some 
time in the past. But its unrealistic pretensions were soon 
noticed and it was buried without even so much as an ode to it.  
Even while Shah, J. in his dissenting opinion in Moti Ram Deka 
v. General Manager, N.E.P. Railways, Maligaon, Pandu,  (1964) 5 
SCR 683: (AIR 1964 SC 600) had given vent to it, Das Guptam 
H. in his concurring judgment but dealing with the same point of 
unguided provisions of Rule 148(3) of the Railways 
Establishment Code, had not supported that view and had struck 
down the rule as being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. 
The majority did not deal with this point at all and struck down 
the Rule as b eing void on account of the discrimination it 
introduced between railway servants and other government 
servants."  
In the cases of  E.P.Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu  (AIR 1974 
SC 555 ), R.D. Shetty v. International Airport Authority  [(1979) 3 SCC 
489],  Manek a Gandhi v. Union of India  [(1978) 1 SCC 248],  Ajay 
Hasia v. Khalid Mujib  [1981(1) SCC 722 ], Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. 
v. Union of India  [1990 (3) SCC 223] the Supreme Court ruled that 
every arbitrary action, whether in the nature of legislative or 
admin istrative or quasi -judicial exercise of power, is liable to attract  26 
the prohibition of Article 14 of the Indian Constitution.  In the case of 
State of NCT of Delhi and another v. Sanjeev alias Bittoo  [(2005) 5 
SCC 181] the court w hile holding that decision is irrational and Court 
may look into the material on record , uphold the right of judicial 
review , on the basis of illegality in decision making process coupled 
with irrational ity and perversity. It was further held that if the 
administrative or judicial p ower has been exercised on non -
consideration or non -application of mind to relevant factors, such 
exercise shall stand vitiated. Relevant portion from the judgment is 
reproduced as under: - 
"If the power has been exercised on a non - consideration or 
non-application of mind to relevant factors, the exercise of 
power will be regarded as manifestly erroneous. If a power 
(whether legislative or administrative) is exercised on the basis 
of facts which do not exist and which are patently erroneous, 
such exercise o f power will stand vitiated."  
 
39. It is an unwritten rule of the law  that whenever a decision -
making function is entrusted to the subjective satisfaction of a 
statutory functionary, there is an implicit obligation to apply his mind 
to pertinent and proxim ate matters only, eschewing the irrelevant and 
the remote. [ Smt. Shalini Soni v. Union of India {(1980) 4 SCC 544 }]. 
By now, the parameters of the Court's power of judicial review of 
administrative or executive action or decision and the grounds on 
which t he Court can interfere with the same are well settled. 
Indisputably, if the action or decision is perverse or is such that no 
reasonable body of persons, properly informed, could come to or has 
been arrived at by the authority misdirecting itself by adopti ng a 
wrong approach or has been influenced by irrelevant or extraneous 
matters the Court would be justified in interfering with the same. 
[Commissioner of Income Tax v. Mahindra  (AIR 1984 SC 1182)]. The 
exercise of constitutional powers by the High Court a nd the Supreme 
Court , under the relevant Article s, have been categorized  as power of 
"judicial review". Every executive or administrative action of the State 
or other statutory or public bodies is open to judicial scrutiny and the 
High Court or the Supreme  Court can, in exercise of the power of 
judicial review under the Constitution, quash the executive action or 
decision which is contrary to law or is violative of Fundamental Rights  27 
guaranteed by the Constitution. With the expanding horizon of Article s 
dealing with Fundamental Rights, every executive action of the 
Government or other public bodies, including Instrumentalities of the 
Government , or those which can be legally treated as "Authority", if 
arbitrary, unreasonable or contrary to law, is amenable t o the writ 
jurisdiction of th e Supreme Court or the High Courts and can be validly 
scrutinised on the touchstone of the Constitutional mandates. 
[Common Cause, A Regd. Society v. Union of India  (AIR 1999 SC 
2979)].  
40. It is to be noted that t he object of suspending an officer from 
duty during the pendency of an inquiry is that he should not be 
allowed to tamper with documentary and oral evidence likely to be 
produced in his case. This object, as has been observed above, can be 
achieved in a very short time  and if the case is likely to take more 
time then the easiest way to avoid it is to transfer him to some other 
department, so that he may not be able to tamper with the evidence 
that may be produced against him. Undoubtedly under, the Service 
Rules there i s ample power with the Government to suspend a 
Government servant both as a measure of penalty and during the 
pendency of the departmental enquiry. But all actions taken under 
these rules must be based on the principles of natural justice, 
otherwise there was no need to frame them. The power of suspension, 
therefore, must be exercised in a reasonable and fair manner. The 
moment the effect of the exercise of such power is found to be unfair 
and unjust, the Government servant, will be entitled to challenge it , 
and Courts of law if satisfied that such orders are based on arbitrary 
exercise of power will not hesitate to set them aside as they will be in 
clear violation and breach of statutory rules. [Allauddin v. Chief 
Commissioner (PLD 1959 Karachi 282) ]. Under the circumstances 
when this Court is already seized with the matter regarding 
enforcement of fundamental rights in respect of corruption of huge 
amount belonging to the nation, it is obliged to exercise its jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) read with Arti cle 187 of the Constitution to 
examine the vires of the order of suspension. As it has been noted 
earlier , no reaction from the competent authority has been filed 
despite of various adjournments in the case i.e. 7.7.2011, 13.7.2011,  28 
14.7.2011, 15.7.2011 an d 18.7.2011,  therefore, in the given facts and 
circumstances examination of the same in exercise of powers of 
judicial review is permissible .  
41. The suspension of Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi as has been taken 
place during the pendency of the matter before th is Court followed by 
the order dated 1.7.2011, therefore, called for exercise of power of 
judicial review because an action which is not legal and re gular and is 
arbitrary, vague and fanciful has to be declared to be coram non judic e 
in the eye of law.  Therefore, we are of the opinion that the suspension 
order of Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi dated 4.7.2011 followed by another 
order passed later on, is not sustainable in eye of law and the 
discretion by the competent authority has been exercised  contrary to 
the settled principles of law noted above .  
42. In addition to above principle this Court is not debarred to 
exercise a jurisdiction for ensuring fair investigation of the cases with 
no other intention except to bring the accused to book who are 
involved in the  cases of corruption which is menace against the 
nation/ society and during the course of commission of offence if prima 
facie they have looted the money and ha ve also succeeded in taking it 
outside the country.  In India a matter was brought to the Supreme 
Court complaining that CBI and other agencies have failed to 
investigate into the offences because of the alleged involvement of 
important politicians, bureaucrats and criminals, who all were 
recipients of money from unlawful sources given for unlawful 
considerations. The Court in Jain Hawala case  observed that , “the 
continuing inertia of the agencies to even commence a proper 
investigation could not be tolerated any longer. In view of the 
persistence of that situation, it becomes necessary as the proceedin gs 
progressed to make some orders which would activate the CBI and the 
other agencies to at least commence a fruitful investigation. Merely 
issuance of a mandamus directing the agencies to perform their task 
would be futile and, therefore, it was decided t o issue directions from 
time to time and keep the matter pending requiring the agencies to 
report the progress of investigation so that monitoring by the court 
could ensure continuance of the investigation. It was, therefore, 
decided to direct the CBI and other agencies to complete the  29 
investigation expeditiously, keeping the court informed from time to 
time of the progress of the investigation so that the court retained 
siesin of the matter till the investigation was completed and the charge 
sheets  were fi led in the competent court for being dealt with, 
thereafter, in accordance with law. ” [Vineet Narain v. Union of India  
(AIR 1998 SC 889)] .  
43. In the case of Bank of Punjab v. Haris Steel Industries (PVT) Ltd.  
(PLD 2010 SC 1109), the m atter related to one  of the gravest 
financial scams in the banking history of Pakistan as a result of 
which the Bank stood cheated of an enormous amount of around 
eleven billion rupees which in fact belonged to around one million 
innocent depositors holding small accounts  of money whose life 
savings and property had come under serious threat causing thus 
an obligation on Supreme Court to move to protect and defend the 
property rights of such a large section of population. Contention 
was raised that Supreme Court had no jurisdi ction to control 
investigation of a criminal case and the reasons offered in support 
of the contention was that such a control over the investigation of 
criminal case by Supreme Court could be prejudicial to the 
accused. The Court held that the approach of  a court of law while 
dealing with criminal matters had to be dynamic keeping in view 
the facts and circumstances of each case and also the surrounding 
situation prevailing in the country; it would have been felonious 
and unconscionable on the part of Supreme Court if it had refused 
to intervene to defend the fundamental rights of such a large 
section of the public and leaving it only to the concerned officials of 
the NAB who had done nothing at all in the matter for almost two 
years and who had remained on ly silent spectators of entire drama 
and had only witnessed the escape of the accuse persons to foreign 
lands; it was to check and cater for such kind of gross negligence 
nonfeasance and malfeasance that the framers of the Constitution 
had obligated the Hi gh Court under Article 199 and Supreme Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution to intervene in the matter 
exercising their power to review the administrative and executive 
actions.   
  30 
44. In view of the above facts and circumstances, we hold that: - 
1. The order dated 4.7.2011 and or any other order , 
suspending Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi, Additional D.G. FIA  
from service have been passed to render the 
judgment/order dated 1.7.2011 ineffective and non -
operative . Thus, order dated 4.7.2011 suspending Mr. 
Zafar  Ahmad Qureshi or any other order, is quashed/set 
aside. He shall be deemed to have been on duty as 
Additional D.G. FIA pursuant to the order of this Court 
dated 1.7.2011.  
 
2. Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi, Addl. D.G. is hereby directed to 
carry out investigation o f the cases registered vide FIRs 
No.24, 29 & 46/2010 and 05/2011 etc., forthwith. He shall 
complete investigation of the cases expeditiously.  
 
3. The D.G. FIA, Additional D.G. FI A, Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi and other government authorities shall take steps 
to e nsure that public money sent abroad noted 
hereinabove, shall be brought back. The D.G. FIA and 
others shall not create hindrance in the investigation being 
conducted by Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi, Addl. D.G, under 
the direction of this Court.  
 
4. In pursuance of  order dated 13.7.2011 passed by this 
Court, no  action shall be taken against Mr.  Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi without prior approval of this Court. The 
investigation team, which had already been assisting him, 
would join him as team mate s, unless he wants otherwis e.  
 
5. On having made the order dated  1.7.2011 ineffective , 
prima facie  interference has been made in the judicial 
function ing of this Court as a result whereof not only the 
authority of the Court has been eroded but at the same 
time the  investigation of the  NICL cases have been badl y 
hampered, resultantly  investigation has  come to stand still , 
no progress has been  made and looted money,  which has  31 
been taken outside the country is not likely to come back 
unless the investigation of the case is conducted serio usly 
and the Government provides support to the prosecution 
instead of withdrawing its support .  
 
6. Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi, Addl. D.G. shall be submitting 
fortnightly report about the progress of the investigation 
duly countersigned by the D.G. FIA to Mr. J ustice Amir 
Hani Muslim for perusal in Chambers.  
 
7. Prima facie suspension order dated 4.7.2011 of Mr. Zafar 
Ahmad Qureshi i s the result of political intervention in the 
affairs of this Court and it requires to be determined 
accordingly in view of facts and circumstances narrated 
above, which also includes pressurizing Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi by the high -ups to dissociate him  from the 
proceedings of the cases, a s a follow up political 
expediency , which has been widely reported by the print 
media , refer red to hereinabove, coupled with propaganda 
on electronic media against judiciary by issuing 
advertisements . The private T.V. Channels m ight have 
declined to indulge in such campaign  but the T.V. channel s 
being operated commercially prima facie can not be 
blamed , however, the persons  or a specific group who 
have provided  finances for this purpose are required to be 
dealt with  in accordance with  law. 
 
8. As it has been held above that prima facie  Mr. Zafar 
Ahmad Qureshi, Addl. D.G. was suspended due to political 
intervention followed by propaganda against judiciary on 
electronic media to undermine its authority , there fore, to 
ascertain these and ancillary questions  Mr. Justice Ghulam 
Rabbani , Hon’ble Judge of this Court  is appointed to 
conduct enquiry and submit report  on the basis of 
evidence , which he will be empowered to collect to 
determine :  
  32 
(i) Whether before suspending Mr. Zafar Ahmad 
Qureshi, pressure was exerted upon him by the 
Interior Minister etc. as it has been reported in the 
newspapers due to political exped iency, if so, to what 
consequences?  
(ii) Responsibility shall be fixed individually or collectively 
against the persons responsible for making 
investment to run the campaign against the judiciary 
on the electronic media as it has been noted 
hereinabove. On havi ng determined the particulars of 
the persons responsible for launching the propaganda 
campaign against the judiciary  what action against 
him and or them is called for, to maintain the dignity 
and honour of the Courts.  
 
We would expect from him to complete  the inquiry 
expeditiously in the interest of justice.  
 
9. Mr. Sajid Mehmood Qazi, Addl. Registrar of this Court is 
deputed to facilitate Hon.ble Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
during inquiry. Similarly the Federal Secretaries including 
Secretary Interior, Secretary Establishment, and Secretary 
Information shall provide assistance, whatsoever is 
required by him to complete the report.   
 
 
Adjourn to a date in office.  
Chief Justic e 
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
Announced in open Court on 08.08.2011 at Islamabad  
 
      Mian Shakirullah Jan, J.  
Approved For Reporting.     