IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
 
Mr. Justice Iftikahr Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal  
Mr. Justice Raja Fayyaz Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Sair Ali  
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice Ghulam Rab bani 
 
SUO MOTU CASE No.24 of 2010  
 
(Regarding Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in 2010)  
 
Human Rights Cases No.57701 -P, 57719 -G, 57754 -P, 58152 -P, 
59036 -S, 59060 -P, 54187 -P & 58118 -K of 2010  
 
(Applications by Abdul Rasheed & others)  
 
On Court notice:    Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser,  
Addl. AG, Punjab   
Syed Arshad Hussain Shah,  
Addl. AG, KPK   
Mr. Azam Khattak, Addl. AG Balochistan  
Mr. Muhammad Mir Qasim Jat, ASC 
(on behalf of AG, Sindh )  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
For Member s of Committee  Nemo  
of Parliamentarians:    
 
Former Minister S&T:   Senator Muhammad Azam Khan   
     Sawati  in person   
 
For former Minister   Mian Khalid Habib Elahi, ASC  
Religious Affairs:    Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
 
For M/o Religious Affa irs:  Mr. Shaukat Hayat Durrani,  Secretary  
 
For former Secretary   Mr. Ahmar Bilal Soofi, ASC  
Religious Affairs :     
 
For Establishment  Division:  Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Abdur Rauf Ch, Secy.  
Mr. Khalid Akhlaq Gil lani, Addl. Secy.  
Mr. Muhamma d Hafeez, J.S.  
Mr. Afzal Latif, J.S.  
     Mr. Muhammad Arshad  Khan , Dy. Secy.  SMC 24/2010 [HAJJ SCAM]  2 
 
For NAB:     Mr. Muhammad Akbar Tarar, Addl. PGA  
     Mr. Fauzi Zafar, ADPGA  
 
For FIA:     Syed Jaw ed Ali Bukhari,  Addl.DG  
     Incharge Investigation   
     Mr. Hussain Asghar,  Director   
     Mr. M. Azam Khan, Director (Law)   
     Mr. Muhammad Niaz, S.I. Police with   
     Rao Shakeel, former DG Hajj (in  
     custody)   
 
In C.M.A No.218/2011 :  Nemo  
 
For Tour Operators:   Nemo   
 
For Contract Officers:   Raja Muhammad Irshad, Sr. A SC 
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
Mr. M. Ilyas Khan, Sr. ASC  
Col. (R) Abdul Wahid Khan, SSP, ATC 
Karachi  
 
Date of hearing :    01.03.2011    
 
ORDER  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  – Syed Jaw ed Ali 
Bukhari, Addl. DG, FIA has submitted progress report, a perusal  
whereof indicates that no effective progress has been shown as is 
also evident from the reports , which were being sent on daily basis 
for perusal of one of us (Raja Fayyaz Ahmed, J.  in Chambers ). On 
perusal of the se repor ts, it has been concluded that –   
  “Plainly, it is reflected from the progress reports 
referred to above that deliberate delay has been and is 
being caused for reaching to the truth and in taking the 
pieces of incriminating material brought so far on record 
linking the accused persons to  its logical conclusion. 
These reports lack necessary particulars and details, 
which lead to no where.  
  It is also apparent from the steps taken during the 
course of investigation that in a way protection is being 
extended to the offenders so that eventu ally they can 
get rid of the offences to which they appear to have SMC 24/2010 [HAJJ SCAM]  3 
been exposed and to be escaped from lawful 
punishments likely to be awarded after trial.  
  Also, it does not transpire that the accused 
persons prima facie  involved in the case have been 
interrogated and if so whether during the course of 
interrogation all the substantial and material 
incriminating  points/material remained in the mind of 
the investigator or otherwise.  
  It seems quite evident that investigation in the 
case is not being con ducted independently and in a 
transparent manner, as well as; it can hardly be 
believed that in presence of the present D. G. FIA 
effective and impartial investigation in the case can be 
conducted in respect of whom specific observations have 
also recorded  by this Court in its order dated 10.2.2011 
and in the subsequent order dated 15.2.2011 
expressing dissatisfaction on the investigation being 
conducted in the case. ”  
 
2.   It is important to note that Syed Imran Ali Shah, who  
had made an allegation  that o ut of the misappropriated/defrauded 
amount of Hajj scam, one bullet proof vehicle  was purchased by 
Abdul Qadir Gillani through his friend Zain Iftikhar Sukhera  at UAE, 
which was brought to the latter’s residence at Sahiwal,  when called 
upon to furnish evid ence to substantiate allegation , failed to do so , 
as it is mentioned in the report in clear terms. We may observe here 
that on the basis of a bald and baseless allegation, such statement 
should not have been made  by Syed Imran Ali Shah. However, the 
Addl. DG may look into the matter and proceed against him if he 
considers that false information was furnished.  
 
3.   It is informed by the Addl. DG that efforts are being 
made to cause the arrest of the accused persons, but they are SMC 24/2010 [HAJJ SCAM]  4 
getting bails from the cour ts of law. However, it has been pointed 
out to him that they should approach the same court or the higher 
court and provide them assistance to pass appropriate orders under 
the law.  
4.   It is also complained by the Addl. DG that about four 
letters have b een sent to the State Bank of Pakistan for the purpose 
of furnishing details of bank accounts of accused Abdullah Khokhar, 
Syed Hamid Saeed Kazmi, Aftab -ul-Islam Raja and others, but so 
far no cooperation has been extended. The Governor State Bank is 
hereb y directed to cooperate with the FIA and issue instructions to 
the concerned authorities to do the needful.  
5.   Mr. Shaukat Hayat Durrani, Secretary Religious Affairs 
has submitted  a report, which is quite satisfactory as payment of 
Pak Rupees equal to SR 700  per pilgrim has already been made to 
99 % affected pilgrims. We appreciate the task, which has been 
completed by the Secretary and he may take further steps to 
distribute the left over amount to the remaining one percent  
pilgrims .   
6.   Mr. Abdul Ha feez Pirzada, Sr. ASC has stated that a 
Committee has already been constituted to look into the cases of 
persons who were appointed on contract basis. We may observe in 
loud and clear terms that appointment s on contract basis are not 
allowed to be continue d in terms of section 14 of the Civil Servants 
Act, 1973, and the Policy unless the conditions specified therein are 
satisfied. Apparently, it seems that the Government is not interested 
in obeying the order of the Court because so far the contract 
appoint ments of only 9 officers have been terminated whereas there 
is a list of more than 100 persons serving  on contract basis  in SMC 24/2010 [HAJJ SCAM]  5 
different capacities , including Secretaries awaiting orders  thereon . It 
is also to be noted that this Court has more than once obser ved that 
incumbent DG, FIA who himself is holding this post on contract basis 
in a disciplined force, is responsible for not allowing the investigation 
of the instant case to proceed in a transparent  manner , however , 
despite these observations, no action h as been taken against him. 
Mr. Pirzada has stated that the fate of DG, FIA will be decided within 
3 days and report shall be submitted to the Registrar of this Court 
for perusal in Chambers.  
8.   Let the main case be adjourned for a period of two 
weeks. I n the meanwhile, as already directed , the Addl. DG shall 
continue submitting report for perusal by one of us (Raja Fayyaz 
Ahmed, J  in Chambers ).  
 
 
    IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J.   
 
 
 
   JAVED IQBAL , J.  
 
 
 
RAJA FAYYAZ AHMED , J.  
 
 
MUHAMMAD SAIR ALI,  J.  
 
 
 
ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA, J.  
 
 
 
GHULAM RABB ANI, J.  
 
ISLAMABAD  
1st March , 2011  
 
 