IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmed Malik  
Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
JAIL PETITIONS N O.10 AND 50  OF 2016  
(Against the Judgment dated 26.10.2015 passed by  
Lahore High Court, Lahore in Cr.A. No.215 -J/2010)  
 
Muhammad Shahbaz Ali Khalid  
(in Jail Petition No.10/2016)   
 
Shujat Ali alias Tikka  
(in Jail Petition No. 50/2016)  
 
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
The State  
…Res pondent  
 
 
For the  petitioner (s): Mr. Muhammad Junaid Akhtar, ASC  
   
 
For the State:  Mirza Abid Majeed,  
 Deputy Prosecutor General, Punjab  
      
Date of hearing:  2.10.2019 . 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Muhammad 
Shahbaz Ali Khalid and Shujat Ali alias Tikka , while travelling in a 
public vehicle, were intercepted on 3.6.2009 within the precincts of 
Police Station Essakh el, District Mianwali ; the former had deceitfully 
clad himself in a veil, however, exposed on search , with a suicide vest 
wrapped  around his body; the explosive weighed 15 kilograms;  Shujat 
Ali was found carrying five leads along with detonators and electric 
fuses ; upon indictment, they claimed trial , culminating into their 
convictions  under Section 4 read with Section 5 -A of the Explosive 
Substances Act, 1908  read with Section 7(g) of the Anti Terrorism Act, 
1997 ; Shahbaz Ali Khalid was additionally convicted under Section 
419 of Pakistan Penal Code for impersonating himself as a female; 
they were sentenced to imprisonment for life  with forfei ture of their Jail Petitions No.10 and 50/2016  
 2
propert ies, Muhammad Shahbaz Ali Khalid with extra tag of three 
years Rigorous Imprisonment on the third count; their appeals met 
with no better fate in the High Court on 26.10.2015 albeit with 
reduction of imprisonment for life imposed upon Shujat Ali alias Tikka 
to ten years R.I.; as per report of Superintendent, High Security 
Prisons, Sahiwal dated 28.9.2019, he has since been released after 
serving out his sentence , however, since his property has been ordered 
to be confiscated, fate of hi s petition is also being decided alongside 
the present petition .  
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioners  has assailed the 
impugned judgment on a variety of grounds ; he emphatically stressed 
prosecution’s failures ranging from omissions on vital aspects of  the 
case, non -association of independent witnesses  admittedly available at 
the spot  to an inclusive expert report to conclusively establish lethality 
of the contraband . The learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the  
convictions and sentences conseque nt thereupon.   
3.  Heard.  
4.  The very genesis of the case is somewhat intriguing, 
inasmuch as , the crime report sans  some important details without 
any plausible explanation ; registration number of the vehicle  wherein 
the petitioners travelled  is conspic uously missing , in absence whereof,  
interrupted journey is relegated into a suspect detour. Similarly, crime 
report is also silent on the names of driver and cleaner of a public 
vehicle, if at all, the petitioners  were surpris ed therein. Despite an 
extensive search , police have not been able to retrieve the tickets, a 
surer means  within the realm of possibility,  to establish petitioners ’ 
journey with the contraband . Muhammad Shahbaz Ali Khalid’s  
interception , attired in feminine  garments  by the male personnel in the 
presence of public without a lady constable, that too, per chance , 
without prior information is a story that may not find a buyer.  
Prosecution’s reliance on the statement of Auliya Khan (PW -3) as an 
expert  to establish  explosive potential of the contraband is beside the 
mark in the face of admission by the witness that he was not an expert 
in the field  and as such hardly in a position to drive home the charge. 
Imprisonment for life is quite a span and an accused cannot be 
deprived of best portion of his life on slipshod, incoherent and suspect Jail Petitions No.10 and 50/2016  
 3
evidence  even in cases  with heinous  contours . In the totality of 
circumstances, prosecution case  cannot be viewed as entirely free from 
doubt and, thus, it would be unsafe to maint ain the conviction . 
Consequently, these petitions are converted into appeals  and allowed ; 
the impugned judgment is set aside ; the appellants are acquitted from 
the charge.  Shahbaz Ali Khalid, appellant shall be released forthwith , 
if not required in any other case .  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
2nd October, 2019  
Not approved for reporting  
Ghulam Raza /-  