IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Athar Minallah  
  
 
Criminal Misc. Appeal No. 6/ 2020 in  
Criminal Appeal No. Nil/2020 
[Against the order of the Registrar dated 17.01.2020]  
 
General (Retd.) Pervez Musharraf.      … Appellant  
 
Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan and others.     … Respondents  
 
 
For the Appellant:    Mr. Salman Safdar, ASC  
 
For the  Respondents:   N.R. 
 
Date of Hearing:    10.11.2023  
 
ORDER  
 
Qazi Faez Isa,  CJ. Learned Mr. Salman Safdar representing the appellant, 
General (Retd .) Pervez Musharraf, states that the appellant was convicted 
by a Special Court and had a right to prefer an appeal against his 
conviction under section 12(3) of the Criminal Law Amendment (Special 
Court) Act, 1976. The appellant was convicted vide judgment  dated 17 
December 2019 and the criminal appeal against such judgment was filed 
on 16 January 2020, which was within time as the said provision stipulates 
that a convict ‘ may prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court within thirty days 
of the passing of the ju dgment .’ However, the criminal appeal was not 
numbered as the Institution Officer of the office of the Supreme Court 
object ed to its filing as the appellant ha d not surrendered himself ; in this 
regard reliance was placed on the proviso to rule 8 of Order X XIII of the  
Supreme Court Rules, 1980.  
 
2. Against the said office objection , dated 17 January 2020, Criminal 
Miscellaneous  Appeal No. 6/2020 was filed on 14 February 2020 , which 
was put up for hearing in Chamber before Justice Umar Ata Bandial, as his Crl. M. A. No. 6/2020.  
 
 2
lordship then was, and, after noting the contentions of the learned counsel, 
he observed vide his order dated 25 February 2020 that, ‘ It would be 
appropriate that these points are considered by a Bench of this  Court. 
Accordingly, let the present C. M. Appeal be fixed before the Court for 
hearing. ’ However, the learned counsel states , the appeal was not fixed in 
Court till today , and the appellant passed away on 5 February 2023.  
 
3. The learned counsel relies on  the case which he had also cited before 
the learned Judge in Chamber , that is, Benazir Bhutto v State  (1999 SCMR 
1619) , and submits that it was fully applicable , in particular its paragraph 
11, at page 1628. He further states that in the Benazir Bhutto  case reliance 
was placed upon the decision in the case of Pakistan v General Public  (PLD 
1989 Supreme Court 6) wherein the Shariat Appellate Bench of this Court 
had directed that in the laws under consideration provisions be made for 
providing a right of app eal. He further states that a right of appeal also 
accords with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘the 
Constitution ’) as it is an adjunct to fair trial and due process  as provided in  
Article 10A  of the Constitution . 
 
4. We enquired from  the learned senior counsel, Mr. Hamid Khan, 
representing Mr. Taufiq Asif, learned senior counsel, Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, 
representing Sindh High Court Bar Association, learned Mr. Haroon -ur-
Rashid, Vice President of the Pakistan Bar Council, learned Hafiz Abdul 
Rehman Ansari, representing himself, in the connected matters fixed today, 
that is, CMA No. 677/2020, etc., whether they have any objection if 
Criminal Miscellaneous  Appeal No. 6/2020 is allowed and they as well as 
the learned Additional Attorney -General state that they have no objection to 
the extent of number ing of the criminal appeal  provided the question 
regarding the intervening death of the appellant will be considered later.  
 
5. It is unfortunate that despite the order of the learne d Judge in 
Chamber , directing that the said criminal miscellaneous appeal be fixed in 
Court this was not done till today  (10 November 2023 ), that is, the same 
was not fixed for a period of over three years and eight months for no 
discernable reason . For th is inordinate delay neither the appellant nor his 
counsel  can be faulted . This Court has repeatedly held that no one should 
be made to suffer on account of an act of Court , or as in this matter, on 
account of inaction. Even otherwise an appeal is the right of every convict . Crl. M. A. No. 6/2020.  
 
 3
Accordingly, Cr iminal Miscellaneous  Appeal No. 6/2020 , assailing the office 
objection , is allowed  and consequently the unnumbered criminal appeal be 
numbered. The record of the Special Court be summoned and be put up 
alongwith the said a ppeal for hearing in Court.  
 
6. The learned Mr. Salman Safdar states that he is in contact with the 
widow, son and daughter of the appellant and will be informing them that 
the appeal has been numbered and fixed for hearing and will be taking 
instructions from them.  
 
7. The said appeal be fixed in Court on Tuesday, 21 November 2023 
at 11.30 am  alongwith the abovementioned petitions.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
10.11.2023  
(Farrukh)  
Approved for Reporting  
 