IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original/ Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Athar Minallah  
 
 
Constitution Petition Nos. 32 and 36 of 2023  
 
Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan through  
its Secretary, Islamabad and others.  
(in Const. P. No. 32/23)  
 
Munir Ahmed.  
(in Const. P. No. 36/23)  
         … Petitioners  
     Versus  
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary,  
Cabinet Division, Islamabad and others.  
(in both Constitution Petitions)     
         … Respondent s 
And 
 
Civil Misc. Appeal Nos. 118 and 119 of 2023  in Const.P.NIL/2023  
 
Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf (PTI), Islamabad through  
its Secretary General and another.  
(in CM Appeal No. 118/23)  
 
Ibad-ur-Rehman Lodhi, ASC.  
(in CM Appeal No. 119/23)  
         … Appellants  
     Versus  
Election Commission of Pakistan through Chief  
Election Commissioner, Islamabad and others.     
(in CM Appeal No. 118/23)  
 
The Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan,  
Islamabad and others.  
(in CM Appeal No. 119/23)  
       … Respondent s 
 
For the Petitioners :  Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC.  
(In Const.P. No.32/23)    assisted by Miss Amna Khalili, Adv.  
and Agha Ali Durrani, Adv.  
Mr. Muqtadir Akhtar Shabbir, ASC.  
Mr. Shakeel -ur-Rehman, ASC.  
Ms. Bushra Qamar, ASC.  
Mr. Saim Chaudhry, ASC.  
 
Mr. Irfan Mir Halepota, ASC.  
(Through video -link from Karachi)     
   
For the Petitioner:    Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC.  
(In Const.P. No.36/23)    
  Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 2
 
For the Appellant:    Syed Ali Zafar, ASC.  
(In CM Appeal 118/23)    assisted by  
Syed Haider Ali Zafar, Ad v. 
 
For the Appellant:    Mr. Ibad -ur-Rehman Lodhi, ASC.  
(In CM Appeal 119/23)   
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
     Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
     assisted by  
     Maryam Ali Abbasi, Adv.,  
     Mr. Ahmed -ur-Rehman, Adv. and  
     Mr. Saad  Javid Satti, Adv.  
Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
     Additional Attorney General for Pakistan.  
 
For Govt. of Punjab:   Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Punjab.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh:   Mr. Saulat Rizvi,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Sindh.  
 
For Govt. of  
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa:   Mr. Sultan Mazher Sher Khan,  
     Additional Advocate -General, KP.  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Balochistan.  
 
For Islamabad  
Capital Territory :   Mr. Ayaz Shaukat,  
     Advocate -General, Islamabad.  
 
For the ECP:    Mr. Sajeel Sheryar Swati, ASC.  
     Mr. M. Arshad, DG (Law) ECP.  
     Mr. Khurram Shehzad, Addl. DG (Law) ECP.  
     Mr. Falak Sher, Legal Consultant, ECP.  
 
Date of Hearing:    03.11.2023.  
 
JUDGMENT  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . Constitution Petition No. 32 of 2023 was filed by the 
Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan by its Secretary and three 
Members, on 16 August 2023, and was represented by the learned Mr. Abid 
S. Zuberi. Constitution Petition No. 36 of 2023 was filed by Mr. Munir 
Ahmed, an Advocate of the High Court, on 13 September 2023, but he 
remained absent throughout and replaced his counsel with learned Mr. 
Anwar Mansoor Khan today, when matters stood almost concluded. The 
petitioners want early elections b ut surprisingly did not seek their petitions’ 
early hearing.  
 Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 3
2. Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 118 of 2023 was filed by the Pakistan 
Tehreek -e-Insaf (‘ PTI’) through its Secretary General, Mr. Omer Ayub, on 28 
August 2023, and PTI was represented by the l earned Mr. Ali Zafar and 
Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 119 of 2023 was filed by Mr. Ibad -ur-
Rehman Lodhi, an Advocate of the Supreme Court, against objections to 
their maintainability. Such appeals are usually heard by a Judge -in-
Chambers, but since the s ame relief was sought in the petitions these 
appeals too were ordered to be fixed in Court.  
 
3. The National Assembly was dissolved on the advice of the Prime 
Minister on 9 August 2023, and the Chief Ministers of the provinces 
advised the dissolution of th e provincial assemblies. The President of 
Pakistan was required to ‘ appoint a date, not later than ninety days from the 
date of the dissolution, for the holding of a general election to the Assembly .1 
And, the Elections Act, 2017 requires the notification of the Election 
Programme, including the date of the general election, as under:  
‘57. Notification of Election Programme.  (1) Subject to 
the Constitution, the Commission shall by notification in the 
official Gazette announce the date or dates, as the case may 
be, of the general elections. ’ 
 
4. However, general election is not being held within the stipulated 
period because of the belated conduct of the ‘7th Population and Housing 
Census, 2023’ (‘ the 7th Census ’). Census is held pursuant to section 31 of 
the General Statistics (Re -organization) Act, 2011. After a census is held 
the Council of Common Interest (‘ CCI’) approves it, pursuant to Article 
154(1) of the Constitution read with the ninth entry of Part -II of the Federal 
Legislative List.2 
 
5. The CCI had approved the previous census, the ‘6th Population and 
Housing Census, 2017’ (‘ the 6th Census ’), on 12 April 2021, that is after a 
period of about four years, and directed that the process of the next census 
be commenced:  
‘The CCI decided to approve the  Final Results of the 6th 
Population and Housing Census, 2017 in the larger national 
interest. The Decision was taken by majority vote, in terms of 
Rule 5(10) of the Rules of Procedure of the Council of 
Common Interests, 2010, as seven members supported th e 
approval of Final Census Result while the Chief Minster 
Sindh opposed it. The CCI directed that the process of next 
                                                
1 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 48(5)(a).  
2 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Fourth Schedule.  Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 4
Census should start as early as possible according to 
international best practices by using latest technology.’  
 
A proviso to Article 51( 5) of the Constitution was added on 22 December 
2017,3 stating:  
‘(5)  The seats in the National Assembly shall be allocated 
to each province and the Federal Capital on the basis of 
population in accordance with the last preceding census 
officially publishe d: 
  
‘Provided that for purposes of the next general elections to be 
held in 2018 and bye -elections related thereto, the allocation 
shall be made on the basis of provisional results of the 2017 
census which  shall be published by the Federal 
Government. ’ 
 
6. Pursuant to the decision of CCI taken on 5 August 2023 the 7th 
Census was carried out. However, since the proviso to Article 51(5) of the 
Constitution had restricted the application of the 6th Census to the ‘ general 
elections to be held in 2018  and bye -elections related thereto ’, it necessitated 
that another census be undertaken for the next general election, that is, 
the 7th Census.  
 
7. A census is followed by delimitation. Article 222(b) of the Constitution 
empowers Parliament to make laws providing for  the ‘ delimitation of 
constituencies ’, and Delimitation of Constituencies  is provided in Chapter III 
of the Elections Act, 2017. The Election Commission of Pakistan (‘ ECP’) 
issued notification dated 17 August 20234 setting out the ‘ schedule for 
carrying out of delimitation of constituencies afresh in accordance with the 
official result of 7th Population and Housing Cens us, 2023 ’. As per the ECP’s 
said notification, the first step towards delimitation was taken on 17 
August 2023 and the last action was the  ‘Final Publication of Delimitation ’ 
which is to take place on 14 December 2023; but, we were informed that an 
amendment was made on 1 September 2023 which brought forward the 
date of ‘ Final Publication of Delimitation ’ to 30 November 2023.  
 
8. Article 224 (2) of the Constitution also requires that general election 
‘shall be held within a period of ninety days after the dissolution ’. However, 
CCI took almost four years to approve the 6th Census, which delayed the 7th 
Census and in turn delayed delimitation. Section 57(2) of the Elections Act, 
2017 stipulates that within ‘ seven days of the announcement under sub -
                                                
3 Constitution (Twenty -Fourth Amendment) Act, 2017.  
4 No.F.9(1)/2021 -Elec-I. Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 5
section (1) ’ of section 57, the election programme is announced, which, we 
were told, requires a minimum period of 54 days.  
 
9. All the learned counse l are of the unanimous view that it is no longer 
possible to hold elections within ninety days of the dissolution of the 
assemblies. The learned Syed Ali Zafar by referring to Article 254 of the 
Constitution stated that if for the doing of any act a partic ular period is 
prescribed but it was not done within such period it would not render the 
act invalid or ineffective. Article 254 of the Constitution is reproduced 
hereunder:  
‘When any act or thing is required by the Constitution to be 
done within a particular period and it is not done within that 
period, the doing of the act or thing shall not be invalid or 
other -wise ineffective by reason only that it was not done 
within that period. ’ 
 
10. In three of the cases before us the President is arrayed as a 
respondent. Constitution Petition No. 36/2023 attaches a message of the 
President, conveyed through social media (X, formerly Twitter) calling for 
the views of the ECP on the announcement of a date for holding elections. If 
the said message was that of t he President, it leads one to question 
whether the country can be run on the basis of messaging on social media.  
 
11. The President of Pakistan and the ECP subsequently reached an 
impasse. The correspondence between the two ended with the President’s 
letter of 13 September 2023, which concluded:  
‘THEREFORE, taking into account all the above, the Election 
Commission of Pakistan in consultation with Provincial 
Governments and political parties under the relevant 
provisions of the Constitution and in view that  some of these 
matters are already subjudice, may seek guidance from the 
Superior Judiciary for announcement of a single date for 
general election to the National and Provincial Assemblies.’5 
 
 ECP confirms the receipt of the above letter, which we are inf ormed it 
did not reply to.  
 
12. We pointed out to the learned counsel, that if their contentions 
required the interpretation of the constitutional provision  it would attract 
section 4 of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023, and a 
larger bench in terms thereof would have to be constituted. But, all the 
learned counsel stated that at this juncture they only want general election 
                                                
5 President’s letter dated 13 September 2023 to the ECP filed with CMA No. 9293/2023.  Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 6
to be held and have no objection to this three -member Bench hearing the 
cases to achieve this objective.  
  
13. Therefore, in order to ascertain how soon the general elections could 
be held, notices were issued, and 2 November 2023 was fixed as the next 
date of hearing on which date the following order was passed:  
‘… the Election Commission of Pakistan’s (‘ECP’) co unsel 
states that the process of delimitation is underway, which 
will conclude on 30 November 2023, and publication of the 
final result of the delimitation will be by 5 December 2023. 
Thereafter, the election programme is to be announced in 
terms of sectio n 57(2) of the Elections Act, 2017, which 
provides certain timeframes and will conclude on 29 January 
2024. ’  
 
‘ECP’s counsel further states that to maximize public 
participation elections should ideally be held on a Sunday, 
and the first Sunday after the above timeframe would be 4 
February 2024. However, to enable political parties to convey 
their respective programmes and manifestoes it would be 
appropriate to hold elections on Sunday, 11 February 2024. ’  
 
‘Let the ECP meet with the President of Pakistan today and 
the date for holding general elections in Pakistan be 
appointed. In this regard, the Attorney -General for Pakistan 
will arrange such meeting and shall provide to the President 
this Court’s order of 23 October 2023 and today’s order, and 
be availa ble to render assistance. ’  
 
‘We expect that the matter of appointing a date for holding 
general elections shall be settled, and this Court will be 
informed tomorrow, that is, 3 November 2023. ’ 
 
14. The President in his letter (of 13 September 2023) had so ught 
guidance  from Superior Judiciary . The only possible avenue for the 
President to seek the Supreme Court’s opinion was by invoking Article 186 
of the Constitution, reproduced hereunder:  
‘186.  (1) If, at any time, the President considers that it is 
desir able to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court on any 
question of law which he considers of public importance, he 
may refer the question to the Supreme Court for 
consideration.  
 
(2) The Supreme Court shall consider a question so referred 
and report its op inion on the question to the President.’  
 
15. However, the President did not seek recourse to Article 186 requiring 
the Supreme Court to give its opinion. Needless to state, this was the only 
constitutionally permissible manner for the Supreme Court to provide 
guidance . The Supreme Court and the holde r of every constitutional office Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 7
and every constitutional body, including the President and the ECP, must 
act in accordance with the mandate of the Constitution. Abiding by the 
Constitution is not optional. It is equally important that no institution 
trans gresses into the constitutional jurisdiction of another. A matter which 
should have been dealt with by the President and the ECP was quite 
unnecessarily brought to this Court. Cognizant of the constitutional 
scheme and fully aware of the limit of our const itutional jurisdiction, we 
were careful not to encroach on the jurisdiction of the President, nor that of 
the ECP.  
 
16. Since the election date was not announced, concerns were rising 
amongst the people of Pakistan, where many of them apprehended that 
elections may be indefinitely postponed or not take place, which 
undoubtedly would cause irreparable damage to democracy and the 
country. Conscious of the Supreme Court’s lack of jurisdiction and careful 
not trespass on the jurisdiction of the President and of  the ECP, we 
encouraged them to meet and determine that which was within their 
constitutional domain. They met yesterday (2 November 2023) and the 
meeting proved to be a success.  
 
17. Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, the learned Attorney -General for 
Pakistan, broug ht a letter issued by the Secretary to the President,6 which 
states that, ‘ after a briefing by Election Commission of Pakistan followed by 
due deliberation, there was an agreement to announce the date of Thursday, 
8th February, 2024 for holding General Ele ctions ’. The ECP has also filed 
documents,7 including the minutes signed by the Chief Election 
Commissioner and the four Members of the ECP, which state, ‘ The 
Commission and the Honourable President during meeting in the President 
House agreed to appoint 8th February, 2024  as a poll date for General 
Election 2024. ’ The ECP has also issued a notification dated 3 November 
2023, which states that 8 February 2024 is the poll date  for general election 
to the National Assembly and the provincial assemblies. The learned 
Attorney -General, on behalf of the Federal Government, and the respective 
law officers, on behalf of the four provinces and the Islamabad Capital 
Territory, have also expressed their concurrence for the holding of general 
election on the said date.  
 
                                                
6 President Sectt. (Public)’s u.o. No. 7/3/2023/FA&PA dated 3rd November, 2023.  
7 CMA No. 9391/2023.  Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 8
18. The President of Pakistan and the ECP have announced the date for 
holding of general election to the National Assembly and to the provincial 
assemblies. The Federal Government, the Provincial Governments and the 
Islamabad Capital Territory have concu rred. The matter of the holding of 
general election on 8 February 2024 stands resolved. No one should now 
put forward any pretext to derail democracy.  
 
19. The higher the constitutional office or body the greater is the 
responsibility. Obedience to the Con stitution and law is an inviolable 
obligation of every citizen,8 however, an added responsibility and obligation 
is placed on all those who assume their office by taking an oath.9 The 
President takes the prescribed oath10 and so too the Chief Election 
Commissioner and Members of the ECP.11 The Constitution has subsisted 
for fifty years; there is no longer any excuse to remain ignorant of the 
Constitution. Incidentally, on this very day (3 November 2007) a grave 
constitution al transgression took place sixteen years ago, and like it every 
constitutional deviation has long lasting effects. We must abide by the 
Constitution and realise mistakes which have had a calamitous effect on 
the people and the territory of Pakistan. It is  about time that courts cease 
to be involved in political disputes, which take up considerable court time; 
time which would be better spent doing what this Court is required to do.  
 
20. This President had earlier dissolved  the National Assembly when the 
Prime Minister faced a vote of no confidence. Despite the fact that the 
Constitution clearly mandated that once the requisite number of members 
had given a notice of a resolution for a vote of no confidence in the National 
Assembly, the power to advise diss olution of the National Assembly no 
longer remained with the Prime Minister. Therefore, the President could not 
dissolve the National Assembly. But the Constitution was disregarded, 
triggering a constitutional crisis, which then had to be redressed by this  
Court, in the case reported as Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians v 
Federation of Pakistan .12 It was pointed out by the Chief Justice and four 
Judges of this Court what was manifestly clear, that a Prime Minister 
facing a vote of no confidence could n ot advise the dissolution of the 
National Assembly. The purported dissolution of the National Assembly was 
declared unconstitutional and held to be of no legal effect. One of the 
                                                
8 Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Article 5.  
9 Ibid., Third Schedule.  
10 Ibid, Article 42.  
11 Ibid, Article 214.  
12 PLD 2022 Supreme Court 574.  Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 9
learned Judges opined that there should be consequences for such a 
blatant tr ansgression of the Constitution:  
‘… the Constitution opens by stating that the exercise of 
authority "is a sacred trust" and can only be exercised 
through "the chosen representatives of the people." However, 
this sacred trust was violated amongst others by the 
President, PM, the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and the Law 
Minister as the elected representatives of the people were 
prevented from voting on the resolution and for such blatant 
transgression of the Constitution there must be 
consequences and the l aw must take its course.’13 
 
And that for such an unconstitutional act Article 6 of the Constitution may 
be invoked:  
‘… acts attract Article 6 of the Constitution is also left open 
to be determined by the Parliamentarians as to whether they 
leave open the d oors for such unconstitutional acts or take 
suitable measures to stop such like mess in future.’  
 
21. On that occasion (3 April 2022) the President had dissolved  the 
National Assembly by using a power not vesting in him, while in the 
present case he did no t use a power which he did possess. Constitutional 
office holders must adhere to the Constitution; fulfil the duties assigned to 
them as a sacred trust , and divest themselves from all that is outside their 
constitutional domain; only then do they serve the  people of Pakistan. 
Pakistan was established democratically, is a democracy and must remain 
one. When general elections are due they have to be held. We are humbled 
in facilitating the President and the ECP to do right by the people of 
Pakistan.  
 
22. In conclusion, we want to acknowledge the role of the media. Article 
19 of the Constitution  decrees that : ‘there shall be freedom of the press ’, 
subject to the stated reasonable restrictions . But some have construed this 
freedom as a license to disinform and b uild a false narrative, and do so to 
undermine democracy. The  Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority 
(‘PEMRA ’) prohibits content which  ‘incites or condones dislodgment of 
democratic se tup against the command of the C onstitution of Pakistan, 
provided that discussions on improvement of democracy shall constitute a 
fair comment’.14 
 
                                                
13 Ibid.,  per Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel, J.   
14 PEMRA’s Electronic Media Code of Conduct 2015, section 3(1).  Constitution Petition No. 32/2023 etc.  
 
 10
23. A decreased confidence in democracy di minishes  people’s engagement  
with it  and suppresses voter turnout. A study conducted by the European 
Parliament found, that:   
‘Disinformation also has far -reaching implications for human 
rights and democratic norms worldwide. It threatens freedom 
of thought, the right to privacy and the right to democratic 
participation, as well as endangering a range of economic, 
social and cu ltural rights. It also diminishes broader 
indicators of democratic quality, unsettling citizens’ faith in 
democratic institutions not only by distorting free and fair 
elections, but also fomenting digital violence and 
repression.’15 
 
However, this Court appreciates those in the media who perform their 
duties professionally and truthfully.  
 
24. We would like to commend the learned Attorney -General for 
Pakistan, the learned law officers and the learned counsel for their positive 
assistance and facilitation for the quick disposal of these cases.16 
 
25. These matters are allowed in the aforesaid terms.  
 
26. In view of the public importance of this matter, this judgment is to be 
translated into Urdu. However, t he English version shall be treated as this 
Court’s decision.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
03.11. 2023  
(M. Tauseef)  
Approved for Reporting  
 
                                                
15 ‘The impact of disinformation on democratic processe s and human rights in the world ’ Carne Colomina, 
Hector Sanchez Margalef, Richard Youngs, European Parliament , Directorate -General for External Policies.  
16 These cases were fixed for hearing in Court on 23 October, heard on 2 and 3 November and decided on  3 
November 2023, that is, within 12 days.  