IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
    (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, HCJ  
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
Constitution Petition No.05 of 2012  
 
Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi       …Petition er 
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan thr. Secretary Law and others         …Respondents  
 
For the petitioner:    Petitioner in person  
 
On Court Notice:    Mr. Irfan Qadir, Attorney General for Pakistan  
For respondents:    Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, DAG    
(1,2,4, 6,8 & 10)      
 
For respondent No.3:    Mr. Qasim Mir Jat, Addl. A.G. Sindh  
 
For respondent No. 5:   Mr. Jawwad Hassan, Addl. A.G. Pb.  
 
For respondent No.7:    Mr. Azam Khattak, Addl. A.G. Balochistan  
 
For respondent No.9:    Syed Arshad Hussain, Addl. A.G. KPK  
 
For Ms. Farah Naz Asfahani:  Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR  
For Mr. Rehman  A. Malik:   Mr. M. Azhar Chaudhry, ASC  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
For Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA:   Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
For Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA:  Nemo  
Date of hearing    25.05.2012  
O R D E R  
 On the last date of hearing , in terms of following paras the 
respectable representatives being the members of Parliament (Senate 
& National Assembly) were required to furnish evidence to establish 
that they have renounced their  allegedly acquired nationality  of United 
Kingdom: - 
“There is a request for adjournment by Ch. M. Azhar, ASC, learned 
counsel on behalf of Mr. Rehman A. Malik. It is to be noted that on the 
last date of hearing CMA was filed by him stating therein that Senator 
Mr. Rehman A. Malik has re nounced his nationality of U.K. after 25th 
March, 2008. We have pointed out to him during the course of 
arguments that some evidence has to be produced although his 
affidavit is available on record. Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA is also required 
to furnish evide nce from the concerned department i.e. passport office 
to prove his claim that he had never obtained any passport for U.K. 
and he is not holding nationality of the said country. Similarly, Mian 
Abdul Rauf, ASC stated that Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA is not holdin g 
nationality of U.K. but he has obtained a permanent residence in U.K. Const.P.5/12  2 
as he is running a business over there. It is to be noted that a person 
who renounces nationality has to submit a renunciation form (RN) to 
the UK Border Agency Department #1 P.O. Box No.306 Liverpool L2 
0QN. Therefore, the said persons claiming renunciation are required to 
furnish evidence with regard to the receipts of the prescribed fee for 
renunciation to establish that they have been renunciated from British 
nationality.  
2.   Mr. W asim Sajjad, learned Sr. ASC on behalf of Ms. Farah Naz 
Asfahani stated that he has been engaged only recently and some time 
may be given for preparation of brief. Request is allowed. onality.  
All the learned counsel appearing on behalf of (1) Senat or A. 
Rehman Malik, Zahid Iqbal and  Iftikhar Nazir have stated that short 
adjournment be given to them to comply with the above order. 
Request is allowed.  
2.   On behalf of respondent Ms. Farah Naz Asfahani , respected 
MNA, Mr. Wasim Sajjad, Sr. ASC sought adjourn ment on the last date 
of hearing to file the reply. Today learned counsel is not in attendance 
and Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR has made request on his behalf  for 
adjournment . However, CMA 2231/2012 has been filed  by the learned 
counsel on her behalf, in which in the concluding para categorical ly it 
has been admitted that “The answering applicant is a natural born 
citizen of Pakistan as well as of the United States of America by virtue 
of the permission granted by the Citizenship Act, 1951 as also by the 
Constitutio n of Pakistan. The answering applicant took oath at the time 
she was elected as a Member to be faithful and loyal to Pakistan. He r 
dual citizenship  has not and will not undermine her loyalty to 
Pakistan.”  
3.   Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR has stated that this Cour t has no 
jurisdiction to examine this question. We fail to understand that in 
such an important matter where elected representatives are holding 
position in Senate & National Assembly and at the same time they are 
enjoy ing benefit of  dual nationality again st the provision of Article 
63(1) (c) of the Constitution, if t his Court, which is bound to preserve Const.P.5/12  3 
and defend the Constitution,  is not empowered to enforce the 
fundamental rights of the citizens in terms of Article 18 4(3) of the 
Constitution, then which C ourt will be competent to do so?  
4.   Here it is equally important to note that after her election 
as Member of National Assembly, she has taken following oath under 
Article 65 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973: - 
“I,___________, do solemnly swear that I will bear true 
faith and allegiance to Pakistan:  
 That, as a member of the National Assembly (or Senate), 
I will perform my functions honestly, to the best of my ability, 
faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, and the law, and the rules of the Assembly 
(or Senate), and always in the interest of the sovereignty, 
integrity, solidarity, well -being and prosperity of Pakistan:  
 That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is 
the bas is for the creation of Pakistan.  
 And that I will preserve, protect and defend the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  
5.   At the same time, while acquiring the citizenship of USA 
she has also taken the oath, which is administered to the imm igrants, 
who wish to become citizens of USA. Same is reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
“I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely 
renounce and abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign 
prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty, of whom or whi ch I 
have heretofore been a subject or citizen; that I will support and 
defend the Constitution and laws of the United States of 
America against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will  
bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I will bear arm s 
on behalf of the United States when required by the law; that I 
will perform noncombatant service in the Armed Forces of the 
United States when required by the law; that I will perform work 
of national importance under civilian direction when required by  
the law; and that I take this obligation freely, without any 
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help me God.  
6.   Prima facie , admission made by her and contents of the 
oath, which she had already taken  of USA and subsequent thereto Const.P.5/12  4 
before the E lection Commission of Pakistan in filing the nomination 
papers to contest the election and then taking oath under the 
Constitution , she had not disclosed that as far as citizen ship of 
Pakistan is concerned, she had already renounced the same and had 
abjured all allegiance and fidelity to her country where she was b orn 
etc. as per her oath taken at the time of acquiring citizenship of USA. 
In democratic dispensation under the Constitutional provision the 
Members of the National Assembly and the Senate occupy  their 
positions as chosen representatives of people of Pakistan and if the 
chosen representatives of Pakistan ha ve already renounced their 
citizenship, prima facie under the Constitutional dispensation, they had 
no right to  represent them and  decide the i ssues of all national 
importance being the member s of different committees including 
Defence  etc., where all open and secret policies for the betterment of 
the people of this country/nation are discussed. Therefore, on having 
gone through the admission mad e by her and taking into consideration 
the oath of the allegiance, which she had already taken while acquiring 
the citizenship of United State of America, we are prima facie  of the 
opinion that it would be in the interest of this country/nation as well as 
to enforce the Constitution, her membership of the National Assembly 
is suspended. She would not be attending the sessions of the National 
Assembly or any Committee nor she would be participating in the 
affairs of making policies for this country and the n ation till the final 
decision of the case.  
7.   As there is a request on behalf of Rehman Malik, Zahid 
Iqbal and Ch. Iftikhar Nazir and learned Attorney General has also 
stated that he needs some time to inquire from the Provincial Const.P.5/12  5 
Assemblies with regard t o dual nationa lity, if anyone is holding the 
same , therefore, case is adjourned to 30th May, 2012.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD, the  
25th May, 2012  
Nisar/* 