IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice  Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
Mr. Justice  Gulzar Ahmed  
 
Human Rights Case No.14392 of 2013  
[Action taken on u nprecedented Load Shedding in the Country ] 
 
AND  
Human Rights Case No.790-G of 2009  
[News clipping published in the daily Jinnah, Islamabad, dated 14.04.2009 ] 
 
For the Applicant :   
(in CMA.3399, 3671 & 3738/13)  : Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC. 
(in CMA.3650/13)  : Mr. Nauman Wazir, Director PESCO . 
(in CMA.3402 & 3975/13)  : Sardar Ejaz Nazir, Advocate, in person . 
(in CMA.3 862/13) : Mr. Kamran Khan , MD, Flying Cement . 
On Court’s Notice : : Mr. Muneer A. Malik,  
Attorney General for Pakistan . 
For Govt. of KPK  : Mr. Naveed Akhtar, Addl. A.G.  
For NTDC  & PEPCO  : Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Zargham Eshaq, MD . 
For WAPDA  : Syed Moazam Ali Rizvi, ASC 
Mr. Badar -ul-Munir, C.E (Hydel)  
 
For IRSA  : Mr. Asjid Imtiaz Ali, Chairman . 
 
For AEDB  : Nemo . 
For SNGPL  : Mr. Muhammad Ashraf,  
GM (S ales) 
 
For SSGC  : Nemo  
For PPIB  : Mr. N.A. Zubairi, MD  
Barrister Asghar Khan, Sr. Law Officer . 
For DISCOs  : Mr. Muhammad Ilyas Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR 
Mr. Muhammad Saleem, CEO, LESCO  
Dr. Rana Abdul Jabbar Khan, CEO, FESCO  
Mr. Balighuzzama n, CEO, QESCO , Quetta  
Mr. Noor Ahmed Dayo, CEO, SEPCO, Sukkar  
Mr. Parvez Khan, CEO, TESCO , Peshawar  
Mr. Mahboob  Alam, CEO, GEPCO  
Mr. Muzaffar Ali Abbasi, CEO, HESCO  
Mr. M ohammad Yousaf, CEO, IESCO  
Mr. Iqbal Hussain, CEO, MEPCO  
 HRC No.14392 of 2013 & HRC No.790 -G of 2009  - 2 - 
 For SHYDO  : Nemo  
Voluntary  Appeared  : Mr. Nazir Mughal, XEN AJK  
Date of Hearing  : 01.07.2013  
 
ORDER  
  It has been informed by Mr. Zargham Ehsaq, M.D. 
(PEPCO) that as per the direction of the Court, category -wise 
chart of consumption of electricity has been prepared.  He is 
direct ed to handover a copy of the same to the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan and all other stakeholders, as they all are 
entitled to consume electricity , as per the formula of “equitable 
distribution ” of the available electricity.  According to the recor d 
maintained by the PEPCO, on June 30th 2013, total generation 
has been shown to be 13,392 MW.  In this chart , total generation 
of electricity of KESC, Kan up, Captive Power Plants  throughout in 
the country  and IPPs operating in Karachi, along with the 
consumption load has not been shown  except that KESC  export 
650 MW from NTDC .   
2.  Similarly, we are also required to know about the 
details of all the IPPs operating on Gas o r RFO  in the country 
along with the details of their electricity generating capacity  and 
if there is a shortfall reasons for the same along with the 
procedure required to be follow ed by PEPCO , NTDC , NEPRA  or 
any other regulatory authority to pursue them to achieve 
maximum target of generation of electricity  as payments of their 
bills are causing extra load on the public exchequer and despite HRC No.14392 of 2013 & HRC No.790 -G of 2009  - 3 - 
 of it they are not getting electricity . However , in the meanwhile 
Secretary WAPDA may arrange their forensic audit so we have full  
picture about their performance a nd financial liability on the 
public exchequer from the date of their commissioning  upto date.    
3.  On having gone through the data , which has been 
supplied and during the discussion  with the Managing Director, 
PEPCO, prima facie, we are of the opinion that subject to 
improvement s in the ma nagement it is not difficult to achieve the 
target of generating electricity required to be consumed all over 
the country because we also note that there are Wind and Solar 
Projects for generat ing electricity, therefore, approximate figures 
of generating e lectricity from such sources be also collected.  
4.  The learned counsel for the DISCOs stated that 300 
MW is being supplied to KESC from the Punjab , but this 
statement has been contra dicted by the Managing Director, as 
according to him it is not possible t o slash from the quota of the 
provinces because such suppl y to KESC is being mad e from the 
National Grid.   
 In such view of the matter, we direct that notice be issued 
to the Chief Executive, KESC  to appear and explain about the 
generating capacity and su pplies from all resources including IPPs 
by the KESC  and as to whether the company is self sufficient to 
cater the requirements, if electricity is generated to its maximum 
capacity.  HRC No.14392 of 2013 & HRC No.790 -G of 2009  - 4 - 
 5.  On the last date of hearing  we have observed that the 
provincial gover nments should take responsibility to control 
pilferage, leakage and theft of electricity so the persons who are 
law abiding and consuming electricity against payments should 
not be penalized for the sake of those who are committing theft 
etc.  Suggestions in this behalf were put forward that in such like 
situation let the provincial governments agree to receive bulk 
supply proportionately for the purpose of consumption of all 
categories including domestic and commercial etc.   
6.  We have also noticed that the uncounted f or natural 
gas, as it has been pointed out by Mr. Muhammad Ashraf, GM 
(Sales) is about 10% which also varies with the input and out of 
the same about 5% of natural gas is uncounted because of theft 
etc.  When we enquired from the representat ive of the SNGPL 
that whether against the total supply of gas to consumers of all 
categories 100% sale proceeds are recovered.  He stated that 
there is always a shortfall of 10%.  In such view of the matter 
again we are of the opinion that unless following  the principle of 
equitable supply of the gas and also ensuring that the uncounted 
for gas  is not reduced and theft of the gas is not fully 
controlled/checked , the gas company shall not be in a position to 
supply the gas to the IPPs, GENCOs etc ., as per th eir 
requirement s.  Besides it , public exchequer has to suffer  huge HRC No.14392 of 2013 & HRC No.790 -G of 2009  - 5 - 
 losses because of mismanagement, which occur s on account of 
the reason s noted herein before .  
 Thus both the companies i.e. SNGPL and SSGC through their 
Managing Directors are required to p ut up complete details of the 
supply of the gas as has been pointed out hereinbefore including 
the gas which is supplied to the Captive Power Plants vis -à-vis 
accurate figure of purchasing electricity against the same by the 
NTDC , as it has been pointed ou t by Mr. Zargham Eshaq, MD , 
PEPCO .   
7.  Notice to all the  provincial Chief Secretaries be issued 
either to appear themselves or make representation through their 
duly authorized counsel or the Advocate General(s) for giving 
reaction that if in bulk the su pplies of electricity from the National 
Grid and the Sui Gas  is ensured by the respective agencies as per 
their requirement s, making them responsible to ensure equitable 
supply of the electricity and the gas  to the consumers of all 
categories and the Feder al Government may deduct , in advance, 
the charges/price  through the NFC.   
 Notice to the Secretary Finance, Government of Pakistan , be 
also issued .   
 Let the Attorney General for Pakistan , may assist us in this 
behalf as well.  
8.  The learned Attorney Ge neral for Pakistan stated that 
Government of Pakistan is about to announce Energy Policy with HRC No.14392 of 2013 & HRC No.790 -G of 2009  - 6 - 
 an object to provide relief to the consumers against the load -
shedding of electricity.  
9.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned ASC stated that the 
industry is sufferin g on account of shortage of electricity.  We 
have pointed out to him that according to the figures which have 
been received so far 66% of the total generation of electricity is 
being supplied by the NTDC to the province of Punjab, however, if 
he has got an y acceptable formula or suggestion based on 
technical advice, he should put up the same in writing enabling us 
to consider his request.  
10.  Mr. As jid Imtiaz  Ali, Chairman IRSA, has placed on 
record  details of unexplored Hydel Power Potential , the same be 
placed on record and a copy of the same be handed over to the 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan.   
11.  No one is present on behalf of SHYDO , notice be issued 
to its CEO/MD for the next date of hearing.   Notice to the NEPRA 
and OGRA be also issued.  
12.  Adjourned to 11.07.2013.  
 
 
 
 CJ. 
  
 
 
 
Islamabad  J.  
01.07.2013  
*Hashmi * J.  
 