v-r—,-,..n.yrdlemstv.ntxt,rersly`.16747IRLMIXE,'" ,,  
For ETPB: Mr. M. Ikram Ch., Sr, ASC. 
Dr. Aainir Ahmed, Chairman ETPB. 
Mr. Tariq Khan Wazir, Addl. Secy., 
(Shrines) ETPB. 
For Govt. of KP: Mr. Shumail Ahmed Butt, A. G. KR 
Mr. Qasim Niaz, Chief Secy., KP. 
Mr. 	M. 	Rafiq, 	Addl. 	Asstt. 
Commissioner, Kohat. 
Mr. Tayyab Khan, RPO, Kohat. 
Mr. M. Naeem, Deputy Secretary, H.E. 
KP. IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION) 
PRESENT: 
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED, I-ICJ 
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL ANSAN 
MR. JUSTICE SAYYED lvIAZAHAR AL1 AKBAR NAQVI 
CMA No.4821 of 2018 in S.M.C. No.01 of 2014.  
(Human Rights Commission of Pakistan through 
Chairperson, Dr. tvlehdi Masan and others. v. Federation of 
Pakistan through Ministry of Education and others). 
AND 
CNIA No.516 of 2019 in Const. Petition No.62 of 2017.  
(Pribhu Lai, etc. v. Government of Pakistan, etc.) 
AND 
Constitution Petition No.62 of 2017.  
(Pribhu Lal, etc. v. Government of Pakistan, etc.) 
AND 
Constitution Petition No.63 of 2017.  
(Leo Roderick Paul, etc. v. Government of Pakistan, etc.) 
In Attendance: 	 Mr. Sohail Mehmood, Addl. AGP, 
Mr. Shoaib Suddie, Chairman of  
Corn mission. • 
Mr. M. Saqib jillani, Member of 
Commission. 
Dr. Ramesh Kumar, Member of 
Conn mission. 
For Govt. of Punjab: Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl. A. G. Punjab. 
Mr. Ibad Ullah Sajid, Social Welfare 
Office, Govt. of Punjab. 
1.1wriuu.,v,Isnneuranrcuarr . -74rTSZTI7EMI.„17SM...Ma . 	• • 	 . 
CW.6111124,021 of 2018 enM.cNo.Qj of 201 S. eic. 
For ICT: 
For Govt. of 
Balochistan: 
Fed. Department: Mian Zahid Mehrnood, Law Officer, H.R. 
Punjab, 
Rizwana Naveed, Addl. Secy., H.R. 
Punjab. 
Mr. Amir Riaz, Director, PCTB, Lahore, 
Dr. Sohail Sarwar, Deputy Director, 
PCTB, Lahore. 
Mr. Shehzad Manzoor, DSP, Multan. 
Mr. Wajid Ullah Kundi, Secretary 1&C, 
Punjab. 
Mr. Niaz Ullah Niazi, A. G. Islamabad. 
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl. A. G. 
Balochistan. 
Mr. Iftikhar Ahmed, S.O. M/o Religious 
Affairs. 
Mr. Sohail Aijaz, Dy. Director Litigation 
M/o Federal Education. 
Mr. M. Rafig Tahir, J.E.A. M/o Federal 
Education. 
Mr. Kamran IVIurtaza, Sr. ASC 
(via video-link from Quetta) 
Mr. Peter Jacob, E.D. CSJ/Chairperson 
PCMR. 
For Govt. of Sindh: 	Ms. Leela Kalpana, Addl. A. G. Sindh 
(via video-link from Karachi) 
Mr. Abdul Hadi, Secretary Minorities 
Affairs, Sindh. 
(via video-link from Karachi) 
Date of Hearing: 	15.02.2021. 
ORDER 
In our last order dated 08.02.2021, there is a 
reference of Rupees Thirty Eight Million to be paid to Pakistan 
Hindu Council by the Evacuee Trust Property Board rETPB"), 
It is stated that an amount of Rupees Two Million has already 
been paid by Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa for 
reconstruction of the Samadhi at Karak. So far the claim of Dr. 
Rornesh Kumar for payment of Rs.38 million by the ETPB is 
CAM No.4821 012018 in S.A{C. No.01 012011, etc 3 
concerned, it is stated by the learned Additional Attorney 
General as well as learned ASC for the ETPB that no account 
has been submitted by the Hindu Council in response of said 
claiM and that in case the Hindu Council submits the account 
of such amount of Rs.38 million, the ETPB shall consider the 
same and deal with it appropriately and in case any amount is 
due to be paid by the ETPB to Hindu Council, the same shall 
be paid. In .this view of the matter, Dr. Ramesh Kumar may 
submit appropriate accounts to the Chairman, ETPB. 
2. 	 As regards the criminal cases initiated against the 
persons who are alleged to have caused damage to the 
Samadhi in Karak, it is stated by Mr. Kamran Murtaza, 
learned Sr.ASC appearing before us through video link from 
Quetta that the cases are not proceeding before the criminal 
Courts and on this account the arrested persons are facing 
difficulties. On this, the learned Advocate General, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa has stated that there is no obstruction from the 
side of KP Government for proceeding with the cases of 
arrested persons and that the cases are being proceeded. He 
however makes a statement: that he will seek instructions with 
regard to the complaint made and ensure that the cases are 
proceeded expeditiously. In view of such statement made by 
the learned Advocate General, KP the learned counsel (Mr. 
Kamran Murtaza) for the arrested persons states that his above 
query stands satisfied. 
   
CALA No.-7822 or 2028 io 17.M.G No.02of2014, ofd 	4 
3. So far Prahlad Mandir at Multan is concerned, no 
satisfactory report has been received from the Government of 
Punjab and even the Chief Secretary, Punjab is not in 
attendance despite the fact that it was directed to him to 
ensure that restoration of the Mandir is made in order to 
facilitate Hindu ComMunity of Pakistan to hold Holi festivals in 
said Mandir on 28th March of 2021. 
4. Once the Court had passed an order, it was the 
duty of the Chief Secretary, Punjab to ensure its compliance. 
We note that despite meeting of the 'One Man Commission' 
appointed by this Court with the Chief Secretary, Punjab so 
also by Dr. Romesh Kumar nothing has been done by the Chief 
Secretary and this Court takes serious note of such conduct of 
the Chief Secretary, Punjab. In the circumstances, the Chief 
Secretary, Punjab is directed to ensure that compliance of this 
Court's order dated 08.02.2021 is made in letter and spirit and 
such compliance report be submitted before this Court on the 
next date of hearing, when the Chief Secretary, Punjab shall 
also be in attendance. Two weeks' time is granted for this 
purpose. 
5. Mr. Muhammad Ikram Chaudhry, learned ASC 
appearing for the ETPB- states that through notification dated 
12.06.2006 management of Katas Raj Temple Complex in 
District Chakwal was transferred by the Federal Government 
to the Provincial Government Punjab for its maintenance with 
immediate effect and until further orders. We are infoimed that                      
rmaxaasza.e..aaaraalevaaraartaaareparap,10.0.`[.•Sl 	Srr.TS.SF.InTOWZ.V.I.a. 161-SSITa.M1. -W7.1.71,,,,::=,,,ZI772,;;;Z=KpaZ,,, ,_ • 
4  OSA No.4821 of 2018 In 2 M.C. No.01 of 2014, etc. 	5 
the maintenance which was required to be made in the year 
2006 has already been done by the Punjab Government and 
now the purpose of said notification dated 12.06.2006 stands 
served and Katas Raj Temple Complex in District. Chakwal has 
to be reverted back to the ETPB. In this regard, let Federal 
Government issue necessary notification(s) and ensure that 
Katas Raj Temple Complex in District Chakwal is returned 
back to the ETPB to be dealt with under the Evacuee Trust 
Properties (Management & Disposal) Act, 1975. Such an 
exercise will be completed by the Federal Government within a 
period of two weeks. 
6. A report has been submitted on behalf of Secretary, 
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training which 
is not signed by the Secretary himself rather it is signed by 
Deputy Director (Literacy) of said Ministry. Such report is not 
in compliance of our order dated 05.02.2021 and as such the 
same is returned with direction to the Secretary, Ministry of 
Federal Education and Professional Training to submit a report 
duly signed by him to the Court and he shall also be in 
attendance on the next date of hearing. The report shall be 
made available by him within a period of two weeks. 
7. The Chairman, ETPB has handed over to the 
learned 'One Man Commission' in Court a USE Drive 
containing full details of all Evacuee Trust Properties as well as 
details of all Iviandirs, Samadhies and Gurdawaras, etc. The 
learned 'One Man Commission' shall examine such material 
.11111.S.A.VarMIT.M.T.S.ASTATIS . tw27331,Vra".=. 
No.9821 of 2018 in .9 tie 1ln.0? of2014. an 	6 
• contained in the USB as supplied to him by the Chairman 
ETPB and thereafter, if deemed necessary, submit his response 
to the same. 
8. 	 However, the Chairman, ETPB has been informed 
that none of the properties of the ETPB can be utilized by the 
Board for its own employees nor the same can be sold 
out/transferred to any person and in case leases of such 
properties have been made, the Chairman shall give full details 
of the same as well as the amounts which the Board is 
receiving from the lessees. He shall also in the report mention 
the rates which were initially fixed as lease amounts and the 
present rates of lease amounts which are being paid to the 
ETPB by the lessees. The duration of the teases shall also be 
indicated from the initial stages uptill now and the persons to 
whom such leases have been granted. This report shall be 
made available by the Chairman, ETPB to this Court within a 
period of two weeks and he shall also be in attendance before 
us on the next date of hearing. Adjourned to a date in office 
after two weeks. 
--‘_ 
(c;\) 
ISLAMABAD. 
15.02.2021. 
ZR/* 
'Not Approved For Reporting' 