IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice  Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice  Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice  Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
C.M.As.NOs.3685 -3686  of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  
 
(Implementation of judgment of this Court, dated 30.3.2012 passed in  
HRC No.7734 -G of 2009 regarding alleged corruption in Rental Power Plants)  
 
Voluntarily appeared  : Kh. Muhammad Asif, MNA  
   
For NAB  : Mr. K.K. Agha, P.G.  
   
Date of Hearing  : 31.01.2013  
 
ORDER  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUD HRY, CJ. -We have passed an 
order on 30.01.2013, contents whereof are reproduced herein 
below: - 
  “It has transpired that during pendency 
of instant matter, relating to implementation 
of the judgment of this Court dated 
30.03.2012, reported as Alleged Corru ption 
in Rental Power Plants, etc.   (2012 SCMR 
773), some print and electronic media had 
printed and televised, the contents of a letter 
of the Chairman NAB. We enquired from the 
learned Prosecutor General NAB, about such 
letter, he replied in affirmative.  We also 
enquired from him, as to whether the 
Chairman, NAB has expressed some 
reservations, he stated that perhaps some 
reservations have been expressed by the 
Chairman NAB.  
 
2. In such view of the matter, we direct to 
the Chairman, NAB to place on recor d, an 
authentic copy of the said letter and also 
disclose the name of the Authorities to whom CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 2 - 
 the same has been circulated and also verify, 
as it has been delivered to the media, both 
print and electronic, for its publication and 
telecasting, he may do so till 31.01.2013.”  
 
2.  Mr. K.K. Agha, Prosecutor General, NAB in compliance 
of the aforesaid directions has placed on record copy of the letter  
authenticated by the Chairman NAB , reference of which has been 
made in the order noted above.  Before considerin g its contents, 
it is to be noted that this Court in a case of “alleged corruption in 
the Rental Power Plants etc” initiated proceedings on the basis of 
applications submitted by Makhdoom Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat, 
one of the Parliamentarians of PML (Q) and the Parliamentary 
Leader of his Party in the National Assembly as well as Khawaja 
Muhamma d Asif, Member of National Assembly of PML(N) . The 
application s moved by them were number ed as HRCs  No.7734 -G 
of 2009, 1003 -G of 2010, and 5 6712 of 20 10. These matters  
were heard from time to time, however , the final judgment in 
respect of the issues of corrup tion in the matter of the Rental 
Power Plants was delivered on 30.3.2012. It is to be noted that 
during hearing of the petition s, a considerable amount which had  
been doled out to the sponsors of the RPPs was received back on 
short notice s pointing towards illegal payment s of the said 
amounts. In the judgment, inter alia , following directions  were 
made:  
 
“ix. All the Government functionaries, 
including the Ministers  for Water and Power 
holding charge in 2006 and onward and from CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 3 - 
 2008 to onward, during whose tenure the 
RPPs were approved/set up and Minister as 
well as Secretary Finance holding the charge 
when the down payment was increased from 
7% to 14%, prima facie, violated the 
principle of transparency under Articles 9 and 
24 of the Constitution and Section 7 of the 
Act, 1997, therefore, the ir involvement in 
getting financial benefits out of the same by 
indulging in corruption and corrupt practices 
cannot be overrul ed in view of the discussion 
made hereinabove. Consequently, they are 
liable to be dealt with under the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 by the NAB;  
 
x. ………………………………………………………………..  
 
xi. The Chairman NAB is directed to 
proceed against all the persons referred to in 
sub paragraphs (iii), (ix) and (x) above 
forthwith in accordance with law and submit 
fortnightly progress report to Registrar for 
our perusal in Chambers.”  
 
As it is evident from the contents of the  relevant  directions that 
this Court having  been  conscious about the rights of the persons 
involved in corrupt ion and cor rupt practices had  used g uarded 
language. However, in view of findings so recorded and as per 
the directions noted herein above, Chairman NAB was directed to 
proceed against the persons reference o f which has been made in 
direction s, noted above and  convey ed to him immediately after 
the pronouncement of the judgment of even date. The office had 
been receiving reports from t ime to time but w ith certain 
reservations at times : and the NAB was  asked to do the needful. 
Ultimately, despite lapse of considerable period of time, on 15th 
September, 2012, specific order was passed wherein it  was CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 4 - 
 concluded that prima fa cie, it appears that NAB authorities are 
intentionally avoiding to impleme nt the judgment in clear 
violation of the observations/ direction s and are committing 
contempt of Court as envisaged under Article 204 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read with 
Section 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 . Therefore, 
show-cause notices were issued to the Cha irman NAB as well as 
other persons whose names find mention in the order dated 
14.09.2012. He along with his other officers appeared and 
thereafter matter was postponed and on some of the dates of 
hearing appear ance of the Chairman NAB was also not insisted  
upon, in this behalf reference may be made to the hearing which 
had taken place on  25.09.2012, 01.10.2012 and 08.11.2012.  On 
the last mentioned date, CMA No.4649 of 20 12 was submitted by 
Makhdoom Syed Faisal Salah Hayat. Notice of the same was 
issued. It is to be noted that in this appl ication,  it was complained 
that one of the RPP Barage Mount ed Karkay  was being allowed to 
sail out of the territorial water s of Pakistan without effecting 
recovery of th e amount due against it. Therefore, orders we re 
also passed that without settling the outstanding dues against it 
may not be allowed to go . In the meanwhile , learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan appeared and he was also requested to look 
into the matter i n respect  of the implement ation of judgment to 
the extent of settling  the account s of Karkay  and an order was CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 5 - 
 passed on 12 .11.2012 and for this purpose thee case was 
adjourned for 20.11.2012 , 21 .11.2012, 22.11.2012 and 
26.12.2012 , when the matter to the e xtent of Karkay was 
disposed of with the observation that let the NAB effect the 
recove ry of outstanding amount , subject to all just and l egal 
exception with f urther observation that it shall be the 
responsibility of the Chairman NAB  to effect its recovery , if the 
ship left the territorial water s of Pakistan .  
3.  On 09.01.2013 , Raja Amir Abbas , learned counsel  for 
the officers of NAB  to wh om the contempt notices were issued , 
informed that reference s have been recommended in  two case s 
and the report s have been received from the Regional 
Headquarters of the NAB. The  number s of those cases are as 
follows:  
  (i) Case No.2(3 -RPP)/SOD/2012/NAB  
   (Against Raja Parvez Ashraf, Ex -Minister W&P and 15 others)  
 
  (ii) Case No.2(4 -RPP)/SOD/2012/NAB  
   (Against  Shahid R afi & 21 others ) 
 
4.  These references were recommend ed against the 
former Minister for W ater & Power, Raja Parvez Ashraf, the 
incumbent P rime Minister and others. O n the said date , it wa s 
also inform ed that vide letter dat ed 07.01.2013 when the IOs 
under contempt have been removed from tho se cases on the 
ground that the Supreme Court  did not appear to be happy with 
their performance . As this Court had never expressed any 
reservation about  their performance , therefore, on query as to CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 6 - 
 why the name of the S upreme Court i s being used for such 
purpose and it was informed by Brig (R) Farooq Nasar Awan, who 
appeared in person .  He was asked that as to wh y action in this 
behalf should not be taken against him in accordance with law. 
However, subsequently, it transp ired that there is a handwritten 
note of the Cha irman NAB, which in fact had  furnished the basis 
for their removal. It is to be noted that these re ports were signed 
by one Asghar Ali . The n otice was issued to the Chai rman NAB to 
explain as to why he falsel y used the name of the S upreme Court 
to remove those IOs . This o rder was w ritten on 15.01. 2013, 
where in the names of M/s Asghar  Ali and Kamran Faisal  were also  
mentioned. However, directions  were iss ued to prepare the 
challan/reference and process the same  and thereafter cause 
arrest of the accused .  On 17. 01.2013 , CMA No.224  of 2013 was 
filed in the Court, which was signed by Rana Zahid Mehmood, 
which was not found satisfac tory and the Court expressed strong 
reservations , however, on th e said date it was  decided to see the 
files of inv estigation as to whether the judgment is being 
implemented in let ter and spirit. Learned P rosecutor General NAB 
raised objecti on upon the jurisdiction of the Court to look into the 
investi gation.  However , he was asked to addr ess the Court and 
the case was adjourned to 23.01.2013.  In the meanwhile, on 
18.01.2013 Mr. Kamran Faisal, A ssistant Director, NAB engaged 
in investi gation of the cases was mysteriously found dead, CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 7 - 
 therefore , a note was received from the Registrar and the  matter 
was transferred to another Hon’ble Bench to look into the same.  
After 23. 01.2013, it appeared in the newspaper s that a letter has 
been sent by the Cha irman NAB to the President of Pakistan, 
therefore, vide order dat ed 30.01.2013, Prosecutor Genera l was 
asked to  inform the Chairman NAB to make available an 
authenticated copy of the letter .  We have gone through contents 
of the letter , which was read out at our reque st by Mr. K .K. Agha .  
On having gone through the letter , we have noti ced that the 
Chairman NAB has mentioned  the situation prevailing in the 
country and admitting that our people are anxious to hold free 
and fair election s and, inter alia , stated  as follows: - 
 “At this juncture all political players appear 
unanimous and united to respond t o the 
aspiration s of their co untrymen.  There is 
broad consensus that non -political player s 
must not be allowed to derail the political 
process .  The Military has made its position 
clear and firmly stands  with the people ”.  
 
He further states that : - 
“I am constrained to observe and bring to 
your notice that the position of the Hon ’ble 
Supreme Court, on this issue, remain s 
clouded by actions that are bearing heavily 
on m y mandate to strictly abide by the NAO 
in both letter and spirit, as the time for 
electi ons approaches.”  
 
The letter further read s as follows: - 
 
“The clear line between the recognized 
authority of the Supreme Court monitor NAB 
investigations to the limited extent of 
ensuring fair investigation, and itself 
becoming involved in guiding investig ations CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 8 - 
 appears to be becoming breached as a norm 
as the elections near. Contempt Notices, 
verbal orders that defer from written orders, 
and insufficient time to prepare numerous 
progress reports, are placing extreme 
pressure on NAB personnel who appear 
before the Hon’ble Judges. There is even a 
danger that NAB personnel could lose their 
independence and are unable to carry out 
their investigation in an independent manner 
due to the pressure being exerted on them 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court to proceed 
along  lines which seem to be desired by the 
Supreme Court. In relieving this pressure, to 
safeguard their jobs, and so as not to 
displeased the Hon’ble Court, there is danger 
of unfair investigation being resorted to. This 
phenomenon is observable in the 
invest igation of very senior politicians of the 
Govt. where orders, to even arrest them, 
have been issued on investigation reports of 
regional investigators that had yet to reach 
the Executive Board Meeting at NAB 
Headquarters that is chaired by me. This 
could b e construed as a clear violation of the 
powers of the Chairman NAB, and to some 
degree circumventing the NAO which I am 
required by law to follow. The NAO in my 
view as it remains law passed by Parliament 
represents the will of the people and as such 
I am bound to follow it. The National 
Accountability Ordinance mandates that no 
reference can be filed until I have been 
allowed to exercise my mind, and decide that 
a clear case of criminality has been made 
out. I would be failing in my statutory duty if 
I shirk from upholding the law that I am 
mandated to protect. Let me assure you, Mr. 
President that I will not flinch from 
prosecuting whosoever may be identified as 
having committed a criminal act under the 
National Accountability Ordinance. All are 
equal befo re the law. The nation expects that 
there be no sacred cows, nor rigging bulls.  
 
The above para was followed with the following para: - 
 CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 9 - 
  “I am constrained to also bring to your notice 
the revolt within NAB, clearly abated by a 
certain section of the media  that used the 
sad demise of Mr. Kamran Faisal to vilify me 
and some senior NAB officers. This section of 
the media appears to be acting as an 
intelligence unit influencing the public and 
possibly influencing certain members of the 
judiciary. Long stand “s tay” on taxes to be 
paid by this media house appears to be 
relevant also. This campaign, in which the 
role of the Hon’ble Supreme Court appears 
evidence, is placing great pressure on me to 
please the Hon’ble Supreme Court in what 
could be seen as pre -poll rigging, and hurried 
unlawful action on my part.”  
 
5.  It is to be noted that reference to the stay order on 
taxes to be paid by some media house, nothing was stated in 
respect of the case which is pending  before this Court.  However, 
last line starting fr om the expression  “this campaign ” wherein he 
has also gone to the extent of using the expression “the role of 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court appears eviden t, is placing great 
pressure on me to please the Hon ’ble Supreme Court  in what 
could be seen as pre-poll r igging , and hurr ied unlawful action on 
my part ”. (Emphasis is supplied)  
6.  Similarly, he has  made fu rther observation in the 
following para  in respect of functioning of the Supreme Court, 
etc.:- 
 “The Ombudsman offices were established to 
also address hum an rights issues. The need 
to allow the Hon’ble SC to be diverted from 
its prime roles as the final Appellate and 
Constitutional Court may need to be 
addressed since ability to take suo moto 
notice of human rights cases can become an CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 10 - 
 open license to underm ine government, and 
may be taking time away from addressing 
the issues of judicial management of the 
current huge pendency of cases in our 
courts. In the absence of timely justice the 
people are forced to take the law into their 
own hands and their anger b ecomes focused 
on their governments. The essence of law is 
to provide a moral benchmark to society. 
That benchmark is sadly being lost by a 
judiciary that may be fast losing its own 
moral authority by relying on the contempt 
law, media, street power of law yers, and 
unchecked violations of the Supreme Court 
Judges code of conduct.”  
 
7.  It is needless to observe once again that this Court vide 
its judgment dated 31st July, 2009, and subsequent thereto at 
different occasion s had repeatedly insisted and shall continue to 
insist ab out the enforcem ent of rule of law and supremacy of the 
Constitution  as well as the continuance of the democratic order 
and in this context while del ivering judgments, particularly, in the 
case of Workers’ Party  Pakistan through Akhtar  Hussain, 
Advocate, General Secretary and 6 -others Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan and 2 -others  (PLD 2012 SC 681) certain suggestions 
have also been made and during the hearing of this case on 
30.01.2013 had made it loud and clear that there should not be 
any d elay in the forthcoming election s which should be he ld 
freely , fairly, honestly and strictly in accordance with the 
Constitution with out any interference or obstacles from  any 
quarters.   Despite of such a clear stance of the judicia ry in th is 
country , we the Judges are confident that there would not be any CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 11 - 
 delay of what soever nature in holding the election s in accord ance 
with the Constitution, b ut at the same time, we have to express 
our concern being the custodian of the Constitution  about the 
press report s as well  as the statements being made by the highly 
reputable personalities like Mr. Raza Rabbani, who has shown his 
concern about the derailment of the democracy in a news item 
published on 29th January, 2013 in the Daily D awn, Nation, Daily 
Times, Daily  Jang, Daily Express, Khabrain and  Al-Akhbar, etc. 
Similarly, there are analysis of different authors published in 
different newspapers on a daily basis wherein it is being 
apprehend ed by the person s who believe in the rule of law and 
the Constitution,  that in view of the letter which has been noted 
herein above a situation  is being created where after taking on the 
judiciary the elections will be delayed  or some other ulterior 
motives and objects are achieved. The people /citizens are fully 
aware that as far back as on 3rd of November, 2007, when 
important matters were pen ding before this Court and the 
Benches were seized of the same , particularly, in respect of the 
qualification or otherwise of Gen. Pervez Musha rraf to conte st 
elections in uniform but before the conclusion of the case under 
certain apprehension s, Martial Law was imposed in the name of 
Emergency Plus  in the country. However, immediately  on coming 
to know of it an order was p assed by a seven Members Bench of 
this Court, which  ultimately resulted  after the restoration of the CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 12 - 
 instant judiciary in a judgment in the case of Sindh High Court 
Bar Association through its Secretary and another Vs. Federation 
of Pakistan through Secretary, M/o Law & Justice, Islamabad and 
other  (PLD 2009 SC 879).  
8.  In such view of the matter, at present it is our duty 
being the Apex Court who had made a commitment to protect 
and preserve the Constitution of 1973 not to allow any subversion 
or deviation in any manner for the purpose of achieving the 
objects noted hereina bove.  And also to ensure  that as  far as the 
constitutional authority of this Court is concerned , it cannot be 
undermine d or the respect or the honour of th is Court can be 
bring under hat red. This Court undoubtedly enjoys the confidence 
of the citizens of t his cou ntry being the Apex Court and similarly 
in the case of Baz M uhammad Kakar and others Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan through M/o Law & Justice and others  (PLD 2012 SC 
923) we have already observed that it is the confidence which 
gives trust to the gene ral public  and citizens who are the subject 
or person in the country in the judicial system , therefore, it is 
considered utmost necessary to pass two following orders.  
(i) As the parliamentary system is 
flourishing in the country on the basis of 
a democratic  order in terms of the 
Constit utional provision s and the 
elections after 5 years , for the National 
and Provincial Assemblies are scheduled 
to be held shortly, therefore, it is held 
that the elections must be held in 
accordance with the Constitution and 
there should be no apprehension of the CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 13 - 
 derailment of the de mocracy as 
expressed in  the statements which are 
being published and have also been 
attributed to highly reput able and 
respectable parliamentarians and no r 
the executive both the c ivilians and the 
military shall take any action in this 
behalf which would tantamount to 
deviation from the Constitution and the 
democratic order whereunder the 
country is governed by elected 
representative of the people only or by 
introducing any other system which is 
not re cognized unde r the Constitution , 
in the name of tak ing actions against 
the judiciary or the Judges of the 
superior Court  on the basis of the letter 
which has been writ ten by the Chair man 
NAB, relevant paras there -from have 
already been reproduced hereinabo ve. 
 
(ii) Copy of the letter of Admiral (R) Fasih 
Bokhari, Chairman N AB, as present ed 
which he has sent to the Pres ident, 
contents whereof have been noted 
hereinabove  and perused. W e are of the 
opinion that wh atever he has expressed 
therein , te ntamount s to caus ing 
interference with and obstruct ion in the 
process of the Court and is substantially 
detrimental to the administration of 
justice and also has used certain 
expression s which ha ve also scandalized 
the Court and its performance with the 
object to undermine  the authority of the 
Court and bring it into  hatred and 
ridicule in the eyes of the general public 
who ha ve to approach  the C ourt for the 
purpose of decision of their cases and if 
such a move made by him is not noticed 
properly the people would loose the  
confidence in this Institution as he has 
involved the Supreme Court as a whole 
being an Institution , therefore, we issue 
notice to him under Article 204 of the 
Constitution read with Section 3 of the 
Contempt of Court  Ordinance , 2003 , 
with the direction t o him to enter CMA No.3685 -3686 of 2012 in HRC No.7734 -G of 2009  - 14 - 
 appear ance in person on 4t h February, 
2013, for filing of the reply and for 
further proceedings according to the 
Constitution and la w”.  
 
9.  The O ffice is directed to issue notice to Admiral (R) 
Fasih Bokhari, Chairman NAB, to the extent of  the cont ents of the 
letter and the last preceding para of th is order noted hereinabove 
during the course of the day. 
10.  Adjourned to 04.02.2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 CJ. 
 
 
 
Islamabad  J. 
31.01.2013  
 J. 
 