IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
Bench -III: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
Constitution Petition No.42/2022  
Public Interest Law Association of Pakistan  
...…. Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
….Respondent(s)  
For the petitioner(s):  Syed M. Faisal Hussain Naqvi, ASC.  
    (Through V.L. Lahore Registry)  
For the respondent(s):  N.R. 
Date of hearing:   07.03.2024  
ORDER  
CMA 1684 of 2024  
In pursuance to the order dated 25.01.2024 passed on the 
administrative side, learned counsel for the petitioner has amended 
the memo of parties through this application which is allowed, subject 
to all just and legal exceptions. Office shall ensure that c orrect memo 
of parties is placed on the main file.  
Main case  
2. Learned counsel submits that climate change1 is a serious 
existential threat to Pakist an. Considering its critical importance the 
Pakistan Climate Change Act, 2017  (“Act”) was promulgated on 
31.03.2017 with the objective of providing comprehensive adaptation 
and mitigation policies, plans, programmes, projects and other 
measures required to address the effects of climate change and for 
matters connected therewith and ancillary thereto. The gri evance of 
the petitioner is that the Act envisages the establishment of the 
Pakistan Climate Change Authority  (under Section 5 of the Act ) which, 
                                                             
1 Under SecƟon 2(d) of the Act, climate change means a change in the climate system which is caused 
by signiﬁcant changes in the concentraƟon of greenhouse gases as a direct or indirect consequence of  
human acƟviƟes and which is in addiƟon to natural climate  change that has been observed during a 
considerable period.  Const. P. 42 of 2022  2 
 
inter alia , has the following important functions under Section 8 of the 
Act: 
8. Functions of the Authority. --(1) Functions of the Authority shall be to  –     
(a) formulate, comprehensive adaptation and mitigation policies, plans, 
programmes, projects and measures designed to address the effects of 
climate change and meet Pakistan's obligations under internation al 
conventions and agreements relating to climate change and within the 
framework of a national climate change policy as may be approved by 
the Federal Government from time to time;  
(b) establish institutional and policy mechanisms for implementation of 
Federal and provincial adaptation and mitigation policies, plans, 
programmes, projects and measures, including plans for renewable 
energy and clean technology measures for energy efficiency and 
energy conservation and awareness -raising and capacity -building 
programmes;  
(c) prepare suitable adaptation and mitigation projects for submission to 
international and local institutions for finding, including the Clean 
Development Mechanism, Global Environmental Facility, Green 
Climate Fund and Adaptation Fund;  
(d) prepare the National Adaptation Plan and its constituent provincial 
and local adaptation action plans, the Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Action Framework and the Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions, Nationally Determined Contributions and Nati onal 
Communication to be submitted to the concerned Secretariat of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change' and 
monitor implementation thereof;  
(e) carry out Technology Needs Assessment and prepare Climate Change 
Technology Action Plan i n accordance with international best 
practices for seeking technical and financial support, amongst others, 
through the Technology Mechanism;  
Therefore, it is the Authority the in effect operationalizes the Act and 
in the absence of such Authority, the entire Act has been rendered 
ineffective. It is also submitted that Pakistan Climate Change Fund  
under Section 12 of the Act has also not been set up . Further, unless 
the Authority is established the said Fund cannot be managed  under 
section 13 .   
3.  According to the Global Climate Risk Index, Pakistan is 
currently the fifth most climate -vulnerable country in the world. At the 
same time, Pakistan also faces some of the highest disaster risk levels 
in the world, ranking 23th out of 194 countries as per the 2024 Inform 
Risk Index.2 This risk is driven particularly by the nation’s exposure to 
flooding, earthquakes, tropical cyclones and their associated hazards. 
It is these alarming statistics which underscore the need to address 
climate change and mitigate it s effect on people and their livelihoods. 
While developing countries like Pakistan may not be the primary 
contributors to climate change, acknowledging and confronting its 
fallout is indispensable, especially for combatting the high risks posed 
                                                             
2 European Commission, Inform Risk Index, 2024.  Const. P. 42 of 2022  3 
 
by climate change.3 As Pakistan and other nations come to terms with 
the impacts of climate change, they will confront questions of 
adaptation, a process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and 
its effects. As a country which has a very low technical and fina ncial 
capacity to adapt to its adverse impacts, the critical importance of 
adaptation and its role in reducing vulnerability, promoting equity and 
safeguarding economic and social stability, particularly for vulnerable 
populations and the marginalized comm unities must be underscored.4 
This not only aligns with Pakistan’s international commitments such 
as the Paris Agreement but also contributes to the advancement of the 
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals.  
4. As Pakistan  moves towards adaptation, it must be supported by 
greater accessibility of and access to finance. According to the United 
Nations Convention on Climate Change (“ UNFCCC ”) Standing 
Commit tee on Finance, “ Climate finance aims at reducing emissions 
and enhanc ing sinks of greenhouse gases and aims at reducing 
vulnerability of, and maintaining and increasing the resilience of, 
human and ecological systems to negative climate change impacts.” 
The primary goal of climate finance is to facilitate the transition to a 
low-carbon and climate -resilient global economy. In the context of 
Pakistan, the economic cost of climate change is substantial and 
affects all sectors, including agriculture, infrastructure, trade and 
tourism. Developing countries like Pakistan struggle  with high levels of 
debt, which potentially hinder their ability to invest in climate 
mitigation and adaptation measures.5 Therefore, access to existing 
climate funds needs to be simplified and the issue of debt needs to be 
looked upon. Another way to cur b this issue is the usage of loss and 
damage fund which could play a pivotal role in building resilience, 
supporting adaptation efforts, and aiding in the recovery from climate -
induced losses. Loss and damage arising from the adverse effects of 
climate cha nge can include those related to extreme weather events 
but also slow onset events, such as sea level rise, increasing 
temperatures, ocean acidification, glacial retreat and related impacts, 
salinization, land and forest degradation, loss of biodiversity a nd 
desertification. Article 8 of the Paris Agreement enshrines the 
                                                             
3 Juan D. Baron & Saher Asad, ‘Turning Concern into Action: Understanding Climate Change Attitudes 
in Pakistan’ World Bank.  
4 Alice Kaswan, ‘Adap tation Justice’ University of San Francisco Law Research Paper 2016 -06 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2703631  last accessed 11 March 2024.  
5 Ministry of Clima te Change, National Adaptation Plan, 2023.  Const. P. 42 of 2022  4 
 
importance of averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage 
and the role of sustainable development in reducing the risk of loss 
and damage.6 The establishment of a loss and damage fu nd for highly 
climate -vulnerable countries like Pakistan would be a vital step 
towards realizing climate justice. Acknowledging that developing 
countries like Pakistan often contribute the least to climate change but 
suffer the most severe consequences, th e fund underscores the moral 
responsibility of historically high -emitting countries. Moreover, by 
facilitating the implementation of climate -resilient infrastructure and 
community -based adaptation strategies, the fund could empower the 
marginalized communi ties to better cope with the impacts of climate 
change, fostering international cooperation and financial commitments 
essential for a sustainable and just future.  
5.  Pakistan’s commitment to equitable and effective global climate 
governance is also evident in its multifaceted approach at COP -28. The 
nation not only emphasized the financial aspects, calling for simplified 
access procedures to climate finance and express ing a preference for 
grant -based financing, but also actively reached a historic agreement 
on the operationalization of the loss and damage fund and funding 
arrangements.7 The agreement, as agreed upon by all parties at COP -
28 urges developed nations to lead in financial contributions to make 
up for the irreversible climate change induced damages they have 
contributed to. This holistic commitment underscores Pakistan’s 
leadership in navigating the complexities of climate change and its 
dedication to fostering a fair and transparent global response to the 
urgent challenges posed by a changing climate. Similarly, the 
implications of this fund’s operationalization and d ynamics  can be 
profound for climate vulnerable countries like Pakistan which suff er 
from extreme weather events. The devastation caused by the 
catastrophic floods in 2022 is distressing proof of the same  which 
caused a total damage of PKR 3.2 trillion (US$14.9 bil lion), a total loss 
at PKR 3.3 trillion (US$15.2 billion) and total needs for recovery and 
reconstruction at PKR 3.5 trillion (US$16.3 million) .8 Against these 
alarming figures and background,  the need for climate finance as new 
and additional and sustained financial resources with a transparent 
                                                             
6 Article 8, The Paris Agreement, 2015.  
7 Kiara Worth, “ COP -28 Agreement Signals “Beginning of the End” of the Fossil Fuel Era”, COP -28, 
United Nations Climate Change.  
8 Province of Sindh v. Sartaj Haider, 2023 SCMR 459.  Const. P. 42 of 2022  5 
 
mechanism, that meets the needs to developing and vulnerable 
countries like Pakistan, with the speed and scale is direly needed.  
6. Let notice be issu ed to the respondents for 21.03.2024. Notice 
shall also be issued to the Attorney General for Pakistan, as well as, to 
the Advocate Generals of all Provinces for the aforesaid date.  Who will 
submit a detailed report regarding climate change challenges face d by 
them and  the initiatives taken by their respective governments. We 
also wish to seek  the opinion of independent experts in the area  
namely: (i) Hammad Naqi Khan, Director General/CEO, World 
Wildlife Fund (WWF) , WWF -Pakistan office, inside Ali Institute of 
Education, Ferozepur Road, Lahore , and (ii) Mr. Abid Qaiyum Suleri, 
Executive Director, Sustainable Development Policy Institute 
(SDPI), Plot # 10  ،Taimur Chambers, Fazl -ul-Haq Road, G 6/2 Blue 
Area, Islamabad . Let notices be issued to them.  To come up on  
21.3.2024 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
7th March, 2024.  
Not approved for reporting  
Iqbal  Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 