IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
 
Presidential R eference No. 2 of 2022  
(Refer ence by the  President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
under Article 186 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 .)  
 
IN ATTENDANCE    
For the Federation  : Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
Addl. Attorney General  
Assisted by : 
Barrister M. Usama R auf 
Mr. Zohair Waheed  
Miss Mar yam Rashid & 
Miss Faryal Shah Afridi , Adv.  
   
For PPL/OGDCL/ Govt. 
Holdings (Pvt.) Ltd.  : Barrister Jahanzeb Awan, ASC  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Umar Shahzad Abbasi  
Mr. Abdullah Raza  
Mr. Shabbir Harianwala  
   
For Govt. of Balochis tan  : Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed, A SC 
Mr. M. Asif Reki, AG , Balochistan  
Mr. M. Ayaz Kha n Swati, Addl. AG , 
Balochistan  
   
For PBC  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, ASC  
   
For Balochistan Bar  : Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, ASC  
   
Amic i Curiae  : Mr. Salman Akram Raja, A SC 
Dr. M. Farogh Naseem, ASC  
Mr. Zahid F. Ibrahim, ASC  
   
For Barr ick Gold 
Corporation  : Mr. M. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC  
Assisted by:  
S.M. Faisal Hussain Naqvi, ASC  
Mr. Iftikhar -ud-Din Riaz, ASC  
Mr. Saad M. Hashmi, Advocate  
Kh. Aziz Ahsan, Advocate  
Mr. Yawar Mukhtar, Advocate  
Kh. Azeem, Advocate  
   
White & Case  : Rabecca C ampbe ll 
Mr. Kamran Ahmed  
(Via Video -Link) 
   
 
 Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   2
Lazard  : Spiro Youakim  
Pierre Cailletea  
Xovier de Regloix  
(Via Video -Link) 
   
Dates of Hearing  : 25 Oct 2022, 01 -02 Nov 2022, 7 -10 Nov 
2022, 14 -17 Nov 2022, 21-24 Nov 2022, 
28-29 Nov 2022  
   
OPINION 
 
  For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject 
to such amplification and elaboration as may be considered 
necessary, Presidential Reference  No.2 of 2022 is ans wered as 
follows:   
2.  On 29.07.1993 the Balochistan Development Authority 
(BDA) entered into  the Chaghi Hill s Exploration Joint Venture 
Agreement (CHEJVA ) with a foreign investor  having 75% 
shareholding  and BDA having  25% shareholding plus 2% royalty . 
Subsequently, in the year 200 6, the foreign investor was succeeded 
by Tethyan Copper  Company P ty. Ltd., Australia (TCCA ). TCCA in 
turn was acquired  by Barri ck Gold Co rporation (Barri ck) and 
Antofagasta  in equal  shares . Under  CHEJVA  Barrick and its 
partner had the exclus ive righ t to prospect and explore for copper 
and gold in the Reko Diq area.  
3.  Between 2006 and 2011, TCCA invested in mineral 
exploration and develop ed detailed plans for mining at Reko Diq. 
However , on 15.11.2011, the licensing  authority  of the Governme nt 
of Balochistan ( GoB) declined the  mining lease application  
subm itted by the project company  of TCCA. Shortly ther eafter, on 
28.11.2011 TCCA init iated arbitration proceedings under the Pak -
Australia  Bilateral Investm ent Treaty (BIT) against the Governmen t 
of Pakistan ( GoP), which claim was registered  as an arbitration 
case with the International Centre for Settlem ent of Investment 
Disputes ( ICSID ). TCCA also  commenced arbitration proceedings Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   3
against  GoB at the International C hamber of Commerce ( ICC) for 
claims arising out of  the CHEJVA . Meanwhile a Writ Petition  filed 
by a Pak istani citizen challenging CHEJVA was dismissed by the  
High Court of Balochistan on 26.06.2007. Leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court against the said judgment was clu bbed with other 
Constitution  Petition s. All the matters were disposed of by  the 
Suprem e Cou rt vide short order dated 07.01.2013 setting aside the 
judgment of the High Court of Balochistan . The detailed reasons 
are reported as Abdul Haque Baloch  Vs. Government of 
Balochista n (PLD 2013 SC 641). As a res ult, CHEJVA was 
declared void, inter al ia, on the ground that it had been entered 
into without lawful authorization and was a non -transparent 
agreement that failed to comply with the regulatory provision s of 
law regarding mining  operations in the  Province.   
4.  The ICSID  arbitration continued in th e mean while  and 
on 10.11.2017  the ICSID Tribunal  rendered its decision on 
jurisdiction and liability. On 12.07.2019  the ICSID  Tribunal  
announced its  final award  with TCCA receiving  approximately  US$ 
5.9 billion in damage s, pre -award interest and cost s incurred b y it. 
Further litigation ensued as TCCA made efforts for enforcing the 
award in different jurisdiction s.  
5.  In the above background, the GoP and the GoB 
commenced talks with the  TCCA. After lengthy negotia tions 
spanning over three years between the  repre sentatives of the two 
Governments and the TCCA Board , a settlement was proposed.  
According to the settlement the financial liability of the GoP under 
the ICSID  award was agreed to  be settled under  the terms and 
conditi ons incorporated in a set of a greeme nts executed between 
the parties. We do not propose nor are we required to comment on Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   4
the commercia l terms  settled between the parties which have be en 
agreed after extens ive negotia tions b etween GoP/GoB and 
Barric k/Antofagasta. In such negotiations G oP/GoB  had t he 
assistance of independent international fin ancial, technical and 
legal experts in addition to Pakistani experts . The negotiations 
were conduct ed by the duly a uthorized repr esentatives o f the 
parties  who h ad been instructed by th e comp etent authorities . 
Simultaneously, the ICC proceedings have also matured to a point 
of decision on  liability and  quantum wi th a likely award  (as per  the 
advice of interna tional legal  and financi al consultan ts of GoP) of 
approximately US$ 2 to 3 billion expected  in favour of TCCA . As a 
resul t, in addition to the actual determined liabi lity of US$  5.9 
billion plus interest  (on the basis of  the ICSID Awar d), another US$ 
2 to 3 billion aw ard is in th e pip eline to be paid to Barri ck and  
Antofagasta  by the GoP and GoB. We have been informed that a s 
part of the settlement , the parties  have agreed that Antofagasta 
shall be paid an amount of  US$ 900 million  which has since been 
deposited in an E scrow Account by the GoP. Upon fulfillment  of 
the condition s precedent  on or before December 15, 2022 
Antofagasta shall be entitled to the amount in the E scrow Account . 
On receipt of the said amo unt any and all rights of Antofagasta 
under the ICSID award , the ICC pro ceedings and any and all 
claims of Antofagasta against GoP/GoB  directly or in directl y 
arising out of or having any nexu s or connection with the Reko Diq 
project  shall stand finally and  conclusively  extinguish ed with no 
further claims either against Barrick  or GoP/GoB . It was  also 
agreed betwe en the parties that  under the settlement the Reko Diq 
project w ill be reconstituted  with Barrick being the operator and 
TCCA holding  50% of the equity with the remaining  50% of the Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   5
equity being held by local Pakist ani e ntities . We have been 
informed that  the 50% local i nterest w ill be held as follows : 
(i) GoB holding a  10% free carried interest ;  
(ii) GoB holding a 15% fully participating interest 
indirectly ; 
 
(iii) GoB receiving royalty at the rate of 5%; a nd 
(iv) GoP or designated Pakistani entities holding the 
remai ning 25% fully partic ipating i nterest. 
The parties also agreed to a package of negotiated fiscal measures 
such as royalties and taxes applicable to the project tha t will be 
stabilized /granted for a speci fic period . Following the restructuring 
of the Reko Diq project , Antofag asta w ill be paid US$ 900 million 
plus accrued interest by the GoP and w ill exit the project  by 
transferring its entire interest in T CCA to Ba rrick. The GoP, GoB 
and both Barrick and A ntofagasta have agreed that all the disputes 
that have arisen  from the Reko Diq pro ject which  are the subject 
matter of litigation /Arbitration Award(s)  anywhere in the world  
shall finally and conclusively  stand resolved as soon  as th e 
agreements which hav e been placed on record and the conditions 
precedent mentioned therein are met on o r before Dece mber 15, 
2022 , and any or all claims including the outstanding ICSID award 
and the anticipated ICC award shal l stand settled without  any 
further claim of any na ture from either side. One of the conditions 
precedent for finalization  of the prop osed settlement is the 
President of Pakistan s eeking an op inion from this Court on th e 
points noted in the Implementation Agreement.   
6.  In ligh t of t he above background th e President of 
Pakistan has referred the following questions for conside ration and 
opinion of this Court : 
“i) Wheth er the earlier  judgment of this  Honourable  Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   6
Court reported as [Maul ana] Abdul Haq ue Baloch  v. 
[Government of Balochistan] , PLD 2 013 SC 641  or the 
laws, public policy or  Constitution of Pakistan  prevent 
the GoB and the GoP from en tering into the 
Implementation Agreement and the Definitive 
Agreements  [Agree ments ] or affect their validity?  
 
ii) If enacted, would the proposed For eign Investment 
(Protection and Promotion) Bill, 2022 [FI Bill 2022 ] be 
valid and constitu tional? ”  
 
7.  We have heard the learned Additional Attorney Gen eral 
for Pakistan , the lea rned counsel appearing on behalf of B arrick 
and the Advocate General Baloch istan assisted by Mr.Salahuddin 
Ahmed, ASC. We also appointed M r.Farogh Naseem,  ASC, Mr . 
Zahid Ibrahim , ASC and Mr.Salman Akram Raja, ASC as amici 
curia e who have also ably assisted the Court  on the legal and 
constit utional issues involved in the matter.  Mr.Amanullah 
Kanrani, ASC also submitted written submissions on behalf of  the 
Balochistan B ar Council. We have also heard Messer  Spiro 
Youakim , Pierre Cailletea  and Xovier de Regloix , representatives of 
Lazard as well as Ms.Rabecca C ampbell  and Mr.Kamran A hmed  of 
White and C ase (via video  link) who were the Financial  
Consultants /Legal Advisors  of the GoP/GoB respec tively during 
negotiations  with Barri ck/ Antofagasta  .   
8.  On hearing the parties, we find  that the foll owing 
issues arise  from the Reference :  
i) Whether the Constitution places any bar on the 
disposal of public assets through a nego tiated 
agreement?  
 
ii) Whether the Regulation of Mines and Oil fields and 
Mineral  Development ( Governmen t Control) 
(Amendment ) Act, 2 022 (2022 Act) is within the Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   7
legislative competence  of the Balochistan Assembly?  
 
iii) Whether the process through which t he GoB is 
entering i nto the Agreements is fair, transparent, 
reasonable and in accordance with law?  
 
iv) Whether the terms of  the Agreements violate or  are in 
conflict with the judgme nt of this Court in Abdul 
Haque Baloch ’s case ( PLD 2013 SC 641)? 
9.  In light of our  answers to the foregoing  issues whi ch 
raise legal and  constitutional questions , the first question referred  
to this Court  by the President of Pak istan, reproduced in 
paragraph 6(i) above is answered in the negati ve for  the following 
reasons:   
i) It is settl ed law that while disposal of public  assets 
through a competitive process is the ordinary rule , it 
is not an invariable rule. The Constitution d oes not  
forbid disposal o f public assets other than through a 
compe titive process  so long as such d isposal has the 
support of the  law and is justified on r ational 
grounds , as is the case here.      
 
ii) Ever since  the enactment of t he Con stitution, 
legisla tive competence to deal w ith mines and mineral 
development (other than minerals used for nuclear 
energy) has res ted exclusively with the Provincial 
Assemblie s. Therefore, t he Provincial Assemblies of 
Sindh and Khyb er P akhtunkhwa hav e already 
enacted  compre hensive statutes dealing with mines 
and mineral development (other than minerals used 
for generatio n of nuclear energy). It follows  from the  
legislati ve ambit of the Provincial Assemblies  under 
the Constitution that th ey are  compete nt to “a lter, 
amend or repeal” any existing law t o the  extent  that it 
deals with  mine s and mineral development.  As far as 
the amendment  incorporated in the Regulation of 
Mines and Oil  fields and Mineral Development Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   8
(Government  Control) Ac t, 1948  (1948 Act ) is 
concerned,  which  has been introduced by way o f the 
2022  Act, to the extent that the said statute  applies 
to the P rovinc e of Balochi stan it is intra vires the 
Constitution and the rules framed by  the GoB under 
Section 2 of  the 1948  Act. The 2022 Ac t can therefore  
be treated as a stand alone provision  that operates 
alongside the 1948 Act and the aforesaid rules  
insofar as the subject of mines and mineral s 
development  (other than oil fields and mineral 
resources necessary for generation  of nuclear energy ) 
falls within th e exclusive  legislative competence of the 
provincial legislature . 
 
iii) The Balochi stan Cabinet has approved  the decision to 
enter into  the Agreeme nts on the basis of a detailed 
summary, a copy of which has been f iled with th is 
Court . The su mmary consider s ‘publi c interest ’ 
inherent  in the  negotiated agreement and since the 
Agreements pertain to an ‘internationa l obligation ’ in 
terms of the 2022 Act (i.e., Pakistan’s obligation to 
make payment of approximately US$ 6 billion under  
an ICSID award dat ed 12.07 .2019 ), the formal 
obligations requ ired under the  2022  Act for entering 
into a negotiated agreement stand ful filled. 
 
iv) The Federal Government  has placed on record 
documents to show that an Apex Committee headed  
by the Prime M inister of Pa kistan and att ended by all  
the relevant stakehold ers (including the Chief 
Minister and Chief Secretary of Balochistan) had 
carefully negotiated the terms of the Agreements with 
the help of international financial advisors, 
international legal advi sors, int ernational min ing 
experts and international tax a dvisors in additio n to 
independent Pakistani advisors. As noted above, t he 
international advisors  also addressed the Court 
directly during proceedings in -person and through 
video link, and answered all the queries raised by the Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   9
Court. Prima facie , the Agreements canno t be faulted 
for lack of due diligence on the part of State 
authorities.  
 
v) The Agreements do not , prima facie,  violate any of the 
findings recorded in the Abdul Haque Baloch  case 
(PLD 2013 SC 64 1). Unlike CHEJVA, the decision to 
enter in to the Agreements is backed by law and has 
been taken on the basis of caref ul negotiations during 
which authorized representatives of GoP/GoB were 
duly assisted by  independent in ternational 
consultants.  
 
Further,  the ob ligation to act in accordance  with 
“Appl icable Law” contained in the Agreements as well 
as the obligations of  the Licensee to apply for 
consents in accordance with law and satisfy all 
conditions prescribed by the A pplicable Law means  
that the statut ory dis cretion of public functionaries is 
not b eing fettered  by the Agreements . 
 
vi) We have also been informed that the Provincial 
Assembly of Balochistan was  given a detailed in -
camera briefing  and was take n into confid ence 
regarding the entire project a nd the terms and 
conditions of the proposed settlement between the 
parties  were accepted  without any objection s being 
raised by the chosen representatives of the people of 
Balochistan.   
 
vii) On our specific query relat ing to environmenta l 
consideration s, particularly in relation to  the use of 
water , we have been informed that the Agreements 
contain no exemption from Pak istan’s environmental 
laws. Rather, the Agreements require Barrick to act 
in accordance with both inte rnational environm ental 
standards a nd dome stic laws.  
 Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   10
10.  The second question is answered in the affirmative for 
the following reasons :  
i) Article 144  of the Constitution allows Provincial 
Assemblies to empower Parliament to pass a law 
dealing with iss ues within the legislative competen ce 
of the Provinces . Similarly, Article 147 of  the 
Constitution allows the Provinces to entrust , either 
conditi onally o r un conditionally, to the Federal 
Government or to its officers , functions in relation to 
any matter t o which the executi ve authority of the 
Province extends . 
 
ii) We have been provi ded the draft resolutions proposed 
to be passed by the Provin cial Assembl ies of Sindh 
and Balochistan to empower  Parliament to enact the 
proposed F I Bill  2022 . Provided that the draft 
resolu tions are passed , Parliament  will be comp etent 
to enact the FI Bil l 2022 , including the no tified 
exemptions  specified in the Bill  and the protected 
benefits  listed in the Third Schedule . 
 
iii) The provisions of Section 3 of the FI Bill 202 2 do not 
in our opi nion fetter the soverei gnty of Parliament. It 
appears that the FI Bill 2022  represents a version of 
the Protectio n of Economic Reforms Act, 1992 . It 
allows the Federal Government to notify certain 
benefits which may not be withdrawn to t he prejudice 
of an investor. We hav e also been informed and ther e 
is consensus of all the learned counsel in th is matter 
that Parliament remains at lib erty to repeal the  entire 
FI Bill 2022 , if it so desires, of course subject to the 
corresponding legal co nsequences  that may arise 
from such  repeal .  
 
On our query, we h ave also been info rmed that most 
of the exemptions proposed to be granted are already 
available under the regulatory r egime s pertaining to 
Export Processing Zone s and Special Technology 
Zones.  Further , the exemption s being gran ted from Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   11
the operation of  Labour Laws do not d enude the 
labour force of their rightful entitlement to fair wages, 
allowances and guarantees/ benefits pro vided by law.  
The learned counsel for  Barrick has categorically 
assur ed us that the applicab le minimum w age law s 
will be fully observed an d the Agreem ents expressly 
provide  that all operations will be carrie d out in 
accordance with International Mining Standards 
which are defined to include compliance with IFC 
Performa nce Standards, to the e xtent applic able. It 
has been point ed out to us that t he IFC Pe rformance 
Standards contain detailed provisions pertainin g to 
labour  rights. Barrick has also committed to act in 
accordance with  the United Nation s Guiding 
Principles o n Business and Human Ri ghts. We hav e 
also been assured that Barrick will contribute 
substantially towards Corporate Social Responsibility 
by dedi catin g a perc entage of its returns towards 
provision of fresh drinking water, health facilities, 
schools an d local infrastructure  to the people of  
Balochistan . In addition, most of the labour fo rce will 
be employed from amongst the local  population  of the 
Province . In addition, progra ms for d evelopment of 
skills w ill also be put in place.  
 
11.  A point th at emerges from the Refere nce filed before  us 
is whether the FI Bill 2022  can be challenge d on the ground that it 
is a person specific law. We note that t he FI Bill 2 022 is not limi ted 
exclusively to the Reko Diq project . Instead, it provides a 
framework f or grant of investment inc entives which will, subject to 
the provisions of the Bill , be availa ble to all investment s of US$ 
500 million or more. The fact that the Reko Diq project is the fi rst 
to be identified as  a “Qualified Investment” under the FI Bill 2022  
does not render the s tatute a s “perso n-specific. ” Furthermore, to 
the extent that legislat ive amendments in the Second Schedule to  Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   12
the FI Bill 2022  pertain speci fically to  the Reko Diq project , such 
statutory provisions and mechanisms are the norm in a nu mber of 
other fiscal statu tes, including , but not limited to  the Income Tax 
Ordinance, 200 1. Under the terms of the FI Bill 2022 s uch specific 
exemptions are required either to be legislatively promulgated or 
legislatively ratified.  
12.  We also note that th e proposed FI Bill 2022  will not 
only pave  the way for implementation of the Reko Diq pro ject in its 
present form but will also facilitate and encourage  direct foreig n 
investment in similar  mining project s and other hi gh capital 
intensive industries  in whi ch direct foreign investme nt is required 
to be encouraged through  guarantees  assured by  laws and 
regulat ory measures.  
13.  To sum up we are of the vi ew that the parameters set  
out in  Abdul Haque Baloch ’s case ( PLD 2013 SC 641) and the 
reason s for the same , have been duly addressed by  the Federa l and 
Provincial Governments . The  process  for the reconstitution of the 
Reko Diq project  has been und ertaken transparently  and with due 
diligence. The Agreements are being signed by authorities duly 
authorized and c ompetent  to do  so under the la w. To ensur e 
transparency and fairness , expert advice on  the financial, technical 
and legal issues involved has b een sought from both l ocal as wel l 
as independent international experts /consultants  on the terms 
settled in the Agreements . The Agreements have been put in place 
after due deliberation and have not been f ound by us to be 
unconstitutional or illegal  on the parameters and grounds  spelt out 
in Abdul Haq ue Baloch ’s case  ibid.  Likewise, the rational e, basis, 
legality and vires of the FI Bill 2022  as we ll as the amendments to 
its schedule s and annexures and the  amendments incorpora ted Reference No.2/20 22                                                                                                
 
   13
through SROs, provided the resolutions are passed  by the Sindh 
and Balochistan Provincial Assembl ies and the Bill is passed by 
the Parliamen t after following due process , shall be  duly enacted 
as required under the Constitution . And such laws and regul atory 
measures  do not in any manner violate the Const itution or the 
Law.    
  The Reference  is accordingly ans wered in the 
aforenoted  terms.   
 
Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
 
   
  Sd/-   
Judge    
  Sd/- 
Judge  
 
I agree  subject to my clarificati on that I may not 
respond  to question No.1 to the exte nt of “public 
policy .” My detailed  reasons shall  follow.  
 
 
   Sd/-   
Judge    
 
  Sd/- 
Judge  
Announ ced in Court  
on 09.12.2022  
 
 
  Sd/- 
  CJ. 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  