IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
   PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN  
MR. JUSTICE MANZOOR AHMAD MALIK  
 
Criminal Petition No.888/2015  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 20.10.2015 
passed by the Lahore High Court, Rawalpindi  Bench 
in Crl.Misc. No.1787 -B/2015)  
 
Naseem Akhtar  
…Petitioner  
Versus  
The State  
..Respondent  
 
For the petitioner:  Mr. S.M. Ayub Bokhari, ASC  
    Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR  
 
For the respond ent: Raja Inaam Amin Minhas, Spl. Prosecutor, ANF  
 
Date of hearing:   27.1.2016  
      
ORDER  
 
   Dost Muhammad Khan, J. — After arguing the case at 
length, the learned counsel for the petitioner stated that if the Jail 
Authorities are directed to extend all required facilities to the suckling 
baby and her mother (the accused pet itioner) during 
confinement/detention and the Trial Court is directed to conclude the 
trial within a month, then he will not press this petition.  
2.   We have perceived from the fax massage of the 
Superintendent Jail, Rawalpindi that the petitioner is a s uckling baby of 
the age of one year and six months and depends on breast feeding. 
The Superintendant Central Jail, Rawalpindi is directed to ensure that 
the baby shall not suffer due to un -nutrition and all required standard 
facilities be provided to the b aby and her mother, which is required in 
such cases, while the Trial Court is directed to conclude the trial within 
one month, after receiving copy of this order . If the prosecution or the 
defense delays in the conclusion of the trial, the Trial Court may resort Crl.P.888/15  2 
to take appropriate action by imposing action and may adopt any 
coercive measure  to ensure the conclusion of the trial.  
3.    If, in case, the trial is not concluded within one month and 
the delay in the conclusion of the trial is not attributable to the 
petitioner or any person, acting on her behalf then, fresh bail petition 
be considered favourable  to her , by the Trial Court.  
With these observations, this petition is disposed of.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
  
 
 
Judge  
 
Islamabad, the   
27th January, 2016  
Nisar / -‘ 
 
 
 