IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
Bench -II: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
Const. P. No.42/2022  
Public Interest Law Association of Pakistan   
...…. Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, etc.    
….Respondent(s)  
In attendance:  Mian Sami ud Din, ASC vice  
Mr. Faisal Hussain Naqvi, ASC.  
   Mr. M. Habib Qureshi, ASC  
Ch. Muhammad Shoaib, ASC.  
Mr. Jawad Rabbani, Dy. Chief M/O PD&SI  
   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, AGP.  
   Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP.  
   Mr. Jawad Dero, AAG  
Mr. Ghulam Murtaza,  
Director Climate Chang, Balochistan.  
   Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, Addl. AGP.  
   Ms. Anza Niazi, A.D. Environment Pb.  
   Mr. Baleegh -uz-Zaman Ch, Addl. AGP.  
   Syed Kausar Ali, Addl. AG KPK.  
   Mr. M. Ayyaz Khan Swati, AAG Balochistan.  
   Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi, AOR.  
   Mr. Mumtaz Ali, D.D. L/EPA, KPK.  
   Mr. Hammad Naqi Khan, Amicus Curiae.  
   Mr. Ghulam Qadir Shah, I.G. (Forest)  
   Mr. Asif Sahibzada, D.G. (Env/CC)  
   Syed Ali Raza Zaidi, D.D.  (Law).  
   Mr. Shams -ul-Haq, S.O. (A.D.  
 
Date of hearing:  06.05.2024  
ORDER  
On the last date of hearing i.e.,21.03.2024, learned Attorney 
General assured the Court that the meeting of the Council will be held 
within a month from today to address the questio n regarding the 
establishment of the Authority, as well as, the Fund . Today, it is pointed 
out that meeting of the Council was held on 26.04.2024 and a summary 
has been put up by the Minister Incharge, Ministry of Climate Change for 
the establishment of th e Authority but the Authority has not yet been 
established. We understand  that the climate change is the most serious 
existential threat to the people of Pakistan and considering that the C.P. 42  of 2022.doc  2
Climate Act , 2017 was promulgated seven years ago  neither the Author ity 
nor the Fund has been established so far. Considering that failure to 
establish the Authority has serious implication on the fundamental rights 
of the people of Pakistan,  we direct the Federal Government to establish 
the Authority within a fortnight  and thereafter complete the establishment 
of the Fund . 
2.  Vide our last order dated 21.03.2024, the Provincial 
Governments were also directed to place on the record strategies adopted 
by them regarding climate change. In pursuance to above, learned 
Addition al Advocate General representing the KPK, Sindh and Punjab 
submit that they have submitted their strategies regarding the climate 
change. As far as, Balochistan is concerned, the Director Climate Change 
submits that summary has been put up before the Cabin et and report to 
this effect has been placed on the record.  We will take up these matters 
next time.  
3.  Let this case be posted for 03.06.2024.  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
6th May, 2024.  
Not approved for reporting  but 
shall be uploaded for information 
on the S.C. webs ite. 
Iqbal  Judge  
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
  