IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
MR. JUSTICE SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI  
 
CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 442 OF 2021  
(On appeal against the order dated 09.04.2021 passed by 
the Peshawar High Court, Pes hawar in Cr. Misc. (BA) No. 
976-P/2021 ) 
 
Saeed Yousaf  
       … Petitioner  
VERSUS  
The State and another  
       … Respondent s 
 
For the Petitioner : Mr. Dar -ul-Salam, ASC  
 
For the State :  Mr. Shumayl Aziz, Addl. A.G. KPK  
    Mr. Anwar Ali, Inspector  
 
For the  Complainant:  In person  
 
Date of Hearing:   15.06.2021  
 
ORDER  
 
SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI, J. - Through this petition 
under Article 185(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973, the petitioner seeks post -arrest bail in case 
registered  vide FIR No.  687 dated 20.11.2019 under Sections 
302/324/34 PPC at Police Station Akora Khattak, District 
Nowshera .   The same relief was denied to him by the learned Trial 
Court as also by the High Court vide impugned order.  
2.  As per contents of the c rime report, the deceased  was 
taking children to school in his Datsun car. When he saw the 
accused armed with firearms, he informed the complainant through 
mobile to reach at the place of occurrence. When the complainant 
and his nephew reached there, co -accused Abid started firing with 
Kalashnikov on the deceased  from the front side whereas the co -
accused Iqbal started firing at the deceased from backside , due to 
which he lost his life. The petitioner along with the three co -accused 
also fired at the compla inant and his nephew Mehmood due t o 
which they received injuries.  The motive was stated to be a quarrel 
which took place between the deceased and the accused.  
3.  Learned counsel for the petitioner inter alia contended 
that the petitioner has been falsely  involved in the instant case by Criminal Petition No. 442/2021  2
the complainant against the actual facts and  circumstances of this 
case in connivance with  the local police; that in the FIR though the 
petitioner has been assigned specific role of causing injury on the 
injured PWs, howeve r, the medical officer  while examining the 
injured PWs has clearly opined that the injuries on both the injured 
PWs are suspected, which clearly reflects that the medical officer  
was doubtful about the infliction of the injuries as stated in the crime 
report; that  though the co -accused of the petitioner are still at large 
but the criminal liability cannot be shifted from one accused to 
another; that  the petitioner is behind the bars and during course of 
investigation, no recovery has been affected from him,  which further 
lends support to the version of the petitioner claiming innocence in 
the case. Lastly it has been argued that the investigation is complete 
and the petitioner is no more required for further investigation and 
he is entitled for the concessio n of bail on this score alone.  
4.  On the other hand, learned Additional Prosecutor 
General and  the complainant in person have supported the 
impugned order declining bail to the petitioner . Learned Law Officer 
contended that the petitioner has been specif ically nominated in the 
FIR, therefore, he does not deserve any leniency by this Court.  
5.  We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner as also 
learned Law Officer and have perused the record with their 
assistance.  
  There is no denial to this fact that there are four persons 
involved in the case. The role of causing firearm injury to the 
deceased is ascribed to the co -accused of the petitioner whereas the 
only role attributed to the petitioner is that he caused injury to the 
injured PWs. During medi cal examination of the injured PWs, it has 
been specifically mentioned in the medico leg al report that the 
injuries sustained by both the injured PWs are suspected . Even 
otherwise, there is no specification of injury caused to the injured 
PWs and even the nature of injury has not been described  by the 
Doctor . We have been informed that from the place of occurrence, 
four empties were recovered  but since no weapon of offence has 
been recovered, this cannot be used against the petitioner. It has 
been brought i n the notice of the Court that co -accused of the 
petitioner are still at large and there is no likelihood of their arrest in 
near future. We have taken care of this aspect of the case. Criminal 
liability cannot be shifted from one person to the other merel y on the Criminal Petition No. 442/2021  3
ground that the co -accused of the petitioner are still at large. Perusal 
of the record reveals that o ne of the grounds on which the learned 
courts below have refused bail to the petitioner is that he remained 
absconder after the incident. It is no w settled that an accused can 
be granted bail if the case of the petitioner is otherwise made out on 
merits and mere absconsion would not come in his way. In Rasool 
Muhammad Vs. Asal Muhammad  (PLJ 199 5 SC 47 7), this court has 
held that disappearance of a p erson named as a murderer after 
occurrence is but natural whether named rightly or wrongly.  This 
Court in Muhammad Tasaweer Vs. Hafiz Zulkarnain  (PLD 2009 SC 
53) and Mitho Pitafai Vs. State  (2009 SCMR 299)  has held that mere 
absconsion is not conclusive pr oof of guilt of an accused person. It is 
only a suspicious circumstance against an accused that he was 
found guilty of the offence. However, suspicions after all are 
suspicions. The same cannot take the place of proof. The value of 
absconsion, therefore, d epends on the facts of each case  and bail 
can be granted if an accused has good case for bail on merit and 
mere absconsion would not deprive him bail, if otherwise  the case 
of the petitioner is of “further inquiry ” as envisaged under Section 
497(2) Cr.P.C  and further no useful purpose would be served while 
keeping him behind the bars till the conclusion of the trial  pending 
adjudication before the Trial Court . 
6.  For what has been discussed above, the petitioner has 
made out a case for grant of bail. Cons equently, we convert this 
petition into appeal, allow it , set aside the impugned order and 
admit  the petitioner to bail, subject to his furnishing bail bonds in 
the sum of Rs.500,000/ - (rupees five hundred thousand) with one 
surety in the like amount to th e satisfaction of learned Trial Court.  
 
 
     
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
15th of June, 2021  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  
 
 