INDEX  
 
 
Sl. 
No. Contents  Para No. Pages  
1. Historical Background of general 
election of 1990 and exercising of 
power under Article 58(2)(b)  
 2-3 2-4 
2.  Disclosure made by  Maj. General (R) 
Nasirullah Khan Baber  on the Floor of 
the house , regarding distri bution of 
money  
 4 4-5 
3. Affidavit of Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad 
Durrani  dt: 24.07.1994  providing 
logistic support for distribution of 
money on the instructions of Gen. (R) 
Mirza Aslam Be g 
(names of recipients have been 
provided in para 101 at page 130)  4 5 
4.  News clipping of Daily Jang dated 
12.06.1996 mentioning the statement 
of Nasirullah Baber made on the floor 
of the House  and containing the names 
of recipients.  
 5 6-7 
5. Letter  of Air Marshal  (R) Muhammad 
Asghar Khan dated 16.06.1996 
addressed to Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali 
Shah.  6 7-8 
6. Letter of Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad Durrani  
(the then Ambassador of Pakistan to 
Germany at Bonn) dt: 07.06.1994 
addressed to the then PM  mentioning 
the names of remaining recipients  7 8-10 
7.  Gen(R) Aslam Beg, Lt. Gen. (R) M . 
Asad Durrani  and Mr. Yunus Habib were 
arrayed as respondents.  
 8 10 
8. CMA No.109/97 by Brig. (R) Kamal 
Alam, naming the officers, involved in 
the distribution of money  
 9 10-11 
9. Order dt.18.10.2012 with regard to 
statement of Brig.  (R) Hamid Saeed 
Akhtar requesting it to be treated as 
“confidential”.  
 9 11-12 
10.  Statement of Brig.(R) Hamid Saeed 
Akhtar, as well as hand written Diary  
providing details of accounts/ list of 
recipients  
 
 9 12-15  
 ii 
11.  Statement of Yunus Habib, u/s 161 
Cr.P.C naming t he recipients is not 
admissible  
 10 16 
12. Brief of reply of Mirza Aslam Beg  
dt.23.02.1997 a/w reproduction of the 
same  wherein he acknowledged the 
fact that money was provided by Yunus 
Habib and distributed by Asad Durrani 
on the direction of Election C ell. 
(relevant portions have been 
highlighted for reference)  
 11 16-25 
13.  Observations of petitioner on reply of 
respondent No.1  about his involvement 
in the distribution of money, 
contradicting the defences made by 
Aslam Beg  
 
 12 25-28 
14.  Affidavit  of Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad 
Durrani  dated 31.10.1997  explaining 
his position and confirming the 
distribution of money.  
 12 28-29 
15. CMA No.1006/2012 and discussion on 
reports of Commission on Mehran Bank 
and HBL Scandals  
 14-18 30-33 
16.  Discussion regar ding supply of 
‘confidential statement’ of Lt. Gen. 
Asad Durrani to PM , Mohtarma Benazir 
Bhutto, which was not produced in 
Court.  
 20 36-37 
17. Observation of Court regarding 
involvement of Mirza Aslam Beg  in 
disbursement of money and his denial 
in reply CMA 1973/12.  
 21 37-38 
18. Affidavit of Mr. Yunus Habib dated 
8.3.2012  giving details of his meetings 
with Gen. (R) Aslam Beg and President 
Ghulam Ishaq Khan as well as the 
details about the generation of funds  
 22 38-42 
19.  Counter affidavit of Mirza A slam Beg  
dt.9.3.2012 leveling allegations against 
Yunus Habib  
 23 42-47 
20 Concise statement of Lt. Gen. (R) M. 
Asad Durrani  dated 8.3.2012  clarifying 
that money was deposited by Yunus 
Habib in MI accounts and not ISI  
 24 47  
 iii 
21. Affidavit of Mr. Yunus Ha bib dated 
10.3.2012 in response to affidavit of 
respondents No.1 & 2.  
 24 47-50 
22. CMA No.1034/12 filed by Yunus Habib 
disclosing the names of persons who 
did not receive the money directly 
(Javed Hashmi) . 
 24 50-51 
23. Report of NAB regarding plea -bargain 
in HBL scam  25 51 
24. Prayers/declarations sought by the 
petitioner  
 25 51 
25.  Court Proceedings dt.26.6.1997, 
regarding creation of political cell in 
ISI, in 1975 and detailed discussion  25-29 
 51-57 
 
 
 
26. Cross -examination of Nasirullah Babar 
and Asad Durrani, produced in Court, 
and Discussed in order dated 
08.03.2012  
 27 54-57 
27. Observation that p rima facie cell was 
functioning in the Presidency  
 29 57 
28. Notice to Secretary to President and 
the statements  made by officers of the 
Presidenc y 
 30 58 
29. Clarification of Yunus Habib that the 
amount was withdrawn from HBL and 
not from Mehran Bank. Detail 
discussion regarding meetings with 
Aslam Beg and President Ghulam Ishaq 
Khan 
 31 58-59 
30. CMA No .3196 and 4350/12 filed by 
Roedad Khan deny ing his involvement 
in political activity  
 32 59-60 
31. Discussion regarding establishing of 
Election Cell in the presidency and 
distribution of money  
 32-33 59-61 
32. Allegations of disbursement of money 
to “Friends” and General Asif Nawaz  
and exception  taken to it by him   
 34 61 
33. Maintainability : 
Arguments of Mr. Akram Sheikh  
Arguments of Salman Akram Raja  
Discussion  
 
  
35 
36-38 
39-41  
61 
61-64 
64-68  
 iv 
34. Bias 
Arguments of Attorney General  
Discussion/findings   
42 
43-44  
69 
69-71 
 
35. Role of Presid ent 
Involvement of President in Politics  
Findings regarding President’s role  
Use of 58(2)(b)  
Article 41 and Oath of President  
Arguments of Attorney General that 
office of President is a political office  
Discussion on role of President  
President is include d in service of 
Pakistan  
Arguments of AG with regard oath of 
President similar to PM etc.  
 45 
46-49 
50 
51-53 
54 
55 
 
56-74 
75-79 
 
80 69 
69-80 
80 
80-84 
85-86 
86-87 
 
87-102 
103-111 
 
111-112 
36. Act of individual or Institution  
Arguments of Salman Akram Raja  
Arguments of Attorney General  
Finding  
  
 
81 
82 
82  
 
112 
112 
113 
37. Role of Armed Forces  
Article 243 and 245  
Section 33 of Pakistan Army Act  
Oath of Armed Forces  
Observation that distribution of money 
stands admitted by the respondents.  
Observation th at Political Cell was 
created in Presidency.  
Conclusion that President has no 
authority to create Election Cell  
Officers are not bound to obey illegal 
Orders.  
  
83-84 
85 
86-92 
93-95 
 
97 
 
98 
 
99-100  
113-115 
115-116 
116-121 
121-123 
 
125 
 
125-126 
 
126-128 
38. Detail of distribution/recipients  
Concise statement of Asad Durrani 
through CMA 3307/12  
List of recipients as per list attached 
with affidavit dt: 27.07.94 of Asad 
Durrani  
List of recipients given by Asad Durrani 
in letter dt: 07.06.94  
Detail of distri bution of money given by 
Asad Durrani in his concise statement 
dt:30.07.12  
Detail of distribution/recipients given 
by Hamid Saeed in statement 
dt:18.10.12  
Information regarding drawl/transfer of 
money at page 163 of paper -book.  
Account of distribution of m oney, page 
220 & 221 of paper -book.  
Details/names of beneficiaries given by 
Yunus Habib in CMA 1034/12  
Acknowledgement of Abida Husssain   
101 
 
101 
 
 
101 
 
101 
 
 
101 
 
 
101 
 
101 
 
101 
 
101  
128-129 
 
130 
 
 
130-131 
 
131 
 
 
131-132 
 
 
132-133 
 
133-135 
 
135 
 
135  
 v 
39. Short Order  102 135-140 
 
40. Thanks to the learned counsel  103 140 
 
41. Order regarding fixation of case, in 
respect of 270 million doled out from IB 
account in the year 2008 -09 
 104 140-141 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
 
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
   PRESENT
 
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ   
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.19 OF 1996
 
 
[Application by Air Marshal (Retd.) Muhammad Asghar Khan]  
 
 
Air Marshal ( Retd.) Muhammad Asghar Khan   … PETITIONER  
VERSUS  
General (Retd.) Mirza Aslam Baig, former Chief of Army Staff & others   
         …  RESPONDENTS  
 
For the petitioner:   Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
     Assisted by Mali k Ghulam Sabir, Adv.  
a/w Air Marshal (R) M. Asghar Khan  
 
For the Federation/ :   Mr. Irfan Qadir Attorney General for Pakistan  
M/o Defence    Mr. Dil Mo hammad Khan Alizai, DAG  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR Assisted by:  
     Barrister Shehryar Riaz Sheikh, Adv . 
Commander Hussain Shahbaz, Director (L)  
Wing Comd. M. Irfan, Deputy Director  
 
For Respondent No. 1:   Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC  
     Assisted by Ch. Hassan Murtaza Mann, Adv.  
a/w Gen. Retd. Mirza Aslam Baig  
 
Respondent No. 2:   Lt. Gen. Retd. Asa d Durrani, Ex -DG, ISI  
     In Person  
 
For Respondent No. 3:   Mr. Muhammad Munir P iracha,  Sr. ASC 
 
For the Applicant(s):   Sh. Khizar Hayat, Sr. ASC  
     (CMA No. 918/2007)   
 
Mr. Roedad Khan in person  
 (CMA No. 3196/2012)  
  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 (in CMA 3410/12)  
 
On Court’s notice:   
For President Secretariat:  Malik Asif Hayat, Secretary to the President  
 Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, Director Legal  
  
For SBP:     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  2 
For NAB:     Mr. Mazhar Ali Chaudhry, DPG  
     Brig. (R) Hamid Saeed, in person  
 
For HBL:     Nemo  
 
Date of Hearing:    19.10.2012.  
…  
 
            J  U  D  G  E  M  E  N  T
 
  
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ
. – The i nstant 
Human Rights Case was registered under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Paki stan, 1973 [hereinafter referred 
to as ‘the Constitution’] on the basis of letter dated 16.06.1996 written 
by Air Martial (R) Muhammad Asghar Khan, a former Chief of Air Staff 
[hereinafter referred to as ‘the petitioner’] to the then Chief Justice of 
Pakistan.  
 
2.   For the purposes of disposal of this petition, it is necessary 
to recapitulate the historical background in which the general elections 
of 1990 were held. On 17.08.1988, General Zia -ul-Haq (late), Chief of 
Army Staff who had imposed martial law  in the country on 05.07.1977 
and later assumed the office of President of Pakistan, died in C -130 
airplane crash carrying top military brass of the time and some other 
notable international figures of the time, few moments before its 
arrival at the Bahawa lpur Military Airbase. General Mirza Aslam Beg, 
the then Vice Chief of Army Staff [hereinafter referred to as 
‘respondent No.1’] was also flying to Bahawalpur but in a separate 
plane and survived. The same day, Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan (late), the 
then Chairm an, Senate of Pakistan was sworn in as the Acting 
President under the Constitution and respondent No.1  was appointed 
as Chief of Army Staff. On 16.11.1988, general elections were held in 
the country and Pakistan People’s Party (PPP), which captured the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  3 
largest number of seats in the National Assembly in comparison to 
other parties, formed the Federal Government. Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan 
(late) was elected as the new President. Political differences arose 
between the President and the elected government of Late  Mohtarma 
Benazir Bhutto. On 06.08.1990, the President, in exercise of powers 
conferred upon him under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution, which 
was inserted by the Eighth Constitutional Amendment, dissolved the 
National Assembly and dismissed the govern ment on the ground that 
the Government of the Federation was not being carried out in 
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. The dissolution 
order was challenged before this Court in the case of Ahmed Tariq 
Rahim v. Federation
 (PLD 1992 SC 646 )], but the same was upheld .  
 
3.   Mr. Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi was appointed as the Caretaker 
Prime Minister and fresh elections were scheduled to be held on 
24.10.1990. An electoral alliance of nine political parties, known as the 
Islami Jamhoori Ittehad  (IJI), also called Islamic Democratic Alliance 
won the largest parliamentary seats and formed the government with 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif as the Prime Minister of Pakistan. On 
19.04.1993, Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan invoked Article 58(2)(b) of the 
Constitution and dissolved the National Assembly on 
grounds/allegations of mal -administration, corruption, nepotism etc. 
This led, once again to forming an interim government headed by 
Caretaker Prime Minster Balakh Sher Mazari. The dissolution order was 
challenged bef ore the Supreme Court in the case of Mian Nawaz Sharif 
v. Federation 
(PLD 1993 SC 473) wherein the exercise of power by the 
President under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution was held to be 
unconstitutional. In consequence, the National Assembly and the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  4 
Government were restored. However, as the political standoff 
continued, which created a passé, the President dissolved the National 
Assembly on the advice of Prime Minister Mian Muhammad Nawaz 
Sharif and proceeded on leave as part of the political arrangem ent. 
This time, Mr. Waseem Sajjad, the then Chairman Senate became the 
Acting President under the Constitution while Mr. Moeen Qureshi, a 
banker from New York was appointed as the Caretaker Prime Minister. 
Elections were held on 06.10.1993 and the PPP emer ged as the 
biggest winner of seats in the National Assembly and formed 
government with Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto (late) as the Prime 
Minister. Mr. Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari, a political worker of the PPP 
was elected as the new President of Pakistan. On 06.11 .1996, 
President Farooq Ahmad Khan Leghari too invoked Article 58(2)(b) of 
the Constitution and dissolved the National Assembly on various 
charges/allegations.  
 
4.   On 11.06.1996, while the PPP government was in office, 
Maj. General (R) Nasirullah Khan B abar, the then Minister for Interior, 
made a speech on the Floor of the National Assembly wherein he 
presented an affidavit dated 24.07.1994, sworn by the former Director 
General, Inter -Services Intelligence (ISI), Lt. General (R) Asad Durrani 
[hereinafter  referred to as ‘respondent No.2’] wherein it was asserted, 
inter alia, that different sums of money were disbursed to various 
politicians/political parties forming part of IJI to enable them to win 
election. It may be noted that at the time of making affi davit, 
respondent No.2  was posted as Ambassador of Pakistan in Bonn, 
Germany. He stated in the affidavit that in September 1990 while he 
was posted as DG ISI, he received instructions from respondent No.1, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  5 
the then Chief of Army Staff (COAS) “to provide lo gistic support to the 
disbursement of donation made by some businessmen of Karachi to 
the election campaign of IJI”. He was also told that the operation had 
the blessings of the Government and proceeded to act in accordance 
with the instructions received b y him. The c ontents of his affidavit are 
reproduced hereinbelow  in extenso : -  
“AFFIDAVIT  
 
  I, Lt. Gen . (R) M.  Asad Durrani, Muslim, adult, 
former DG. ISI, presently posted as Ambassador of 
Pakistan, Bonn, Germany, do here by my oath and state on 
solemn a ffirmation as under:  
 
(1) In September, 1990, as DG,  ISI, I received 
instruction s from the then COAS, (now retired) 
General Mirza Aslam Beg to provide “logistic support” 
to the disbursement of donations made by some 
businessmen of Karachi to the election campai gn of 
IJI.  I was told that the operation had the blessing s 
of the Government.  
(2) Accordingly I tasked some officers, and took the 
following actions:  
(a) Opened a few cover accounts in Karachi, 
Quetta and Rawalpindi.  
(b) Money – eventually 140 million rupees – was 
deposited in Karachi accounts by one Mr. 
Yunus  Habib.  
(c) As required amounts were transferred to 
Quetta and Rawalpindi accounts.  
(d) A total of 6.0 million rupees were distributed 
as directed by the COAS  or at time directly by 
the election cell in Presidency.  
(e) The r emaining money was transferred to a 
special fund.  
 
 
Distribution of 6.0 million is attached:  
 
 
    --Sd.-- 
Lt. Gen. (Retd.) 
24 July, [***] 94  
(M. ASAD DURRANI)  
 
The names of the recipients are detached from his affidavit and shall 
be noted at an appropriat e place.   HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  6 
 
 
5.  The contents of the speech of the then Minister for 
Interior/ affidavit of respondent No.2  were carried by the daily Jang in 
its issue of 12.06.1996 as under:  -  
 
 
 
 
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  7 
 
 
6.   Air Marshal (R) Muhammad Asghar Khan , a former Chief of 
Air Staff who had rendered meritorious services as a fighter pilot after 
his retirement , and had joined politics by forming a political party with 
the name and style of Tehrik -e-Istaqlal  Pakistan , in his above referred 
letter had averred as under : -   
  
“BY TCS
   PERSONAL
 
     16th June, 1996  
Dear Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah , 
 
I should like to draw your attention to the disclosure 
by the Minister for Interior in the National Assembly on 
11th June, 1996 that General (R)  Mirza Aslam Beg , a 
former Chief of the Army  Staff, had drawn Rs. 15 Crores 
from the Mehran Bank and had distributed this amount to 
various people prior to the 1990 elections. He disclosed 
that this had been done through Lt. Gen. (R) Assad 
Durrani, the Director General of the Inter Services 
Intellig ence Directorate, at that tim e. General Duran’s  
statement was read out in the National Assembly. I am 
enclosing a cutting from th e Daily ‘JANG' , Rawalpindi of 
12th June, 1996 which gives the detail s (Encl .1).  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  8 
 The action of General (R) Mirza Aslam  Beg and  of Lt. 
Gen. (R) Assad Durrani amounts to gross misconduct and I 
am writing to ask that you may be pleased to initiate legal 
proceedings against both these persons who have brought 
the Armed Forces of Pakistan into disrepute and have been 
guilty of undermi ning the discipline of the Armed Forces.  
 I am also sending a copy of this letter to the Chief of 
the Army Staff for his info rmation.  
 
    Sincerely  
         Sd/- 
        (M. Asghar Khan)”  
 
 
7.  Major General (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar, the then Interior 
Minister had raised the issue of distribution of money to a group of 
politicians on the floor of the House of the National Assembly by 
reading out the affidavit of respondent No.2  wherein he had admitted 
that amounts were distributed to certain persons for  the purpose of 
election campaign of Islami Jamhuri Ittehad (IJI). Prior to th e affidavit, 
respondent No. 2  had sent a handwritten note to the then Prime 
Minister of Pakistan , wherein he had stated as hereunder: -  
 
“Eyes Only      Embassy of Pakistan  
            5300 Bonn 2  
      Rheinallee 24  
Telephone 35 20 04  
        7 June 94  
My dear Prime Minister  
 A few points I want to include in my “confessional 
statement” handed over to the Director FIA. These could 
be embarrassing or sensitive.   
a. The recipients included Khar 2 Millions, Hafeez 
Pirzada 3, Sarwar Cheema 0.5 and Mairaj 
Khalid 0.2 Millions. The last two were not on 
the wrong side. It was merely someone’s “ soft 
corner ” that benefited them.  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  9 
 
b.  The remaining 80 Ms were either deposited in 
the ISI’s ‘ K’ fund (60 M) or given to Director 
External Intelligence for special operations 
(perhaps the saving face of this disgraceful 
exercise, but it is delicate information) .  
 
c.  The operation not only had the “blessings” of 
the President and the whole hearted  
participation of the caretaker PM, bu t was also 
in the knowledge of the Army High Command. 
The last mentioned will be the d efence of many 
of us including Gen. Beg (who took his 
colleagues in “confidence”) but that is the 
name that we have to protect.  
 
 The point that I have “wargamed” in my mind very 
often is: what is the object of this exercise ?  
a. If it is to target the opposition; “it might be 
their legitimate right to take donations, 
especi ally if they came through “s acred 
channels”. Some embarrassment is possible, 
but a few millions are peanuts now a days.  
 
b. If the idea is to put Gen. Beg on the mat; “he 
was merely providing “logistic support ” to 
donations made by a community  “under 
instructions” from the Government and with 
the “ consent ” of the military  high command.” 
In any case , I understand he is implicated in 
some other deals in the same case.   
 
c. GIK could pretend ignorance, as indeed he 
never involved himself directly.  
 
d. Of course one has t o meet the genuine ends of 
law. In that case , let us take care  of the 
sensitivities like special operations and possibly 
that of the Army . HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  10 
 
 It was for these reasons that I desperately wanted to 
see you before leaving. I also wanted to ta lk about my 
farewell  meetings with the COAS. In the meantime , you 
must have met often enough and worked and what is in 
the best interest of the country.   
 
 I keep praying that all these natural , and man made 
calamities are only to strengthen us in ou r resolve and not 
in any way reflective of our collective sins.   
 
With best regards an d respects  
 
      Yours sincerely  
 
        Sd/- 
Asad”  
 
8.  General (R) Mirza Aslam Be g, former Chief of Army Staff, 
Lt. Gen. (R) Asad Durrani, Ex -DG, ISI and Mr. Yunus  Habib, Ex -Chief 
Mehran Bank Limited, being the main figures in the alleged scam of 
distribution of funds to a group of politicians to influence the outcome 
of the 1990 general elections, were arrayed as respondents  No.1 to 3 , 
and notices were issued to them.  
 
9.   It is to be noted that one Brig. (R) Kamal Alam Khan sent 
an application to t he then Chief Justice of Pakistan requesting therein 
that he may be impleaded as a party in the proceedings. The said 
application was registered as CMA No.109/1997. In the application , he 
named the following officers of the Armed Forces who, according to 
him, were part of this operation:  -  
(a) Brig (R) Hamid Saeed Akhtar  
(b) Brig (R) Amanullah  
(c) Lt. Col (R) Eqbal Saeed Khan  
(d) Lt. Col (R) Ejaz  
(e) Lt. Col (R) Mir Akbar Ali Khan  
(f) Lt. Col Salman Butt  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  11 
As per Court order dated 24.02.1997, though t he above named officer 
was allowed  to atten d the proceedings of the Court  but according to 
Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned ASC he was not allowed  to join the 
proceedings and now he had passed away. In the said application , as 
noted, the name of Brig. (R) Hamid Saeed Akhtar was also me ntioned . 
Therefore, on the Court’s direction, respondent No.2  furnish ed his 
address  and notice was issued to him . Accordingly , he appeared and 
filed a written statement , which was marked as ‘confidential
’, but 
during hearing he stated that his written stat ement may not be treated 
as confidential. For facility of reference, order dated 18.10.2012 is 
reproduced hereinbelow:  -  
"Brig. (Retd.) Hamid Saeed has appeared and filed a 
statement in writing on top of which, word “Confidential” is 
mentioned. We have po inted out to him that the Court is 
seized of the information contained in Paras 9 onwards of 
his statement because the facts mentioned therein 
pertaining to distribution/donation of funds to a group of 
politicians/IJI before the 1990’s general elections an d 
same are already on the record of the case. Prima  facie, 
the contents of Paras 1 to 8 of his statement are not 
relevant for the purpose of decision of the present case, 
therefore, if he so wishes, he may claim confidentiality in 
respect thereof. However,  he stated that either a 
document is to be treated ‘confidential’ as a whole or not 
at all. He explained that if Paras 1 to 8 are deleted from 
his statement, the whole object and purpose he wanted to 
convey to the Court vide Para 9 onwards would not be 
conveyed. Thus, he has expressed the desire not to treat 
his statement as ‘confidential’ and has scored off the word 
‘confidential’ written on the top of the document. He has 
also stated that he wants to explain the events and dates 
in respect of disbursement  of funds to a group of 
politicians with the assistance of a diary, which he was HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  12 
maintaining at the relevant time. He has handed over this 
document for our perusal in Court.”   
 
 
The statement of Brig. (R) Hamid Saeed dated 18.10.2012 as well as 
extract s of his handwritten diary, of which he took full responsibility, 
filed in Court are also reproduced hereinbelow:  -  
 
(1) In 1990 I was commanding an Artillery Brigade in D.I.  
Khan. In the same year following an indigenous uprising of 
Kashmiris in the Indian Held Kashmir both India & 
Pakistan deployed their forces in the border areas. My 
Brigade had just reached the border area when I received 
the orders to join regional office of Military Intelligence in 
Karachi. I talked to the Corps Commander and submitted 
that I wished to be with my troops during combat. I 
further pleaded that I
 
had no intelligence back ground or 
formal training. Corps Commander advised that my 
services were very urgently required at Karachi to control 
the deteriorating internal security situati on in Sindh. 
Accordingly I reported to my new duty station and 
assumed command w.e.f.  23rd July 1990.  
(2) At that time MQ M had recently fallen apart from the ruling 
political party (PPP). PPP workers had re sorted to taking 
revenge from MQ M for their political betrayal through the 
use of force. MQ M reacted even more violently through 
their armed political workers. PPP, MQ M, PPI, JI and JSM 
activists were relentlessly killing each other. The daily 
death toll was 100 -110 besides countless left wounded and 
incapa citated. PSF, APMSO, IJT and JSQ M had taken 
prisoners, the activists of their rivals and committed 
horrendous & inhuman atrocities on them e.g. drilling 
holes in knee joints with the drill machines and burning 
their delicate parts with electric soldering mac hines. I 
immediately held meetings with Mr. Tariq Azeem, Dr. 
lmran Farooq, and Mr.  Saleem Shahzad of MQM, Prof. 
Ghafoor of JI, Dr. Hameeda Khoro & Mr. Mumtaz Bhotto 
JSF, Abdul Waheed Aresar of JSQM and Mukhtar Awan of 
PPI and gave them strong message that if they did not 
stop killing, arson and looting, army may be forced to step 
in to restore peace.  
(3) Initially the belligerent forces totally denied their 
involvement in the unlawful activities. However when 
irrefutable evidence of their crimes was produced, they 
took the advice more seriously. Following were the visible 
effects of intelligence intervention on the security situation 
in Karachi: -  
 a.  Within 1  week killing reduced drastically from 100 -
110 to 20 -30 per day.  
 
b. Exchange of prisoners of the bellig erent sides was HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  13 
arranged and this exchange took place at Karachi 
Corps HQ.  
 
(4) All the above was achieved through negotiations and 
dialogue. Not a single bullet was fired, nobody was kept in 
illegal confinement and no torture was committed to 
extract informa tion. The importance of my primary task 
i.e. intelligence & counter 
intelligence 
operations far 
outweighed my involvement in the internal security 
matters but at that time internal security had assumed 
greater importance.  
(5) Soon after, the provincial Govt launched a police operation 
against Moha jir populace residing in Pukka Q ila Hyderabad 
on a day when the PM, COAS and Karachi Corps 
Commander were on tour abroad and the army units were 
out annual exercise. In this operation police killed dozens 
of men, wome n & children. The matter was reported to 
higher echelons. The president Mr. Ghulam lshaq Khan 
ordered the Army to intervene and stop 
this 
carnage. 
Station Commander Hyderabad gathered about 300 
soldiers from the personnel left behind for guard duties 
and r eached the site. On his intervention police force 
withdrew. PM Benazir Bhutto on return to Pakistan gave a 
press statement that "Ar my had supplied POF made 
weapons to Mohajirs ”. Police had besieged Pukka Qila to 
recover these weapons. When police force was  about to 
reach th e cache  in Pukka Qila, Army ste pped in and took 
away the weapons in military vehicles". Everybody was 
shocked by this statement.  
(6) After this mayhem  MRC (Mohajir Rabita Committee) gave 
a press statement that they (Mohajirs) were being forc ed 
to look towards India for the protection of their rights. 
India readily responded to this call by stating that Mohajirs 
were India's ex -citizens and India was obliged to ensure 
their safety and protection against state terrorism and 
genocide. Such state ments reminded one of the Indian 
interventions in former East Pakistan which finally resulted 
in the dismemberment of our country.  
(7) Earlier that year, the PM had also publicly criticized the 
army for crossing the red line by enriching uranium to a 
level wh ich was not acceptable to big powers. She also 
gave an interview to BBC in which she mentioned of her 
support to India in crushing Khalistan Movement. 
Sometime later PM criticized the Army for conducting the 
annual exercise in the Sindh province without he r consent. 
ISPR had to clarify through a press release that under the 
law COAS was not obliged to seek anyone's permission for 
conducting training exercises in any part of the country. All 
such events were reported by the print media.  
(8) During the same year  the government also gave attractive 
jobs to AI -Zulfiqar activists in Railways, PIA, Customs, 
KPT, Immigration, Excise & Taxation and other sensitive 
departments, thus endangering national security. These 
activists of AZO had been imparted proper training by 
India in sabotage, arson, bomb blasts, mass killing and 
other acts of terrorism. The authentic record of these HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  14 
terrorists was available with all the intelligence agencies. 
All these matters were reported to higher ups through 
normal command channels.  
(9) General perception of the common man was that the ruling 
party had got the votes but lacked the vision to run the 
country. Something appeared to be in the offing. On 16th 
August 1990 President Ghulam lshaq Khan dissolved the 
PPP Govt using power under Artic le58 (2) (b). In Sindh an 
interim Government was formed under Jam Sadiq Ali as 
the Chief Minister.  
a. On 12 September 1990 DG Ml Maj. Gen Muhammad 
Asad Durrani visited Karachi and gave following 
directions to me: -  
b. Open six accounts in different banks and  send me the 
title and number of each account.  
c. Keep on monitoring these accounts. Some funds shall 
be deposited in these accounts from time to time. You 
will keep me updated regarding the balance in each 
account on weekly basis.  
(10) All transactions in these  accounts shall be treated as secret. 
You w ill be personally responsible to me for their accounting 
and no information in this regard shall be shared with any 
unauthorized person. Services of a grade -1 staff officer may 
be used for opening and handling of these accounts.  
(11) In compliance with these directions six accounts were 
opened in different banks. Funds started pouring in from 16th 
September 1990 onwards. By 22nd October 1990, Rs. 140 
Million had been received in these accounts. Thereafter 
following amo unts were remitted as ordered by DGMI: - 
a. Rs.40 Million   to GHQ account.  
b. Rs.10.5 Million  to regional office of MI Quetta.  
c. Rs.5 Million   to interim PM Mr. Ghulam Mustafa 
Jatoi 
d. Rs.5. Million   to interim CM Sindh Mr. Jam 
Sadiq Ali  
e. Rs.2.5 Million   to Mr. Muhammad Khan 
Junejo.  
f. Rs.3 Million   to Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada  
g. Rs.2 Million   to Mr. Sibghat -Ullah Pir sahib Pagara.  
h. Rs.03 Million   to Mr. Muzaffar Hussain Shah.  
i. Rs.03 Million   to Mr. Muzaffar Hussain Shah  
j. Rs.0.3 Million   to Mr. Gh ulam Ali Nizamani.  
k. Rs.02 Million   to Mr. Arbab Ghulam Rahim  
l. Rs.03 Million   to Mr. Salah -ud-Din (Takbeer).  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  15 
m. Rs.05 Million   to Mr. Yousaf Haroon  
n. Rs.3,828 Million  to Sindh 
Regimental Centre, and also used for 
construction of  men’s living barra cks, 
interrogation cells  
(12) The remaining balance of Rs.67, 628,511/ - including interest 
was later on sent to GHQ along with up  to date bank 
statements. I would like to state that during my service with 
the Military Intelligence, I was of the opinion that the fu nds 
were coming from GHQ.  
(13) In 1991 I learnt through news media that one Mr. Yunus  
Habib had been arrested for fraud in Habib Bank Ltd. At  that 
occasion Gen. Durrani rang me up to explore the possibility 
of having him bailed out. He said that the COAS had d esired 
to have him bailed out because he had been helpful in doing 
a work of national importance. I showed my inability to do so 
because this case was sub judice. In September 1991 I was 
posted out from Ml to Kharian. Finally I retired from service 
in Dece mber 1994 . 
(14) In 1994, during the second tenure of PPP government, when 
Gen. Durrani gave an affidavit to the court and the matter 
became public, I for the first time learnt through the news 
media that these funds were stated to have been provided 
by Mr. Yunus Habib.  
 
Sd/- 
Brig (R) Hamid Saeed Akhtar  
18 Oct 2012 ” 
 
 
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  16 
 
10.     As regards the  statement  under Section 161 Cr.P.C.,  of 
Mr. Yunus  Habib  [hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent No.3’] , it may 
be mentioned that such statement is not   per se,  admissible under the 
Qanoon -e-Shahadat  Order, 1984 as proof of the facts stated therein 
unless the same are otherwise proved in a court of law  in accordance 
with law . But here reference is being made to it as the Mehran Bank 
Scandal report containing the said stateme nt has been made part of 
the record. It is also to be noted that investigation would be required 
to be made in respect of distribution of the sums of money  paid before 
the 1990 general elections after withdrawal  thereof from HBL or 
subsequent thereto from the Mehran Bank Ltd, as in the year 1990 , it 
was Habib Bank Ltd and not Mehran Bank, from w here these amounts 
were drawn.  
11.   Respondent No.1, filed his reply  on 23.02.1997  through 
Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC  stating therein , inter alia , that 
in the year 1990 when the National Assembly was dissolved and a 
Caretaker Government was formed to hold elections within 90 days, an 
Election Cell was set up in the Presidency , which function ed directly 
under the then President ( late Ghulam Ishaq Khan ) and was managed 
by M/s Roedad Khan and Ijalal Haider  Zaidi . It was further stated that 
uptill 1975, the ISI was responsible for countering intelligence and 
strategic operational intelligence and functioned under the Joint 
Services Secretariat. In 1975, the then Prime Minister Mr. Zulfiqar Ali 
Bhutto, created a Political Cell within the ISI, as a result whereof it 
was made responsible to the Chief Executive , i.e. the Prime 
Minister/President for all matters of national and political intelligence. 
After establishme nt of the Higher Defence Organization in 1976, the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  17 
ISI continued to be responsible to the Chief Executive while the Joint 
Staff Headquarter s maintained administrative control only. He further 
stated that the ISI used to support the candidates during electi on 
under the di rection of the Chief Executive  of the Government. The 
receipt of th e amount by IS1 from respondent No.3  in 1990 was also 
under the direction of the Chief Executive. DG, 1SI also informed him  
that the funds so received were properly handled a nd account s were 
maintained, and that the then President was briefed by him on this 
matter. He averred that the aforesaid statement of Gen. (R) Nasirullah 
Khan Babar  was self -contradictory inasmuch as on 20.04.1994 the 
latter had stated on the floor of the  National Assembly that a sum of 
Rs.140 million was given to him (General Beg) whereas in his 
aforesaid statement he had alleged that the said amount was in fact 
distributed amongst the politicians and various other persons. He 
averred that Maj. General  (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar  knew that the 
said amount was not given to the answering respondent for his 
personal use and he also knew that Mehran Bank was not in existence 
in 1990. Relevant portion s from the said reply are reproduced 
hereinbelow: -  
(1) That t he answering respondent never receive d the 
alleged amount from Mr. Y unus Habib, respondent No. 3 in 
person or through any other means and emphatically 
denies the allegation made by Maj. General (R) Nasirullah 
Babar, the then Interior Minister on the floor of the 
National Assembly on 20th April, 1994. The answering 
respondent promptly denied the allegations made through 
a press release (Exhibit A -I) which was published in 
various newspapers.  
“The fact of matter is that no such amount was paid 
to answering r espondent nor was it placed in any 
army account, rather the amount was paid in the 
I.S.I’s account as donation by Yunus  Habib and his 
community. This was deposited by Yunus  Habib 
directly in the accounts of a government agency, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  18 
which maintained full detail s of all transactions 
according  to the policy and laid down pr ocedures of 
the Government”
. (Exhibit A -2 attached). The Daily 
“The News” of 10th April 1994 carried the following 
story:  
 
“It was br iefly reported last week that Y unus Habib 
had deposited Rs. 1 40 million in an account 
mentioned by the then COAS, General Aslam Beg. 
It was initially thought that the money went to 
Beg’s organization called Friends, but in a brief 
statement to the press, a few days ago, the former 
COAS disclosed that the donation ac tually went to 
an account run by a secret service. The NIU 
investigations confirmed Beg’s statement as it was 
revealed that the money was deposited in a secret 
account run by the Military Intelligence (MI) 
Directorate
.  
 
(2) That in early September, Mr. Yunus Habib then 
serving in the Habib Bank Ltd., as Zonal Chief had called 
on the answering respondent and informed him that he 
was under instructions from the President’s Election cell to 
make available a sum of Rs. 140 million for supporting the 
Elections of 1990. He had stated that he will be available 
to collect this amount through his own efforts from his 
community as donations and that he was under the 
instructions of the Election Cell to place this amount at the 
disposal of the Director General Inter S ervices Intelligence 
who would handle this amount as per instructions of the 
President’s Election Cell.  
(3) That in 1990 when the National  Assembly was 
dissolved and the Government of Mrs. Benazir Bhutto was 
dismissed. Care Taker Government was formed to hold 
elections within 90 days. The then President Mr. Ghulam 
Ishaq Khan had formed an Election Cell directly under him, 
and managed by Mr. Roedad Khan / Mr. Ijlal Haider Zaidi.
  
 
(4) That letter on the answering respondent was 
informed by the Director Gene ral Inter Services 
Intelligence that various cover accounts were opened by 
Inter Services Int elligence and the amount of Rs. 140 
million was deposited in those accounts directly by Mr. 
Yunus  Habib. Director General Inter Services Intelligence 
made arrangeme nts to distribute these amount s amongst 
the politicians belonging to various political parties and 
persons as instructed by the Election Cell.  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  19 
(5) That the fact that the amount of Rs. 140 million was 
made available on the instructions of the Election Cel l was 
confirmed by Mr. Yunus  Habib in his voluntary statement 
made by him during enquiry in connection with Mehran 
Bank Scam. In his statement he has conceded that:  -  
 
“That Rs. 140 million donation to the “Military 
Intelligence” Yunus  revealed that donat ion was 
approved by the Board of Directors of the Habib 
Bank Ltd. And the bank had fulfilled all formalities. 
In a vague answer he said that the request was 
initially made by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who 
had communicated to him through General Beg that  
the Government of Pakistan needed money to hold 
elections in the country. Yunus  said, that donation 
was also in the full knowled ge of Ijlal Hyde Zaidi 
and Roeda d Khan” (Exhibit A -3 attached.)  
(6) That the allegation that funds were deposited in the 
in the  Military Intelligence was absolutely wrong. The cover 
account were opened by 202 Survey Section under the 
command of Inter Services Intelligence since August 1990. 
Therefore, 202 Survey Section, a unit of the Army for all 
political and technical purposes,  was under the command 
of Inter Services Intelligence and functioned as per of ISI 
organization which was the “competent authority” to task 
it.  
(7) That until 1975 the Inter Services Intelligence 
Organization was responsible to the 3 services for 
counteri ng intelligence and strategic operational 
intelligence and functioned under the Joint Services 
Secretariat.   
 In 1975, Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, the then Prime 
Minister, created a Political Cell within the ISI 
Organization. As a result, the ISI was made res ponsible to 
the Chief Executive, i.e. The Prime Minister/ President for 
all matters of national and political intelligence. After the 
establishment of the Higher Defence Organization in 1976, 
ISI continued to be responsible to the Chief Executive, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  20 
while th e Joint Staff Headquarter, maintained 
administrative control only. This was the situation which 
existed in 1990 and continues even today.  
(8) That ISI draws its manpower from three services, 
with Army taking the major share. About 7% to 8% are 
civilians. It is headed by any Army Officer in uniform 
except for the period of Benazir Bhutto’s first tenure, when 
Lt. Gen. Shamsur Rehman Kallu, a retired officer, was 
appointed DG ISI in 1989, who relinquished the job when 
Benazir Government was dismissed in 1990.  He was 
replaced by Lt. Gen Mohammad Asad Durrani, in August 
1990.  
 It is submitted that the amount in question, was Rs. 
140 million and not Rs. 15 Crore (150 Million) as 
mentioned in the petition. This is doubtful 
misrepresentation of the facts.  
(9) Furthermore, the name of Mehran Bank mentioned in 
the petition is again a misquotation of fact. This Bank has 
neither been mentioned in the press report of daily “The 
Jang” of 12 June, 1996 which formed the basis of the 
petition, nor the Mehran Bank existed i n 1990. The 
petitioner made no efforts to ascertain the facts, before 
filing the petition in the Supreme Court. His hasty action, 
without confirming the authenticity of the press report, is 
expressive of a mala  fide intention, especially, when the 
petition er is the head of a political party, namely Awami 
Qiadat Party and at the time of petition (June 1996) was 
fully involved in organizing his party.  
(10) That it is in the knowledge of the answering 
respondent that it was the practice with the ISI to suppor t 
the candidates during the elections under the directions of 
the Chief Executive of the Government. The receipt of this 
amount by ISI from Yunus  Habib in 1990 was also under 
the directions of the Chief Executive. DG ISI also informed 
the answering respond ent that funds so received were 
properly handled and the account were maintained, and HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  21 
that the President Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan was briefed by 
him on this matter.
 
(11) That the answering respondent was also informed by 
the DG ISI that the policy for financi al support to the 
candidates was laid down by the President’s Election Cell 
and that the DG ISI was acting on their behalf and made 
payments to various politicians and persons as directed. 
 
(12) That by late November, 1990 the DG ISI Lt. Gen. 
Muhammad Asad  Durrani informed the answering 
respondent that out of Rs. 140 million deposited in the ISI 
accounts, approximately Rs. 60 million were spent for 
election purposes and for acquisition of election 
intelligence, while the remaining amount of Rs. 80 million 
was deposited in the accounts of the Special Funds of ISI.
 
(13) That during this period, in his meeting with the 
President, Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the answering 
respondent had inform him about the donations made by 
Yunus  Habib and its utilization by DG ISI under 
instructions of the President’s Political Cell. 
 
(14) That on 20 April, 1994 the then Interior Minister Mr. 
Nasirullah Babar made the disclosure in the National 
Assembly as reported in the “The Daily Muslim” dated 21st 
April, 1994:  
“That Yunus  Habib,  the Chief Operator of 
Mehran Bank Limited (MBL) misappropriated 
Rs.2.10 billion through a number of fake 
accounts”  
“The Interior Minister told the House that 
Yunus  Habib gave Rs.140 million to Mirza 
Aslam Beg, the former COAS in 1991” Rs.70 
million to lat e Jam Sadiq Ali Khan, the then CM 
Sindh, Rs.20 Million to Altaf Hussain, the MQM 
Chief, and huge amount to other politicians”.  
(Exhibit -C attached.)  
(15)  That mala fide intentions of Maj. General (R) 
Nasirullah Babar were further supported by the fact tha t 
while divulging this information, the Interior Minister HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  22 
claimed to have in his possession a computer diskette 
which contained the full information with respect to the 
disbursement of the funds arranged by Yunus  Habib, but 
during the proceedings of the Me hran Bank Judicial 
Commission, the existence of such a diskette was 
completely denied.   
 
“A very important computer diskette of the 
jailed banker Yunus  Habib and some vital 
documents seized by the Federal Investigation 
Agency (FIA) during its search of Hab ib’s 
residence and from the possession of his most 
trusted confidante Salim Sattar in the last 
week of March o this year are now missing 
from the FIA record Senior Federal Interior 
Ministry and FIA sources confirmed this to the 
News Intelligence Unit (NIU)  in his computer 
diskette Yunus  Habib had maintained complete 
details of the pay -offs made from various 
fictitious accounts at Habib Bank Limited (HBL) 
and Mehran Bank Limited (MBL) to politicians, 
bureaucrats and to a dozen FIA officials. In a 
recent move  the FIA has decided to deny the 
existence of the Computer diskette before the 
Judicial Commission.” (Exhibit -D attached).  
(16)  That two years later Maj. Gen. Nasirullah 
Babar , the then Interior Minister made a self contradictory 
statement in the Assembly  on Monday 11 June 1996:  
“Interior Minister Nasirullah Babar  and told the 
National assembly on June 11 that Mirza Aslam 
Beg had drawn Rs.15 Crores from the Mehran 
Bank and had distributed this amount to 
various people prior to the 1990 elections 
(Exhibit -e attached)  
(17)  That above statement contradicts the pervious 
allegation, because in his earlier statement made on the 
floor of the National assembly on 20 April 1994, he had HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  23 
alleged that the amount of Rs.140 million was given to the 
answering respondent,  who misappropriated the amount 
for himself, while in his subsequent allegation made on 
June 11, 1996 on the floor of National Assembly it was 
alleged that the amount of Rs.140 million, was in fact 
distributed amongst the politicians and other personalitie s. 
It is amazing as to how the facts were distorted, knowing 
fully well that the said amount was not given to the 
answering respondent for his personal use and also he 
knew fully well, that the Mehran Bank was not in existence 
in 1990. This act of his amou nt to deliberate disinformation 
for mala fide intentions to cause discredit and disrepute to 
the answering respondent.  
(18)  That the above fact clearly brings out the fact 
that the then Interior Minister, Maj. General Nasirullah 
Babar, holding official cl assified information, relating to ISI 
activities, used it for political ends of his party, thus 
violating the “Official Secrets Act”. In doing so, he has 
brought two important national institutions i.e. Pakistan 
Army and ISI in disrepute.  
(19)  The Nasirul lah Babar also intentionally denied 
information to the Judicial Commission and failed to 
produced the computer diskette, he claimed to have, in the 
National Assembly.  (Exhibit -D attached).  
(20)  That the petitioner has made following 
allegations:  
a) Action s of General Mirza Aslam Beg and 
Lt. General Muhammad Asad Durrani 
amounted to gross misconduct.  
b) Both have brought the Armed Forces of 
Pakistan into disrepute.  
c) Both have been guilty of undermining the 
discipline of the Armed Forces.  
G R O U N D S
 
(a) That the answering respondent did have the 
knowledge about the transaction of Rs. 140 million 
but had no other involvement regarding the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  24 
disbursement of this amount nor did he receive 
directly or indirectly any portion of this amount. 
 
 
(b) That the amount of Rs.  140 million so donated by 
Yunus  Habib was deposited directly in the accounts 
maintained by the ISI, who properly maintained the 
accounts.
 
 
 
(c) That DG ISI acted within the limits of the “ lawful
 
command ” received from the President’s Election 
Cell. Definition  of “lawful  command ” as interpreted 
by Pakistan Army Act Section 33 Note b(3) is: 
 
“A superior can give a command for the purpose of 
maintaining good order or suppressing a disturbance 
or for the execution of a military duty or regulation 
". 
 
 and  
  
 Pakistan Army Act Section 33 Notes b(11):  
 
“A civilian cannot give a “lawful command” under 
this sub -section to a soldier employed under him; 
but it may well be the soldier's duty as such to do 
the act indicated ”  
 
(d) That a full account maintained of all the pay ments 
made by the DG ISI and no amount was mis -
appropriated or misused. 
 
 
(e) That actions of answering respondent and General 
Asad Durrani did not amount to gross misconduct. 
Orders were carried out under a lawful command. 
 
 
 
(f) That doing so, the answering resp ondent and 
General Asad Durrani have not brought the Armed 
Forces of Pakistan into disrepute nor they are guilty 
of undermining the discipline of the Armed forces. 
 
 
(g) That Air Marshal  (R) Mohammad Asghar Khan has 
acted out of personal grudge and for politic al gains 
by approaching the Honourable Supreme Court of 
Pakistan to take action against the answering 
respondent at this juncture when the answering 
respondent was fully involved in organizing his 
political party and participation in the general 
elections 1997 as political main stream.  
 
 
(h) That Air Marshal  (R) Asghar Khan has acted 
irresponsibly in that he failed to investigate the 
matter properly and in hot haste, proceeded to level 
charges against the answering respondent as based 
on unfounded reports of th e news papers. This act of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  25 
the petitioner amounts to character assassination 
with intent to cause political damage and to bring 
into disrepute the name of the answering 
respondent.  
 
(i) That the disclosure made by Maj. General Nasirullah 
Babar  on the floor of  the National Assembly on 20 
April 1994 and on June 11, 1996 was in patent 
violation of the Official Secrets Act, as well as a 
malicious act, with intent to bring into disrepute the 
name of the answering respondent and to cause 
political damage to his repu tation and other 
members of the political parties while not disclosing 
the name of the politicians belonging to his own 
party. ” [Underlining provided for emphasis]  
 
Few concluding Paras from the reply being informal have not been 
reproduced hereinabove.  
12.   On 11.06.1997 , in response to the reply filed by 
respondent No.1, the petitioner filed his observations as under: -  
“OBSERVATIONS OF PETITIONER ON REPLY OF 
RESPONDENT NO.1
 
 
Respectfully Sheweth: -  
 
(1) That being the Chief of the Army Staff at the t ime, 
the Respondent by being directly involved in the 
disbursement of public money and in its misuse for 
political purpose has infringed on the fundamental 
rights of the citizens of Pakistan. Further by thus 
involving the Armed Forces in politics, the 
Respondent has affected adversely the morale and 
the fighting efficiency of the Armed Forces, reduced 
its defense capability, affected adversely the security 
of the country and has thus created conditions which 
infringe on their human and fundamental rights.  
 
(2) That the Petitioner has brought this matter before 
this Honourable Court also with the purpose of 
seeking a judgment which would set an example for 
other and improve   the discipline and fighting 
efficiency of the Armed Forces. It would also be   
benef icial for their morale.  
 
(3) That Para 4 of the Respondent’s reply regarding sub -
clause 3 of article 199 of the 1973 Constitution 
relates to terms and conditions of service of a person 
subject to military law and is not relevant to this 
case. 
 
(4) The Petitioner sent a copy of his letter to the Chief of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  26 
the Army Staff purely for information. The Chief of 
the Army Staff is not the only competent authority 
and proper person to look into the allegation and 
take any action thereupon’ as stated by   the 
Responde nt.  Because the Respondent was the Chief 
of the Army Staff and the present incumbent to this 
post was his subordinate, it would be appropriate if 
this case is dealt with by this Honourable Court.  
 
(5) This Respondent has stated in Para 6 of his reply 
that the funds were deposited with the I.S. 
Intelligence which has been denied by the Secretary, 
Ministry of Defence.           The Respondent has 
further stated that he was aware of Lt. Gen. (R) 
Asad Durrani having received the money and 
distributed it ( Para 12 of Respondent’s reply) to   
various people. Lt. Gen. (R) Asad Durrani though 
head of an organization which was, according to the 
Respondent under ‘Chief Exe cutive’, was still a 
serving Army Officer, subject to the service discipline 
and military law.  H is conduct should therefore have 
been of direct concern to the Chief of the Army Staff. 
To have been aware of all this going on and not to 
have taken any action itself amounts to abetting  the 
crime. However, the Respondent in Para 17 of his 
reply states t hat the amount     was not given to him 
‘for his personal use’.  This is admission that he did 
receive the amount.  
 
(6) In Para 21(c) and 21(e) of his reply, the Respondent 
has stated the orders to collect    and distribute, 
funds were carried out under a ‘lawful command/ 
The interpretation     of the Pakistan Army Act 
Section 33 Note B(3) as quoted in Para 21(c) of the 
Respondent’s reply in erroneous. This relates to 
suppressing of a disturbance and Section 33 Note 
b(11) quoted in the same Para of the Resp ondent’s 
reply i.e. Para  21(c) is also irrelevant. This states 
that ‘a civilian cannot give a lawful command    
under this sub -section to a soldier employed under 
him but it may well be the     soldier’s duty as such 
to do the act as indicated’.  
 
(7) A person subject to military law is only required to 
obey ‘lawful commands and it is   in fact his duty to 
disobey an unlawful order or an unlawful command. 
The onus for deciding what is lawful and what is an 
unlawful command rests on the individual. Recent 
history is replete with examples where soldiers have 
been punished for    carrying out unlawful 
commands. In the Nuremberg trials held after World 
War II     for he killing of jews by German soldiers, 
the plea put forward was similar to that   being put 
forward by the Respondent that what was done was 
in response to a ‘lawful’ command. In the Nuremberg HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  27 
trial, the Germans soldiers accused of murder 
pleaded   that they had only carried out the orders of 
their superior officers. The Court      awarded the 
death sentences to those who carried out these 
illegal orders.  
 
(8) In my own case when I had barely two years service 
and was stationed in Hyderabad Sindh, during the 
‘Hur disturbances’, and the Marshal  Law of 1942, I 
was ordered personally by Maj. General Rich ardson, 
the Marshal  Law Administrator Sindh, to lead  a flight 
of aircraft and machine -gun the caravan of the Pir of 
Pagara which was    moving eat of Sanghar. I took 
the flight of 4 aircrafts as ordered but when I saw        
that the camel caravan compris ed unarmed men, 
women and children I refused to   carry out the 
orders and returned without firing a shot. When 
asked to explain, I told   the General who was 
waiting at the airfield for our return that to shoot 
unarmed civilians was not a lawful command a nd I 
would not obey it. What followed is not relevant to 
this case.  
 
(9) Throughout my political career I have practiced the 
same philosophy and have called upon the police to 
obey only lawful commands. I have been stopped 
illegally on numerous occasions a nd either detained 
or removed hundred of miles away illegally. On one 
occasion, in the company of the Late Mian Mahmud 
Ali Kasuri, Bar -at-Law, M. Anwar, Bar -at-Law and 
Miss Rabia Qari, I was stopped illegally from walking 
on Fane Road near the Lahore High Court, Lahore.       
We resisted this illegal order but not before we had 
told the police officers that their orders was illegal 
and since we  were not violating the law the police 
force under their command was duty bound to 
disobey it.  
 
(10) In the Nawab Ahmed Khan murder case, four 
policemen were given the death   sentence for 
carrying out unlawful orders.   More recently in the 
Tando Bahawal case   a Major was sentenced to 
death for giving unlawful orders and some 
servicemen were given long sentences for  obeying 
unlawful commands of their superior officers.  
 
(11) It is my submission that the Chief of the Army Staff 
should have set an example and should himself have 
carried out only lawful orders. He should also have 
ensured that others subjects to militar y law did the 
same.  
 
(12) The Respondent has also stated that I have acted 
out of personal grudge and mala  fide intentions. I 
have no personal grudge against the respondent and HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  28 
have moved this august Court so that an example 
should be set for the Armed For ces so that they may  
in future concentrate on their main function, not 
obey unlawful commands and not involve themselves 
in politics which infringe on human rights and 
national security.  
 
  
       -Sd.- 
       (M. Asghar Khan)  
11.06.1997           PETITION ER” 
 
 
Respondent No.2  filed in Court affidavit dated 31.10.1997, which reads 
as under: -   
“AFFIDAVIT OF LT. GEN. (R) M. ASAD DURRANI
 
 
I, Lt. Gen (R) M. Asad Durrani S/o Dost Mohammad 
Durrani (late), resident of 189 -E, Gulraiz II, Chaklala, 
Rawalpindi, do hereby solemnly affirm and declare as 
under: - 
 
(1) In April 1994, there was a press release issued on 
behalf  of Gen. (R) Mirza Aslam Beg that one Mr. 
Yunus  Habib  and his community had donated Rupees 
One Hundred Forty  Million and Mr. Habib deposited 
this am ount in the account of a government agency. 
It was later reported in the press that Gen. Beg had 
further elaborated that the ISI had spent Rupees 
Sixty Million out of this donation for “political 
intelligence” prior to the 1990 election, and put the 
rest in a special fund. At that time I was the Director 
General of ISI and Gen. Beg confirmed to me that 
these statements had been given.  
(2) In May 1994, I took up my assignment as Pakistan’s 
Ambassador to Germany. In early June 1994, I was 
contacted by Maj. Ge n. (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar, 
the Interior Minister who told me that a commission 
o0f inquiry had been constituted to ascertain the 
facts regarding Gen. Beg’s statement. He also added 
that he had discussed with General A. Waheed at 
that time the COAS, who after consulting with the 
JAG assured army’s cooperation. Gen. Babar said 
that a Director of FIA was on his way to take my 
statement. He a lso added that he had discussed with 
General A. Waheed at that time the COAS, who after 
consulting with the JAG assure d army’s cooperation. 
Gen. Babar  said that a Director of FIA was on his 
way to take my statement.  
(3) On 6th of June 1994, Mr. Rehman Malik, a Director in 
FIA, contacted me in Bonn and presented a letter 
from the Director General, FIA asking me for 
necessa ry details. I talked to Gen. Babar and pointed HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  29 
out that there were certain sensitivities of the case 
and he suggested that I could address a confidential 
statement to the Prime Minister. I agreed.  
(4) I wrote down a hand -written “eyes only” letter to the 
Prime Minister, providing the information. I also 
pointed out the implications that I believed were of 
sensitive nature and requested for discrete handling. 
Mr. Rehman Malik came back to Germany after a few 
weeks. My statement had been typed out on a court 
paper and I was required to sign it for perusal by the 
commission. I was told that it had the approval of 
the chief executive and that the matter would be 
handled confidentially. I Signed the prepared 
statement which was given to me by Mr. Rehman 
Malik, Di rector FIA.  
(5) For the next about two years, I heard nothing more 
on the subject till the press reported that the Interior 
Minister Mr. Nasirullah Khan Babar had made a 
statement in the National Assembly referring to an 
affidavit that he said was given by  me. 
(6) The statement was got signed by me by Mr. Rehman 
Malik under special circumstances and I was given 
the assurance that the matter would be dealt with 
confidentially. I do not know under what 
circumstances the then Interior Minister made the 
stateme nt in the National Assembly. I was unaware 
about his intentions that are known to him.  
(7) The affidavit was got signed from me on the 
understanding that it would only be used for specific 
purpose. Having recommended that the information 
be treated confide ntially, I humbly submit to this 
Honourable Court that I am unable to comment on 
the contents of the affidavit in an open court because 
I am bound by the official secret act. I am of course, 
prepared to answer your questions in your Chamber 
or in camera pr oceedings.  
(8) I am proceeding to Germany to take part in a 
seminar in the first week of November 1997, that 
had been scheduled long time ago and I am, 
therefore, unable to personally attend the 
proceedings. I will be back by the 16th of November 
1997.  
 
The contents of this affidavit are true and correct to 
the best of my knowledge and belief. Nothing has been 
stated incorrect nor concealed, as required by Law.  
 
 
        Sd/- 
 Islamabad       Deponent  
31.10.1997  Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad 
Durrani”  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  30 
13.   Respondent No.1  filed  CMA 1006/2012, wherein it was 
stated that two Commissions of Inquiry , one on the Mehran Bank 
Scandal and the other on Habib Bank  were presided over by Hon’ble 
Judges of superior courts, but, till date these two reports have not 
been made public. He prayed  for issuance of appropriate direction to 
the Federation , the learned Attorney General and the Registrar to 
make available statements recorded in camera and reports of two 
Commissions of Inquiry to him on the condition, assurance and 
undertaking of confide ntiality of the same from the public domain and 
only to be used for properly defending the respondent in th e case. In 
view of the prayer so made, directions were issued to the learned 
Attorney General for producing copies of the reports.  
14.   It may be n oted that Federal Government on having taken 
notice of allegations vide SRO No.617(1)1994 dated 17 .06.1994 
appointed a Commission of inquiry under Pakistan Commission s of 
Inquiry Act, 1956 to inquire into the matters relating to Mehran Bank, 
specified in t he said notification as the terms of reference, comprising  
following : -  
(1) Mr. Justice Abdul Qadeer Chaudhry   
 Judge, Supreme Court of Pakistan   
 
(2) Mr. Justice Zia Mahmood Mirza   
 Judge, Supreme Court of Pakistan   
 
(3) Mr. Justice (Retd.) Z.A. Chana   
 Form Judge, High Court of Sindh   
 
(4) Mr. Justice Nazir Ahmed Bhatti   
 Judge, Federal Shariat court; and  
 
(5) Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Farooq  
 Judge Pehsawar Hi gh Court   
 
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  31 
15.  The Commission completed its task and submitted the 
report. Unfortunately despite Court’s direct ion, the report was not 
made available. However, in the meanwhile, Mr. Hamid Mir, a 
renowned  journalist/anchor person working for private TV channel 
(GEO Network ), handed over a copy of such report to Mr. Salman 
Akram Raja, learned counsel for the petition er and also to the Court  
for perusal . We intended to seek its authenticity from the Law Ministry , 
but the Ministry did not do so on the pretext that its original was not 
available with it . As regards the inquiry report relating to Habib Bank 
Ltd. Scam . In pursuance of such scam  an amount of Rs.140 million 
was withdrawn by respondent No.3  for handing over to the Election 
Cell created in 1990 before election, in the Presidency for the purpose 
of extending financial support to certain favoured candidates 
conte sting the election . It may be noted that the Commission on HBL 
was headed by Mr. Justice Muhammad Ilyas, who submit ted an interim 
report on 22.04.1997. It is mentioned in the interim report that Mr. 
Justice Muhammad Munir Khan was originally Chairman of th e 
Commission  appointed by the Federal Government, whereas Mr. 
Justice Raja Abdul Aziz Bhatti, Judge Lahore High Court and Mr. Justice 
Sardar Muhammad Raza Khan, Judge Peshawar High Court were its 
Members. Its term, however, was extended from time to time w ith the 
result that total period consumed by the original Commission was 
about one year. After sad demise of Mr. Justice Muhammad Munir  
Khan, the Commission was re -constituted on 29.01.1997  with Mr. 
Justice Muhammad Ilyas (former Judge of Supreme Court)  as 
Chairman  and Mr. Justice Javed Nawaz Gandapur and Mr. Justice Faqir 
Muhammad Khokhar as its Members. The Commission inquired from 
the Secretary of the Ministry of Law as to whether the new HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  32 
Commission was required to hold de-novo inquiry or to proceed with  
the inquiry from the stage where it was left by the original 
Commission.  Be that as it may, the Commission did not complete its 
report, as is evident from the report dated 17.05.2012 submitted on 
behalf of the Ministry of Law and Justice vide CMA No.2096/ 12 wherein 
it is stated that report of Commission in the affairs of Mehra n Bank 
Ltd, is not available. As regard s the report on Habib Bank Scam , it was 
submitted that Mr. Justice (R) Muhammad Ilyas, Chairman, HBL 
Inquiry Commission vide letter dated 22.04. 1997 sent only an interim 
report , and did not send the final report to the Ministry. A copy of the 
interim report is annexed with the above CMA . Therefore, vide order 
dated 17.05.2012, the President H BL was directed to appear in person 
and to produce the s tatement/ledger showing the withdrawal of the 
amount on the direction of the then Vice President  HBL, respondent 
No.3 and also to assist the Court as to whether any other material was 
available , which showed that tho se amounts were taken out without 
adopting the proper procedure as alleged, for t he purpose  of 
distribution to certain politicians and others  before the 1990 general 
election s. Likewise the Governor, State Bank of Pakistan was also 
asked to look into the matter and if some information in that b ehalf 
was available with him, he would share the same with the Court. 
Accordingly, vide CMAs No.2372/2012 and 2373/2012 , a copy of the 
reply submitted by Habib Bank Ltd . to the Secretary Commission of 
Inquiry (in two parts) was filed. Similarly, the Govern or, State Bank of 
Pakistan through CMA No.2374/2012 also filed a statement along with 
certain documents .  
16.   It is to be noted that the HBL  in its rep ly has mentioned 
about the withdrawal/deposit of Rs.140 million from Habib Bank Ltd. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  33 
under the instruct ion of respondent No.3 . Likewise, t he Governor, 
State Bank of Pakistan in his statement dated 01.06.2012 has 
confirmed that “ the HBL Reports , inter alia, deal with the issue of 
‘withdrawal & deposit of Rs.140.000 (M) from HBL under the 
instructions of Mr. Yunus  Habib.’  It is submitted that the details given 
in HBL Reports appear to be correct ”. The factum of withdrawal and 
deposit as well as disbursement has also been confirmed by Brig. (R) 
Hamid Saeed Akhtar in his non -confidential report noted hereinabove . 
Besides confirmation of the same, respondent No.2  in his affidavit has 
also confirmed the same.  
17.   In this regard, it is noteworthy that CMA 785/97 dated 
22.10.1997 was filed by Mr. Akhtar Ali Chaudhry, AOR on behalf of 
Ministry of Law for holding th e proceedings of the case ‘in camera’, 
inter alia  stating therein as follows:  -  
“3. In the Petition, filed by Air Marshal (Retd.) 
Mohammad Ashgar Khan, it has been alleged that some 
money was disbursed to Gen. (Retd.) Mirza Aslam Beg by 
the ISI. An affida vit of Lt. General (Retd.) Mr. Asad 
Durrani, former Director General, ISI, has also been placed 
on record to allege the distribution of funds to the former 
Chief of Army Staff (COAS) and others as donation to the 
election campaign in September/October, 199 0, which fact 
has been denied in the letter of Secretary, Defence, 
Government of Pakistan, addressed to the Attorney 
General for Pakistan on 25.6.1997. However, regardless of 
the truth or otherwise of the allegations, if the proceedings 
are held in the ope n court, it may not be in national  
interest as well as in the interest of highly sensitive 
Institution of the Country. Accordingly, prayer is herein -
made for holding the proceedings of the case in Camera by 
this Hon’ble Court.”  
 
Respondent No.1 vehemently opposed the request by filing the reply in 
the CMA noted above through his counsel , inter alia , contending as 
under:  -  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  34 
“2. Para 2 is incorrect. This learned court is not holding 
any proceeding with to the working of Inter Services 
Intelligence Bureau. The  Honourable court is only looking 
into the Political Cell of this institution which was opened 
by virtue of an executive order in 1975 by Mr. Zulfiqar Ali 
Bhutto, a former Prime Minister of Pakistan. This Political 
Cell as per the press reports have allege dly manipulated 
people’s right to form associations under Article 17 of the 
Constitution and have also reportedly acted to frustrate 
the will of the citizens of the Country. It is, therefore, in 
the interest of the national security that a disputed Politic al 
Cell be treated differently and distinctly from rest of the 
institution and may also be dealt with separately so as to 
rid political process of the country from undesirable, 
unhealthy and extraneous influence. The work of ISI is not 
at all in question o r the subject matter of probe or 
adjudication by this honorable court. The only question 
which falls for the determination of the Honourable 
Supreme Court is as to whether the public funds which are 
property to 130 million people of Pakistan and are 
deposi ted with the banks could be siphoned to manipulate 
people will during elections. This, by no stretch of 
imagination or interpretation could be extended to include 
in the domain of the national security issues. Therefore, 
the issue raised in paragraph 2 dem onstrate s an obvious 
confusion and lack of comprehension of the substance of 
subject matter of inquiry by the court.   
3. Contents of Para 3 are absolutely incorrect hence 
denied. In the letter of Air Marshal ( Retd.) M. Asghar Khan 
which has been treated a s a petition by this learned court, 
disbursement of money to respondent has never been 
alleged. Even the alleged affidavit of Lt. Gen. (Retd.) M. 
Asad Durrani is not part of the record. Regardless of the 
defence taken by the Government of Pakistan, none of  the 
above referred issues relate to the national security. The 
proceedings in camera because such proceedings give rise HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  35 
to suspicions, speculations and mistrusts. Disbursement of 
money to individuals for politics does not make the issue 
as sensitive or on e pertaining to the national security. If at 
any stage of the proceedings it is found that any issue 
relating to defence of the country or working of the ISI in 
its national security pursuits comes under question that 
specific situation may be dealt with d ifferently otherwise 
the request for holding camera proceeding in arbitrary 
desire which cannot be countenanced.”   
 
18.   In pursuance of above reply  filed by  respondent No.1, his 
statement  was recorded on oath  in open court on 16.06.1997, wherein 
he reaffirmed the contents of his reply and reiterated that the ISI had 
been created by the Government of Pakistan , which was  directly 
answerable/responsible to the three Services through JCS till 1975. In 
1975 the then Prime Minister of Pakistan through an execut ive order, 
created a political cell within the Organization of ISI and by virtue of 
that change in the working of ISI it came directly under the control of 
the Chief Executive, particularly on political matters and for all the 
security matters concerning t he armed forces, ISI, reported to the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. According to him, that position 
continued till that date i.e. 16.06.1997. He explained that ISI had 
been virtually divided into two parts, namely; political wing and other 
wing concerni ng matters relating to counter and strategic  intelligence 
of the Armed Forces . During the regime of General Zia -ul-Haq, ISI was 
reporting in all matters to the President, who by virtue of his office as 
Chief Martial Law Administrator and President of Pakis tan controlled its 
office.  He further explained that after the general elections of 1988, 
ISI was completely free from the influence of Army and since then is 
virtually under the control of Chief Executive while remaining HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  36 
responsible to JCSC. In 1990 when the money was donated by 
respondent No.3 , ISI was acting under the  direction of the higher 
authorities. As Chief of Army Staff at that time when he was informed 
of this matter, his only concern was that the money received by the 
ISI was utilized properly a nd an account was maintained and beyond 
that, he had no concern with that money. Thereafter, on a question 
put by the learned counsel for the petitioner , he stated as under:  -  
“Although the Director General, ISI is an office r in uniform 
but the Chief of A rmy Staff has no authority to take action 
against him. The head of ISI was a person from Army of 
which I  was head at the relevant time.”  
 
19.   On 24.02.1997, the Ministry of Defence filed in Court a 
letter dated 22.02.1997, wherein it was stated that acco rding to 
information provided by the ISI, it did not receive any amount during 
September/October 1990, therefore, the question of distribution of 
same to the politicians, as stated by respondent No.2 , did not arise. 
Since the said statement contradicted th e statement made by Maj. 
Gen. (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar on the floor of the National Assembly, 
therefore, the Court vide order dated 24.02.1997, summoned the 
record of proceeding of National Assembly dated 11.06.1997 in which 
Maj. Gen. (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar had made the statement in 
question. On 26.03.1997, record of proceedings was produced and it 
was observed that no specific amount had been mentioned allegedly 
received by respondent No.2 . However, t he petitioner produced a copy 
of affidavit of respon dent No.2 , which contained a recital regarding 
distribution of 6 0 million rupees as per direction of the COAS/election 
cell. Later, on court’s direction, Maj. General (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar 
and respondent No.2  filed their statements in the shape of affi davits. 
However, a perusal of the Court  orders dated 23.10.1997, 27.10.1997 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  37 
and 06.11.1997 reveal s that the Court had taken judicial notice of the 
facts stated by both of them  in their affidavit s. The order sheet of 19 & 
20.11.1997 also shows that the ir cross-examin ation was made by 
holding proceedings in camera . On having gone through the order -
sheet, it appears that proceedings to the extent of cross -examination 
of the se persons were completed. However, portion of the record 
regarding their cross-examinat ion ha s not been de -classified by this 
Court.   
20.   As regards the request made by the learned counsel for 
respondent No.1 to supply copy of the ‘confidential statement ’ of 
respondent No.2 , referred to by him in his handwritten letter to the 
Prime Ministe r dated 07.06.1994, it may be mentioned that no such 
statement was brought on record by either of the parties, therefore, it 
was not possible to supply the same. As for the request of respondent 
No.1 made vide CMA No.1006/2012 to supply copy of cross -
exami nation on the statement s of Maj. General (R) Nas irullah Khan 
Babar and respondent No.2 , the request was not acceded to because 
the Court had decided not to make their statements public and we 
were of the opinion that if the matter could be decided to the e xtent of 
relief sought by the petitioner Air Marshal  Asghar Khan, there would be 
no necessity to rely upon the proceedings held in Camera.   
21.   It is to be noted that during proceedings on 25.04.2012 
following observations were made:  -  
“3. We have under taken some deliberations and during 
course whereof, it transpired that Gen (R) Mirza Aslam Beg 
in his concise statement had also taken the position of 
possessing knowledge about the distribution of this 
amount and ma intaining the account by the ISI. Inter alia, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  38 
in the concise statement, one of the factors also finds 
mention to the effect that full account was maintained qua 
all the payments made by the then Director General, ISI 
and no amount was misappropriated or misused.”  
 
As such, Mr. Muhammad Akram She ikh, learned ASC appearing for 
respondent No.1 was required to furnish details of such accounts 
before the next date of hearing. Thus, CMA No.1973/2012 was filed by 
respondent No.1  under his own signature wherein it was stated that he 
had been maintain ing from the very outset that he ha d absolutely no 
involvement in the disbursement of donation ordered by President of 
Pakistan Ghulam Ishaq Khan and that he merely possessed knowledge 
of the same being the Commander of Armed forces.   
22.   The respondent No.3  whose name has been repeated time 
and again in the pleadings,  was never asked to file reply, as such,  
during instant hearing he was issued notice, in response whereof , he 
appeared and filed affidavit dated 08.03.2012  to the following effect : -  
“Affidavit  for Supreme Court   
 
I, Mohammad Yunus A. Habib S/o A. Habib resident of II -
A-I, Main S unset Boulevard, DHA Phase II Ext Karachi, 
give sworn statement which follows as under: - 
 
(1) That Air Marshal (R) Mohammad Asghar K han filed a 
petition (Human Rights Case N o.19/1996 in the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan and that dep onent is 
responde nt along with Gen (R) Mirza Aslam Beg, Ex 
Chief of Army Staf f and Lt . Gen. (R) Asad Durani , Ex 
DG I.S.I  
(2) That the Honourable Apex Court issued a notice to 
appear on 8th March 2012 at 9. 00 a.m.   
(3) That back in 1979/80 when I was serving as Vice 
President of Habib Bank Ltd . and posted at Karachi , I HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  39 
had m et Brig (later) General Mirza Aslam Beg at the 
residence  of Brig . Qamar -ul-Islam. One (Brig . 
Mohammad Aslam was also present ).  
(4) The above me eting translated in to personal 
friend ship between  Gen (R) Mirza Aslam Beg and 
myself.  
(5) Gen (R) Mirza Aslam Beg and I frequently talked  to 
each other. To the best of my memory Gen Beg 
called me in March 1990 and asked that late  
President Ghulam Isha q Khan h as asked to arrange 
Rupees 350.00 Million (Thirty five cror es) well before 
the election which could be held at any time in 
GREAT NATIONAL INTEREST.
 
(6) Few months later I was invited as a guest in 
installation ceremony of Col in Chief (General Beg).  
(7) That Presi dent Ghulam Ishaq Khan was the Chief 
Guest but in actual fact I was treated like the Chief 
Guest.  
(8) That I enclosed a photo taken on that occasion in 
which I was flanked by late President on the left and 
Gen Beg on the right which proof above statement.  
(9) That ours Bank (Habib Bank Ltd) was a Nationalized 
Bank and that I was holding the position of SEVP and 
Member Board and Provincial Chief of the said Bank.  
(10) During this occasion a meeting was held in which 
Gen Beg  introduced myself to l ate President Ghulam 
Ishaq Khan and told him that as per you r desired I 
have discussed with Mr. Yunus  Habib for the 
arrangement of required funds.  
(11) After approximately 45 to 60 days late r General Beg 
telephoned me and asked that late President Ghulam 
Ishaq Khan wants to have a meeting with me in 
which President was to be assured that Funds 
between 35 to 40 cror es will be managed.  
(12) As far as I can recall the meeting was held most 
probably at Balochistan house Islamabad.  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  40 
(13) During the meeting in which only (3) of us 
(President , Gen Beg an d myself ) were present , 
President inquired of me for the arrangement of 35 
to 40 cror es for the Great National Interest
 to which 
I told the President that arrangement for such a 
huge amount was not possible through legal means   
and manipulation  shall be n eeded for this purpose. 
The President directed that what ever is required 
should be done for the National Cause.
 
(14) That on 29th Sep 1990 a meeting was held most 
probably Q block of Islamabad Secretariat. In this 
meeting late Attorney General Aziz Munshi and M r. 
Roedad Khan (who was probably Chief of Cell to 
initiate cases against President Asif Ali Zardari and 
Mohtarma   late Benazir Bhutto. During the said 
meeting I was personally pressurized by Mr. Roedad 
Khan to lodge a complain against President Asif Ali 
Zardari to which I refused.  
(15) When I  went back to Karachi I was arrested from the 
Airport and FIA Cell and I was informed I have been 
arrested on the orders of Mr. Roedad Knan and I was 
again pressurized for the same purpose  (Ref Fa izi Ali 
Kazmi case) but I ag ain refused.  
(16) I was kept in FIA Cell for (5) to (6) days and I was 
informed that I have not yet arranged required 
funds.  
(17) That I have m et Mr. Ij lal Haider Zaidi a couple of 
times in the office of Gen Beg and he was also fully 
aware.   
(18) That during the days whe n I was under the custody 
of FIA I came to the conclusion that I have to 
arrange the funds by hook or crook (The t erm 
frequently used by President & Gen Beg). I was 
bulled out through the courtesy of Jam Sadiq Ali.  
(19) That the loans worth Rs.148 crores were sanctioned 
by Provincial Committee and Executive Committee of 
the Habib Bank Ltd
 in the name of my Friends and HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  41 
Business Acquaintances  (Yousuf Memon and Rafiq 
Moor, etc. etc.)   
(20) Gen Beg and Col Akbar I.S.I detachment provided 
certain a ccounts in various Ban ks i.e. UBL, Allied 
Bank and MCB, in which Funds were to be deposited.   
(21) Brig Hamid Saeed I.S.I detachment Karachi was 
detailed Coordinator/ Supervisor of the operation.  
(22) The deposited amount was informed by me to Gen 
Beg and Brig Hamid Saeed and counterfoil s of the 
deposit slip s were handed over to Col  Akbar and 
photocopy of counter foils to Mr. Yousuf Memon.  
(23) A total Rs.(34) crores out of Rs.148 crores were 
disburse d as under:  -  
i. 140 million through Gen Beg as detailed 
above .   
ii. 70 million to Mr. Jam Sadiq Ali , the then 
Chief Minister Sindh .  
iii. 15 million to Pir Pagara Sahib th rough 
late Jam Sadiq Ali .    
iv. 70 million were paid to Mr. Yousuf 
Memon on the inst ance of the 
President /Gen Beg for the politicians who 
did not want to get money directly from 
ISI
.  
Some fun ds were given for Army welfare 
scheme the exact details . I did not know the 
remaining amount were utilized for purchase of 
properties etc . etc. and a p ortion  of these 
funds were also given to business 
acquaintances who facilitated/provided their 
name s for as directors/companies.  
(24) A total of Rup ees 3450 .00 millions (three point 45 
Billion) have been paid back to the Bankers, and a 
sum of Rs.1150 .00 million is yet to be paid to Habib 
Bank Ltd against with a 32 Acres of land 
com/industrial/Reside ntial plots for  which a case is  
pending with Honourable Supreme Court.   HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  42 
(25) That this case has been scandalize d as Mehran Gate 
whereas the fact of the matter is that the money was 
taken out of Habib Bank Ltd and Mehran Bank was 
not yet born.   
(26) That however when the matter cam e to Surface in 
1994 I was then Chief Operating Officer of Mehran 
Bank Ltd however I enjoying the full powers of Chief 
Executive of Mehran Bank Ltd because of my huge 
investment in the Bank.   
(27) When Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto Shaheed came to 
power in the 2nd tenure and came to kn ow that I was 
used against her in the election by providing huge 
amount she order ed to close the Mehran Bank and 
also ordered to arrest me.  
(28) THAT I SPEN T (4) YEARS IN JAIL FOR SERVING SO 
CALLED SUPREME NATIONAL INTEREST . I NEVER 
KNEW THE EXACT PURPOSE AS TO HOW THE MONEY 
WAS TO BE UTILIZED.   
(29) That I was an employee of the Nationalize d Bank and 
under the circumstances had no option but  to obey 
the President and the COAS in the name of Supreme 
National Interest.   
(30) I apologi se my invol vement a nd throw myself at the 
mercy of this Honourable Court.   
That above is to the best of my knowledge & believe.  
 
Mohammad Yunus Habib  
  Sd/—   
Dt. 08/03/2012”  
 
23.  In view of the allegations contained in the affidavit of 
respondent No.3 , respondent No.1, o n 09.03.2012,  filed a counter -
affidavit in the following terms : -  
“COUNTER AFFIDAVIT O F GENERAL (R)  MIRZA 
ASLAM BEG, DEPONENT/ RESPONDENT NO.1, IN 
RESPONSE TO THE AFFI DAVIT FOR MR. YUNUS A. 
HABIB
 
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  43 
I, General (R)  Mirza Aslam Beg, hereby do solemnly affirm 
and state on oath as under:  
 
(1) That the deponent hereby sincerely, firmly and 
honestly den ies all the contents of the affidavit 
sworn by Mr. Yunus A. Habib, on 8th of March, 2012 . 
(2) That the affidavit filed by Mr. Yunus A. Habib, before 
this Honourable Court, on 8th March 2012, is a “bolt 
from the blue”
 and brings out something only to 
scandlise the proceedings pending before this August 
Court since 1996.  
(3) This is a totally mala  fide attempt to dra matise and 
scandalize the sanctity of the proceedings pending 
before  this Honourable Court, which have been given 
a new direction by the sinister intelligence behind 
this whole affair.  
(4) That Mr. Yunus Habib  has tired to malign the former 
President of Pakistan Ghulam Ishaq Khan, 
posthumously, myself, and several others in th is 
sordid game of mixing politics with justice, with the 
sordid intent to obstruct the wheel of justice.   
(5) That in response to the allegations of Yunus A. 
Habib, a self condemned perjurer, I consider it 
proper to bring on record for the kind attention of 
this honourable Court, the disappearance of the 
statements of Gen. Assad Durani, and Maj. General 
® N. K. Babar  recorded by this Hon’ble Court in 
camera but not yet found. This fact supports the 
respondent deponent’s apprehension that the 
“vested interests, which carry the legacy of the 
vendetta of the lady” – Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto 
– against the respondent deponent, for allegedly 
causing the fall of her government in 1990, continue 
to haunt him and endeavour to interfere with even 
the record of this A ugust Court.  
(6) That the respondent deponent would also draw the 
attention of this Hon’ble Court, some crucial facts to 
recall the past proceedings for proper perspective.   
 
a. Judgment was reserved by a learned bench 
headed by Chief Justice Mr. Justice 
Saiduzzaman Siddiqui on 19.5.1999, but the 
proceedings were subsequently re -opened by 
the Chief Justice on 08 .10.1999, when the 
following order was passed:   
 
“After judgment was reserved in the case, 
the office pointed out that the statements of 
two witnesses (Ma j. General (R) Nasirullah 
Babar  and Lt. Gen. (R) Asad Durani) 
recorded in the case during in -camera 
proceedings were neither signed by the 
witnesses nor by the learned Judges who 
conducted in -camera proceedings. 
According, the two witnesses were called in HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  44 
the chamber before one of us (justice 
Saiduzzaman Siddiqui) on 2.6.1999 and 
shown the record of their respective 
evidence. The two witnesses after going 
through their statements confirmed the 
correctness of their statements and signed 
the same.  
 
Thereafter , Maj. Gen. (R) Nasirullah Babar  
filed an application in the office under Order 
V Rule 1 (19), 1980, along with several 
documents, praying that Sardar Farooq 
Ahmed Khan Leghari be summoned in the 
case to produce the computer disk in 
respect of all accounts  maintained in the 
Mehran Bank and specifically his own 
accounts and his evidence be also recorded. 
As judgment in the case was reserved, the 
office sent the application for orders in the 
chambers. The above application filed by 
Maj. Gen. (R) Nasirullah  Babr could not be 
heard and disposed of due to summer 
vacations. As the application filed by Mr. 
Nasirullah Babar  is to be disposed of before 
final decision of the case, the office is 
directed to fix the application in Court on 
11.10.1999 at 1 p.m. after not ice to all the 
parties and the learned Attorney General.”  
 
The case was last fixed according to record on 
12-10-1999, i.e. the day of Military Takeover 
by Gen. Musharraf, on which day the following 
order was passed: - 
 
“Learned Attorney General submits tha t he 
has received the copy of C.M.A. 1072/99 
today and request for time to file reply 
thereto. Learned Counsel for respondent 
No. 1 states that his client is out of country. 
He also requests for time. Adjourned to a 
date in office.  
  
b. In 1997, I recorded my  statement in ‘Open 
Court’. I was questioned by the petitioner’s 
lawyer. But regretfully, the statements of Lt 
General Asad Durrani and N.K. Babar  were 
recorded in camera . My defence counsel Mr. 
Akram Sheikh was present and I had no access 
to these stateme nts, till I got the call -up notice 
from this apex court, to appear for haring on 
8th March 2012.   
c. My Defence Counsel Mr. Akram Sheikh gave 
me the copy of Lt Gen Asad Durrani’s affidavit, 
but could not find Gen: Nas irullah Babar’s HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  45 
statement, which was seale d and kept in safe 
custody of the court.  
d. The respondent deponent/application was 
summoned in a petition alleging commission of 
misconduct by the respondent 
deponent/applicant and Gen. Asad Durrani, but 
the respondent deponent/applicant himself 
volunteered  to submit that this allegation 
would not attract enforcement of any 
fundamental right falling within the jurisdiction 
of this Hon’ble Court and way back in 1997 in 
his concise statement as well as his reply to 
CMA No. 785 of 1997 stated: -  
“That this Hon’ ble Court could very 
competently look at the working of 
political cell of the ISI which was opened 
by virtue of an executive order in 1975 
by Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, a former Prime 
Minister of Pakistan. This political Cell as 
per the press reports has all egedly 
manipulated people’s right to form 
Associations under Article 17 of the 
Constitution and has also reportedly 
acted to frustrate the will of the citizens 
of the country. It is, therefore, in the 
interest of the national security that a 
disputed Polit ical Cell be treated 
differently and distinctly from rest of the 
institution and may also be dealt with 
separately so as to rid political process of 
the country from undesirable, unhealthy 
and extraneous influence.”  
 
(7) That the respondent deponent/applicant may also 
refer to paragraph 14 of his concise statement/reply 
on behalf of respondent No. 1, which is reproduced 
here under: - 
 
“14. That on 20 April, 1994 the then Interior Minister 
Mr. Nasirullah Babar  made the disclosure in the 
National Assembly as repor ted in the “The Daily 
Muslim” dated 21st April, 1994:  
 
“That Yunus  Habib, the Chief Operator of 
Mehran Bank Limited (MBL) misappropriated 
Rs. 2.10 billion through a number of fake 
accounts.  
 
“The Interior Minister told the House that 
Yunus  Habib gave Rs. 1 40 million to Mirza 
Aslam Beg, the former COAS in 1991” Rs. 70 
million to late Jam Sadiq Ali Khan, the then CM 
Sindh, Rs. 20 Million to Altaf Hussain, the MQM 
Chief, and huge amount to other politicians”.  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  46 
All these allegations have been dealt with and 
vehemently denied by the respondent 
deponent/applicant in his concise statement as 
trumped up charges by Interior Minister of Pakistan 
Peoples Party government. It is also part of the 
record that Mr. Rehman Malik traveled to Germany 
twice to scandalize the is sue subject matter of this 
petition, which was first blasted by Maj. Gen ® N.K. 
Babar on the floor of the National Assembly.  
 
(8) In the earlier statement quoted to have been made 
by Mr. Yunus Habib there was no mention of Rs. 
1800 million and other allegation s that he talks 
about now and claims that he was directed to 
produce this amount “by hook or by crook”.  
(9) That in fact he has tired to develop a new story, to 
cover -up his own crimes of having siphoned -of Rs. 
1800million from Habib Bank/Mehran Bank for which  
he was prosecuted, jailed and made to pay almost 
double the amount of over Rs. 3 billion. Thus, 
‘politics’ and ‘crime’ mingled together to create space 
for denial of justice.  
(10) That I find myself handicapped in properly replying 
to the affidavit filed by Mr . Yunus Habib, without 
having in hand the report of Mehran Bank Scandal 
Commission and Habib Bank Scandal Commission 
and crave indulgence of this Hon’ble Court  to direct 
the Federal Government of Pakistan Peoples Party to 
supply me a copy of the same, so t hat I may submit 
my detailed response to malicious, prompted, and 
absolutely false allegation so far as the respondent 
deponent/applicant is concerned.  
(11) That the applicant/respondent deponent takes this 
opportunity for placing before this Hon’ble Court the 
consistent attitude of various PPP governments 
towards the judiciary and armed forces and they do 
not spare any opportunity to tarnish the image of 
these two institutions.  
(12) That I have no doubt in my mind whatsoever that 
the bundle of lies put together by Mr. Yunus Habib in 
his affidavit is inspired by political expediency of the 
vested interests and Yunus Habib’s effort to sanctify 
his sordid deals, by linking -up the matter with “fund 
raising for elections, in national interest.”  
(13) That this affidavit is a c over-up for his own crime, he 
was found guilty of and punished for under the law. 
It was a separate matte, which has been dealt with 
by the Habib Bank and Mehran Bank Commissions of 
Enquiries.  
(14) That in submitting this co unter affidavit I sincerely 
thank thi s Hon’ble Court, for making me complete 
my ‘hat-trick’, of appearing thrice before this apex 
court – first before Chief Justice M. Afzal Zullah, 
second time before Chief Justice Sajjad Ali Shah and 
now before this Honourable court, under the dynamic HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  47 
leader ship of Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudh ry. This is an honour, bestowed on me – 
which no other COAS can possibly claim.   
 
And yet, I wonder: “Jane kis jurm ki  paye hay saza 
yad naheen.” (Why I am being punished, I know not)  
 
Submitted with respect by  
 
SWORN at Islamabad this day of 09 .03.2012 
 
 
               Sd/-  
Respondent Deponent  
     General (R) Mirza Aslam Beg.”  
 
 
24.  Respondent No.2  also filed a concise statement dated 
08.03.2012 , which reads as under: -  
 
CONCISE STATEMENT ON  BEHALF OF RESPO NDENT NO. 2
 
LT. GENERAL (R)  M. ASAD DURRANI
 
 
Respectfully Sheweth, 
 
 
1. That on 8th March, 2012, the Hon’ble Chief Justice of 
Pakistan directed  me to give my comments on the 
affidavit submitted by Mr. Yunus Habib, during the 
hearing of HRC No. 19/1996 (Air Ma rshal Asghar 
Khan v. Gen Aslam Beg. These are as under : -   
2. Mr. Yunus Habib did deposit Rs. 140 million ( Para 
No. 23 (1) of the affidavit) in various branches (Para 
No. 20) in the accounts opened, on my orders , by 
Brig. Hamid Saeed (heading M.I and not I.S .I. 
formation in Karachi)  
3. This fact was also mentioned by me in the affidavit 
that I had signed and handed over to Mr. Rehman 
Malik, the then D.G. F.I.A. on 07 .06.1994 in 
Germany.   
4. I have no information on any other issue raised by 
Mr. Yunus Habib in the a ffidavit.   
 
It is therefore respectfully prayed that concise statement 
may kindly be placed on record in the interest of justice.  
 
 
Dated: 08.03.2012         Lt. General (R) M. Asad 
Durrani”   
 
Respondent No.3 , in response to the above counter -affidavit of 
respondent No.1  dated 09.03.2012 and concise statement of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  48 
respondent No.2  dated 08.03.2012  filed affidavit dated 10.03.2012, 
which reads as under: -    
“AFFIDAVIT in response of affidavit of General (R)  Mirza 
Aslam B eg dated 9th March 2012 and Lt Gen (R) M . Asad 
Durrani dated 8th March, 2012
 
In the Supreme Court of Pakistan
 
 
I, Muhammad Yun us A. Habib s/o A . Habib resident of 11 -
A-1 Main Sunset B oulevard, DHA Phase II Extension 
Karachi give SWORN
 Statement which follows as under: - 
 
Gen. (R) Mirza Aslam B eg
 
 
(1) In rep ly to Para (2) of the affidavit,  it is submitted 
that I submitted th e affidavit dated 8.3.2012 in the 
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan with all 
Sincerely, Honesty to bring the truth on record and 
there is no Question of Scandalizing the highest  
Court of the Co untry (Supreme Court of Pakistan) 
headed by the Chief Justice of Pakistan, Justice 
Iftikhar Chaudhry, arises.  
(2) I have no interest in dramatizing this case and just 
want to speak truth before this Honourable Court 
(before death) to enable an d empowered this 
Honourable Court to reach at correct conclusion. It is 
further stated at ever since this case filed by Air 
Marshal Asghar Khan in the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan, I never met any official of any Civil or 
Military Intelligence and never met a ny Political 
figure of any Political Party till I deposited my 
affidavit in this Honourable Court on 8th March 2012 . 
Only Gen (R) Mirza Aslam beg spoke to me in the 
last about (2) years only (4) to (5) times. (This is in 
reply to Para (3) of affidavit)  
(3) In reply to Para (4) of the affidavit again I have no 
interest in the politics of the Country and can never 
think to malign any person and obstruct the Court of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  49 
Justice. The Photo Su bmitted by me  in the affidavit 
dated 8/3/2012 is proof of the fact that the President 
and Gen (R) Beg pampered me to the extent that I 
should not refuse to their order.  
(4) In reply to Para  (8) it is submitted that i n my 
previous affidavit , I stated that Rupees 1480 million 
(One hundred forty eight crores) were taken out of 
Habib  Ban k Ltd and not Rupees 1800 Million as 
stated by Gen (R) Aslam Beg.  
(5) In reply to Para (9) it is stated that Gen (R) Aslam 
Beg has mixed up Habib Bank and Mehran Bank 
whereas to the b est of my knowledge and 
understanding , the fi led by Air Marshall (R) Asghar 
Khan portions to use of money in the Edition in 1990 
to block the victory of PPP Govt. and , therefore, I 
restricted my disclosure of facts confined to Habib 
Bank Ltd and did not touch the issue of Mehran Bank 
except Rs. 150 Million paid to Late Jam Sadiq A li for 
licence (as a separate note on the affidavit) .  
(6) I am ready to file the affidavit in case of Mehran 
Bank if a case is filed in the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan or the Supreme Court
 itself orders to 
submit the affidavit in this respect.  
(7) It is correct to  the extent that I paid a sum of 
Rupees amount to more than (3) Billion. I actually  
have so far paid Rupees 345
 crores and only Rs.115 
crores is to be paid to Habib Bank Ltd, this amount 
can be easily paid out of sale proceeds of plot for 32 
Acres situate d at Gulshan -e-Iqbal Block 9 . I am 
100% sure that the case will be decided in my favo ur 
because City District Govt. has taken back its claim 
that it paid any amount against this plot to Evacuee 
Trust.  
(8) In reply to Para 12 & 13 my submission in the above 
paragraphs reiterated.  
 
Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad Durrani
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  50 
(1) In reply to Para (2) it is submitted that B rig. Hamid 
Saeed and Col. Akbar were introduced to me as ISI 
officers. However , after affidavit of Gen (R) Durrani 
the word ISI in Para 20 & 21 may kindly be del eted 
from my previous affidavit dated 8th March 2012. 
That above is to best of my knowledge and belief.  
     Muhammad Yunus Habib  
   Sd/-   
             10.03.2012”  
 
In the meanwhile , respondent No.3  also filed CMA No.1034 of 2012 
wherein he stated that i n his affidavit dated 08.03.2012 reproduced 
hereinabove, he had disclosed that Rs.70 million were distributed 
through Mr. Yousaf Memon, Advocate amongst those politicians who 
did not want to get money directly from ISI. That Mr. Yousaf Memon 
Advocate in tw o different TV Programmes of GEO News channel (one 
by Kamran Khan and the other by Nazir Laghari ) admitted that a 
house was purchased in F-6/2 Islamabad in the name of Mr. Ja ved 
Hashmi. He also admitted that 50% of the amount was invested in the 
purchase o f house (Kasim 1 al -Multan ). That after release from jail , he 
contacted the officials of State Bank of Pakistan and Habib Bank Ltd . 
for settlement of liabilities , desired to settle the liabilities with 
facilitation of NAB to which he agreed.  Thus, a gainst a loan of Rs.148  
crores, settlement was reached at Rs. 300 crores ( original amount of 
loan/ad vances of Rs.148 crores and markup/interest of Rs.152 crores) . 
Out of the said liability , he had paid  Rs.185 crores , which mea ns that 
the principal liability of Rs.148 crores has already been paid while 
Rs.37 crores have been paid towards markup and only a sum of 
rupee s Rs.115 crores wa s outstanding on account of markup/interest.  
He prayed for appoint ment of  a Judicial Commission to effect reco very 
of the amount disburse d through ISI and  Mr. Yousaf Memon Advocate,  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  51 
adjust the same towards the settlement of H BL’s liability; or in the 
alternative, the responsibility of recovery of said money may be 
assigned to the NAB, which is already engaged in the case.  
25.   In pur suance of Court  notice, learned Deputy Prosecutor 
General, NAB appeared and submitted a report pointing out that 
following the process of plea bargain under the NAO, settlement of 
account ha d already taken place with HBL. Be that as it may, the Court 
while being seized with the matter regarding distribution of the 
amounts through election cell would not be extend ing the scope of 
proceeding so as to  settle  the personal  account s of respondent No.3  
and would confine itself only to the extent of the prayer s/declaration s 
sought by the learned counsel for the petitioner , which are as under : -  
(a) All members, including Defence Army Officers who 
are respondents, who acted so as to interfere with 
and maneuver the electoral process in any manner, 
including through disbu rsement of funds subverted 
the Constitution.  
(b) No member of the Armed Forces is obliged to obey a 
command in violation of his oath of his office and 
cannot take the defence of command of the 
superiors.  
(c) Receiving secret funds and non -disclosure thereof 
constitutes serious electoral fraud with consequences 
under the electoral laws.  
(d) A direction to the Federation to initiate appropriate 
proceedings under criminal and election laws against 
the alleged givers and recipients of funds for political 
purposes includ ing the respondents and the various 
persons named in Ltd. Gen (R) Durrani’s letter to PM 
dated 7.6.94 and affidavit dated 24.7.94.”   
26.   On 26. 06.1997 , the then learned Attorney General 
produced in Court original le tter dated 25. 06.1997 addressed to him  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  52 
by the Secretary Defence along  with the document under which ISI 
was created. However, while placing the  said  document before the 
Court, he claimed privilege, which was allowed for the time being  and 
the document  was returned to him on the same date . This fact was 
mentioned in the order dated 26. 06.1997 wherein it was observed that 
it appeared from the contents of the letter addressed to the learned 
Attorney General that a political cell was created in the ISI in May, 
1975, which was still in existence. When the Court inquired from the 
learned Attorney General as to whether the Government intended to 
continue with the political cell in the ISI, he requested for time to seek 
specific instructions. The matter was  then taken up on 23.10.1997 and 
26.07.1997 , but no response came up in that behalf. As such , on 
27.10.1997 again learned Attorney General was asked to inform the 
Court whether the Federal Government wanted to retain the political 
cell in  the ISI as was directed on 26. 07.1997. However,  despite 
repeated  directions, the learned Attorney General failed to file any 
response of the Government regarding retaining of the political cell in 
the ISI. However, on 09.03.2012 , the respondent No.2 , while changing 
his earlier stance, stated in Court that there was no political cell in the 
ISI, but political work might have been done by certain designated 
persons. On 17.05.2012, the learned Attorney General was asked to 
procure notification of 1975 issued by the then Chief Executive in 
pursuance whereof a political cell  was created in the ISI as alleged by 
the respondents . When the case was taken up on 04.06.2012, the 
learned Attorney General stated that copy of said notification would be 
produced on the next date of hearing. However, on the next date , i.e. 
22.06.2012, h e stated that despite h is efforts , he could not succeed in  
getting  the said notification  traced , whereas Commander Shehbaz, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  53 
Director (Law), Ministry of Defence stated that according to his 
information the notification was issued by the Cabinet Division and  he 
would try to get a copy of the same from the  said Division . He, too, 
failed to produce the same  on the next date of hearing , i.e., 
16.07.2012  when he stated that no such notification was available in 
the Ministry of Defence. In the circumstances, vide order dated 
13.09.2012 , the Secretary , Ministry of Defence, Government of 
Pakistan was directed to file a statement in writing in that behalf and 
also to explain as to whether presently any such cell was working in 
the ISI or any other agency controlled by  the Defence Ministry.  
Likewise , Secretary , Ministry of Interior was also directed to make  a 
similar statement in respect of IB and all other agencies controlled by 
the said Ministry. On the next date of hearing , i.e., 03.10.2012 , the 
learned Attorney Gene ral placed on record letter dated 28. 09.2012 
addressed to him by the Ministry of Defence stating therein that no 
political cell is functioning in the Directorate General, Inter Services 
Intelligence or any other Agency working under the administrative 
control of Ministry of Defence.  On 04.10.2012, the Interior Secretary 
submitted a written statement wherein it was stated that IB/ISI are 
not working under the administrative control of Ministry of Interior. 
Furthermore, no  other agency under the administrativ e control of 
Ministry of Interior  is running any political cell.   
27.  On 16.06.1997, the statement of the respondent No.1 was 
recorded and petitioner’s counsel Mr. Habib -ul-Wahab Al -Khari, ASC 
cross-examined him. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan, app earing 
on Court notice, filed an application requesting for in -camera hearing 
of the case. Both Mr. Nasirullah Khan Babar  and the respondent No. 2 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  54 
filed their detailed affidavits stating therein all the facts which they 
wanted to state, as such, only cross -examination was to be made. The 
Court, vide order dated 06.11.1997, decided to record the further 
statement of these persons in -camera. As such, proceedings were held 
in camera in which cross -examination of said persons was recorded. 
On 19.05.1999, the ar guments were completed and judgment was 
reserved for orders. However, afterwards, office pointed out that the 
statements of Maj. Gen. (R) Nasirullah Khan Babar and the respondent 
No. 2, recorded in -camera, were not signed by the witnesses nor by 
the learne d Judges who conducted in -camera proceedings. 
Accordingly, on 02.06.1999, both the witness were called in Chambers 
before Mr. Justice Saiduzzaman Siddiqui, J., as he then was (later CJ). 
The witnesses, after going through their statements, verified the 
correctness of their statements and signed the same. Similarly, as per 
order dated 27.05.1998, a sealed cover report on the working of ISI 
(parts IV & V) was also filed in Court . Later on, it was pointed out that 
the statements of said witnesses, recorded in camera as well as the 
report on the working of ISI were not available on record . As such, 
vide order dated 29.02.2012, office was directed to trace out the same 
and produce in Court in sealed envelope. On the next date of hearing 
i.e. 08.03.2012, the requi site documents were produced in Court by 
the Court Associate in sealed envelopes. The same were opened, seen, 
and returned to him with the direction to deposit the same with the 
Registrar of this Court. Relevant portion from the order dated 
08.03.2012 read s as under: -  
“In obedience to order dated 29.02.2012, the office has 
placed on record a sealed envelop under the cover “TOP 
SECRETE” “REPORT OF THE COMMISSION TO REVIEW THE 
WORKING OF SECURITY & INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES”. The 
envelop has been opened in Cour t, which contains four HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  55 
folders Part -II (Report of the Commission to Review the 
Working of Security & Intelligence Agencies (MARCH –
1989); Part -III (Correspondence); again Part -II 
(photocopy of the same report of the Commission (March -
1989); and again Part -III (Correspondence).  
 
2. A perusal of the same indicates that the Report of 
the Commission to Review the Working of Security & 
Intelligence Agencies has not been filed. However, Comdr. 
Muhammad Hussain Shahbaz, Director (Legal), 
representing Ministry of D efence, is allowed to go through 
these documents in the office of Registrar of this Court, 
who shall facilitate him in this behalf. He is directed to file 
the requisite reports pertaining to the year 1990 as well as 
up-to-date reports on the Working of Sec urity & 
Intelligence Agencies. In the interest of nation, these 
documents shall be kept CONFIDENTIAL.  
 
3. The envelop produced before us has been given to 
Mr. Rafaqat Hussain, CA/Branch Incharge, Civil -II, who 
shall handover the same to Registrar of this Court, who 
shall put them under seal.  
 
4. Another envelop has been produced, which contains 
the following items: -  
 
“Item No.1  
1. 2 Audio Cassettes relating to HRC.19/1996 
containing detail, as under: - 
Cassette No.1
: Dated 20.11.1997 timings 
10.30 to 11. 00 a.m.  
 
Cassette No.2
: Dated 25.11.1997 timing, 10 
am to 11 am and 11.30 to 
1.00 pm. (side A) dated 
26.11.1997 timings 11:45 
am to 1:15 pm (side B)  
Item No.2
 
 
File No.1
: Consisting 3 pages in original  
 
Page No.1
: 
(Note dated 28.5.1999 of the then Additio nal 
Registrar with regard to obtaining the orders of 
HJ (1) whether Lt. General ® Nasirullah Babar 
and Lt. General ® Asad Durrani may be asked 
to read their statements and sign them in the 
presence of an officer of this Court).  
 
Page No.2
: 
Note dated 1.6.1 999 regarding submission of 
unsigned statements/cross -examination of 
Maj. (R) Nasir ullah Babar and Lt. General Asad 
Durrani to the then HJ(1)  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  56 
Page No.3
: 
Order  dated 2.6.1999 of Justice Said uzzaman 
Siddiqui  
 
File No.2 in original
: 
 
 
Srl. 
Nos
. 
 Detail  
(All in original)  
 Page
s 
 
1 Cross examination of Maj. 
Gen.(R) Nasir ullah Babar by Gen. 
Mirza Aslam Beg 1-3 
 
2 Explanation of Gen Babar with 
regard to his cross examination  4 
3 Cross examination of Maj. Gen. 
(R) Nasir ullah Babar by Habib -ul-
Wahab  ul-Khairi  (in Urdu)  5-9 
4 Cross examination of Maj. Gen. 
(R) Nasir ullah Babar by Mr. 
Muhammad Akram Sheikh.  10-
21 
 
5 Cross examination of Lt. Gen.(R) 
Asad Durrani  22-
25 
6 Cross examination of Lt. Gen.(R) 
Asad Durrani by Habib -ul-Wahab -
ul-Khairi  26-
33 
7 Cross exam ination of Lt. Gen.(R) 
Asad Durrani by Maj. Gen.(R) 
Nasirullah Babar  34-
35 
 
 
Item No.3
: 
 
Copy No.08 of 11 Copies
:- 
Folder with regard to the report of the 
commission to review the working of Security 
and Intelligence  Agencies (March -1989) 
submitted by (i ). Air Chief Marshal Zulfiqar Ali 
Khan, Chairman, (ii). S.K. Mahmud, Secretary 
Interior, Member, (iii). Mr. M.A.K. Chaudhry, 
Member and (iv) Air Commodore Muhammad 
Yamin, Secretary. (Pages 1 -57). 
 
Item No.4
: 
 
ADO letter No.RC/1/89 dated 27.3.1989 
addressed  to the Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto, 
Prime Minister of Pakistan, Prime Minister’s 
Secretariat, Rawalpindi by the Air Chief 
Marshal, Zulfiqar Ali Khan along with its 
synopsis of the Commissioner’s Report for 
facility of reference. (Pages 1 -8)”. 
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  57 
5.  The office has also made efforts to find out as to 
whether examination -in-chief of Gen.(R) Nas irullah Khan 
Babar and Lt. Gen.(R) Asad Durrani was recorded; 
according to the report, no such document is available on 
record. However, Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned ASC, 
appearing for the petitioner, states that they were 
subjected to cross -examination on the affidavits, which 
have already been filed. As these proceedings were drawn 
in camera, therefore, the same be sealed and are handed 
over to Mr. Rafaqat Hussain for dep ositing the same with 
the Registrar. As regards proceedings drawn by the office 
of Registrar to locate these documents, the same are also 
made part of the record and are ordered to be deposited 
with the Registrar.”   
 
28.   Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, learne d counsel for 
respondent No.1 , with reference to the order dated 26. 06.1997 , stated  
that a political cell was created in the ISI in May, 1975 and the 
document creating the said cell was shown to the Court, which was 
returned after examination. Thus, conclu sion can be drawn that a 
political cell was working in the ISI since May, 1975 onward and at 
initial stage documents were shown, which now have been withheld.   
29.   It is to be noted that as per contents of various 
documents/ pleadings , it is , prima  facie, evident that a cell was 
allegedly functioning in the Presidency in the year 1990 under the 
supervision of then President of Pakistan Ghulam Ishaq Khan (late) 
and M/s Roedad Khan and Ijlal Haider were in charge/looking after the 
affairs of such cell . Inasmuch as, it is also on record that at one point 
of time when Mr. Farooq Ahmad Khan Leghari (late) was the President 
of Pakistan, some consultation to ok place between him, late Mohta rma 
Benazir Bhutto, the then Prime Minister and late Maj. Gen. (R) 
Nasirull ah Khan Babar wherein the affairs of the cell constituted to 
support alliance of political parties were discussed.  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  58 
30.   It may be observed that the President, under Article 41(1) 
of the Constitution , being the head of the State represents the unity of 
the Republic , whereas by virtue of Article 243(2) of the Constitution , 
he is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces  of Pakistan . 
Therefore, the President  was not supposed to be undertak ing any 
activities in pursuance whereof a particular group of the poli tical 
parties might be allegedly supported in  the name of national interest . 
On the request of learned counsel for the petitioner, it was deemed 
appropriate to implead the office of President as party through 
Secretary to the President vide order dated 04.10.2012.  On the next 
date of hearing i.e. 15.10.2012 , Malik Asif Hayat, Secretary to the 
President of Pakistan , in response to the notice , appeared and 
requested for time. On 17.10.2012, he again appeared and stated that 
as per present record, no concrete information was available about 
any election cell having ever been created in the Presidency. However, 
efforts were being made to lay hand upon any such file. He also stated 
that as the Military Secretary to the President was also in possession 
of some rec ord of  Presidency, information in that  behalf, if any, w ould 
be placed before the Court after consulting his office.  On 18.10.2012, 
Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, Director Legal, President House appeared 
and filed a statement on behalf of Military Secretary to t he President 
stating therein that the record available in the President’s Secretariat 
(Personal) was searched , but no document/file pertaining to the cell 
allegedly set up in the Presidency in the year 1990 or thereafter was 
found.  
31.  Respondent No.3  has clarified in his affidavit that it was 
not the Mehran Bank, but the Habib Bank from where the alleged HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  59 
amount was drawn for distribution amongst a group of politicians, who 
were intending to contest election from the platform of IJI. He has 
stated that respondent No.1 frequently talked to him. In March 1990, 
Gen. (R) Mirza Aslam Beg called him and stated  that late President 
Ghulam Ishaq Khan had asked to arrange Rs.350 Million ( thirty five 
crores) well before the election , which would be held at any time i n the 
great er national interest. A few months later , he was invited as a 
guest in the installation ceremony of Col onel-in-Chief of respondent 
No.1. In the said function, President Ghulam Ishaq Khan was the Chief 
Guest , but in actual fact he ( respondent No. 3) was treated like the 
Chief Guest. During the period when he was holding the position of 
SEVP and Member Board of Governors as well as Regional  Chief of 
HBL, a meeting was held in which respondent No.1 introduced him to 
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan (late)  and told him (President) that as 
per his  desire he had discussed with him (respondent No.3) matter 
regarding arrangement of required funds.  He further stated that a fter 
approximately 45 to 60 days , respondent No.1 told him on telephone 
that P resident Ghul am Ishaq Khan (late) wanted to have a meeting 
with him,  in which President was to be assured that funds between 
Rs.35 to 40 cror es would be arranged . A meeting  was held  probably at 
Balochistan House, Islamabad , in which  only three persons , namely , 
Presiden t, respondent No.1 and he (respondent No.3 ) were present . 
The President  directed  that the requisite funds be managed by all 
means in the national  interest .  
32.  Mr. Roedad Khan, by means of CMA 3196/2012 filed a 
rejoinder to the reply of the respondent No .1 and a supplementary 
statement through CMA No. 4350/2012 wherein he denied his HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  60 
involvement in the distribution of funds in any manner whatsoever. 
According to him, he had never been a member of any such cell, that 
he had met respondent No. 2 only once in  the office of the Military 
Secretary to the President, but had never met respondent No.1 during 
the relevant period.  
33.   From a perusal of the replies/affidavits filed by 
respo ndents No.1 , 2 & 3 , which have been reproduced hereinabove,  it 
is clear that the then President Mr. Ghulam Ishaq Khan had formed an 
Election Cell directly under hi s supervision . According to respondent 
No. 3,  he was informed by respondent No.1 that he  was under 
instruction from the President’s Election Cell to make available a sum 
of Rs.140 million for supporting the 1990  elections  and to place this 
amount at the disposal of the respondent No.2 , who would handle it as 
per instruction of the President’s Election Cell. The amount was not 
deposited in the MI  account , rather various cov er accounts were 
opened by 202 Survey Section  (Brig. Hamid Saeed)  under the 
command of ISI and an amount of Rs. 140 million was deposited in 
those accounts directly by respondent No.3 . Respondent No.2 under 
instruction from respondent No.1 made arrangements  to distribute this 
amount amongst the politicians belonging to various political parties 
and other persons as instructed by the alleged election cell . 
Respondent No.1, in a meeting with President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, 
brought to his knowledge the fact of don ation made by the respondent 
No. 3 and its utilization by the respondent No. 2 under instruction of 
the President’s Election Cell.  Respondent No.1 was fully on board in 
the whole exercise. The policy of financial support to the candidates 
was laid down by the President’s Election Cell and respondent No. 2 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  61 
was acting under its command and ma king payments as directed from 
time to time . Out of Rs. 140 million deposited in the cover accounts, 
approxim ately Rs. 60 million were spent for election purposes and for 
acquisition of election intelligence, wh ile the remaining amount of 
Rs.80 million was deposited in the accounts of the special funds of ISI.   
34.  There was a document, though yet to be proved , which 
indicated that about Rs.30 million were deposited under t he instruction 
of the respondent No.1 in the account of an organization in the name 
and style of “Friends ” and General Asif Nawaz Janjua, the then COAS 
had taken exception to the deposit of the said amount in that account. 
As such, on 17.10.2012, Commander  Hussain Shahbaz, representative 
of Ministry of Defence was asked to inquire from the concerned 
quarters and submit as to whether the remaining amount was 
available in the said account , or the same had been spent, and if so, 
what were the details thereof ? But, despite availing opportunity, 
needful was not done.  
35.  Now in the presence of the above material, it would be 
proper to first decide the question of maintainability of the petition 
raised by Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC, learned counsel for 
respondent No.1  who argued  that the instant petition was filed alleging 
commission of misconduct by the respondent s No.1 & 2, which would 
not attract the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution , which is available  in a case invol ving a question of public 
importance with reference to enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights . He submitted  that he had raised this objection in the year 1997 
in his concise statement as well as in his reply to CMA No. 785 of 
1997.  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  62 
36.  In response to the above, Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned 
ASC has argued that the instant proceedings d o raise a question of 
great public importance with reference to enforcement of various 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens guaranteed under the Constitution 
of Pakista n, 1973, e.g., the right to information (Article 19A); the right 
of association (Article 17), etc., which have been infringed in the 
instant case. He has placed reliance upon following judgments: -    
a) Benazir Bhutto v. The Federation
 (PLD 1988 SC 416) at 
518-533. 
b) Mian Nawaz Sharif v. The President
 (PLD 1993 SC 473 ) at 
558, 559.  
c) Nawabzada Iftikhar Ahmad Khan Bar v. Chief Election 
Commissioner Islamabad
 (PLD 2010 SC 817) at 826.  
d) Muhammad Rizwan Gill v. Nadia Aziz
 (PLD 2010 SC 828) 
at 838.  
e) Workers' Party Pakist an v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 
2012 SC 681)  at Paras 38, 46, 49.  
 
37.  The learned counsel also argued that it is established in 
the instant proceedings that the democratic process was interfered 
with at the relevant time by certain functionaries of th e State in 
derogation of the fundamental rights of the citizens guaranteed under 
Article 17 read with Article 2A of the Constitution, which is tantamount 
to subversion of the Constitution.  Those included, inter alia, the 
respondents No.1 & 2 and a number of their subordinate officers, such 
as Brig (R) Hamid Saeed, then head of MI in Sind h and others , who 
were tasked with the distribution of funds and whose names would be 
available with the respondent No. 2 and Brig (R) Hamid Saeed.  
38.   The learned couns el argued that in the light of law laid 
down in Mian Nawaz Sharif’s case
 (supra ), on account of the admission HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  63 
made by the respondents, there was a concerted attempt to subvert 
Article 17 and thereby to subvert the Constitution. He further argued 
that in en forcing fundamental rights of the people, this Court has not 
only made the requisite declarations, but has also issued necessary 
directions to the concerned agencies to initiate action against all those 
liable under applicable civil, electoral and criminal  laws. In this behalf, 
he has placed reliance on the following cases: -  
a) Alleged Corruption in Rental Power Plants
 (2012 SCMR 
773).  National Accountability Bureau asked to carry out 
prosecution.  
b) NRO Implementation proceedings
 (2012 SCMR 1434), 
(PLD 2012 S C 866).  
c) Watan Party v. The Federation (Memo Matter)
 (PLD 2012 
SC 292). High powered commission formed.  
 
He also argued that this Court, in exercise of its jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, is competent to mould the relief to 
be grante d in the matter before it in accordance with the facts and 
circumstances that come to light during the proceedings. In support of 
the above proposition, he has referred to the following cases: -  
a) Watan  Party v. The Federation (Memo matter), PLD 2012 
SC 292  at page 359, 360.  
b) Watan Party v. The Federation, (Karachi Suo Mot u), PLD 
2011 SC 997 at 1055, 1112.  
c) Shahid Orakzai v. The Federation, PLD 2011 SC 365, Para 
28.  
d) Mst. Amatul Begum v. Muhammad Ibrahim Sheikh, 2004 
SCMR 1934, Para 8.  
The learned counsel f urther submitted that instant proceedings are not 
adversarial, inasmuch as these are being used to lay before the people 
of Pakistan things that had happened in the past with a view to 
avoiding same or similar constitutional violations in future. Article 1 9A 
of the Constitution guarantees the right to information. The petitioner 
in the instant case is merely an informer and as the information HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  64 
develops, it would be for the Court to grant relief . As regards the relief 
that can be provided under Article 184(3) , learned counsel has 
referred to Shahid Orakz ai v. Pakistan through Secretary Law
 (PLD 
2011 SC 365) wherein this Court has held as under: -  
“28. … … as cancellation of the respondent's earlier 
appointment and his fresh appointment as Chairman, 
National A ccountability Bureau had come about during the 
pendency and hearing of the present petitions and as the 
said development had been brought  to the notice of this 
Court by the Federation of Pakistan itself, therefore, we 
had decided to treat that development as a part of the 
pending issue and had decided to determine its effect on 
the same without requiring the petitioners to amend their 
petitions in respect of such development. There is no 
gainsaying the fact that the law is by now quite settled 
that a Court seized of a matter cannot only take notice of 
any relevant development taking place during the 
pendency of the lis but it can also mould the relief to be 
granted keeping in view such development and none of 
the learned counsel representing different partie s to the 
present petitions has disputed that legal position or has 
objected to the course adopted by us in that regard.”  
 
39.   We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner , 
respondent No.1  and the learned Attorney General . In the context of 
the p resent case, t he observation of Mr. Justice Muhammad Afzal 
Zullah, J, as he then was, (later Chief Justice) in Benazir Bhutto ’s case
 
(PLD 1988 SC 416) that Article 17(2) of the Constitution provides a 
basic guarantee to the citizen against usurpation of hi s will to freely 
participate in the affairs and governance of Pakistan through political 
activity relating thereto , is very pertinent. In Benazir Bhutto v. 
Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 1989 S C66), Justice Nasim Hasan Shah, 
in his note of concurrence held th at “the right to form or be a member 
of a political party” guaranteed under Article 17(2) of the Constitution 
includes the right to contest and participate in the elections. In Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case
 (supra ) this Court relying upon 
Benazir Bhutt o's case
 (supra ) held that in the scheme of the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  65 
Constitution, the guarantee “to form a political party” must be deemed 
to comprise also the right by that political party to form the 
Government, wherever the said political party possesses the requisite 
majority in the Assembly. It was further held that if the lawful 
functioning of a Government o r political party is frustrated by an 
unlawful order, such an order is an impediment in the healthy 
functioning of the political party and would, therefore, constitut e an 
infringement of the fundamental right conferred by Article 17(2). The 
same view was reiterated by this Court in the case of Muhammad 
Nasir Mahmood v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 2009 SC 107). 
Recently, this Court, in Workers' Party Pakistan ’s case
 (supra), has  
held, inter alia, that Article 2A expressly lays down that “...principles 
of democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance and social justice, as 
enunciated by Islam, shall be fully observed” in the State of Pakistan 
and that the protection and advance ment of these principles is an 
integral objective and an essential feature of the Pakistani 
constitutional Order  It was also held that this constitutional Order 
declares that “the authority [is] to be exercised by the people of 
Pakistan”. By guaranteeing the observance of ‘principles of democracy’ 
in Pakistan and mandating that the “State shall exercise its powers 
and authority through the chosen representatives of the people” the 
Constitution envisages that this authority is to be exercised by and 
through  a representative and democratic government. Furthermore, by 
establishing and enumerating the powers and manner in which the 
legislature is to function, Parts II and III of the Constitution cement 
‘democracy’ as the chosen system of the people and a fundam ental 
constitutional dictate. This symbiotic relationship between ‘democracy’ 
as a governing system and the objective of ‘advancing and protecting HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  66 
Fundamental Rights, as enunciated by Islam’ , it was held,  preserves 
and reinforces both these constitutional dictates as cardinal features of 
the Constitution. In the above perspective, it was reiterated that t he 
freedom of association, as enunciated by Article 17 of the Constitution, 
confers a Fundamental right on every individual to partake in the 
political gov ernance of the State, whilst concurrently reinforcing the 
constitutional mandate to protect and advance this right through a 
democratic State. Article 51(6)(a) of the Constitution mandates that 
the representatives of the people “shall be elected by direct and free 
vote, in accordance with law”, therefore, f air, free, honest and just 
elections are sine qua non for strengthening of democracy.  It was also 
noted that t he right to form a political party under Article 17 of the 
Constitution includes the right to participate in free and fair election 
and to form government if such party is successful because 
‘participation’ in the electioneering process necessarily implies that 
every person and every group in society may genuinely take part in 
the process of electi ons, as voter and candidate, without constraint , 
coercion , unlawful inducement  or subjugation. Consequently, any 
unconstitutional curtailment of the right to participate  in election , and 
to form government, is tantamount to an abridgement of the right 
under Article 17(2) of the Constitution. Thus, it has been emphasized 
that a combined reading of Article 17(2) and Article 25 of the 
Constitution mandates a ‘level playing field’ for electioneering 
processes. The principle of free and fair elections was also highlighted 
in the Indian jurisdiction in the case of Smt. Indira Nehru Gandhi v. 
Raj Narain
 (AIR 1972 SC 1302) = [(1975) Supp. 1 SCC 1]  wherein  the 
Court struck down even a constitutional amendment on the ground 
that it was violative of the said principle.  Later, in People's Union for HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  67 
Civil Liberties v. Union of India
 (2009) it was held that democracy 
contemplates that elections should be free and fair and the voters 
should be in a position to vote for the candidates of their choice.    
40.  As already ment ioned above, President Ghulam Ishaq 
Khan dismissed the PPP Government on 06.08.1990 in exercise of 
powers conferred upon him under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution.   
Fresh Elections were scheduled to be held on 24.10.1990 and Mr. 
Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi (late) was made the Caretaker Prime Minister. In 
order to contest the elections against PPP , a political alliance namely 
IJI was formed. T he then President of Pakistan  Ghulam Ishaq Khan, 
having disputes/rivalry with PPP, supported IJI through the Election 
Cell established in the President House. For that purpose, funds were 
arranged and the same were distributed to various politicians/political 
parties through ISI/IB. In this way, the elections of 1990 were 
maneuvered and as stated by learned counsel for the  petitioner , the 
PPP got half the number of seats in the National Assembly as 
compared to the seats won by it in the previous elections. Thus, 
allegedly people were deprived of their fundamental right under Article 
17 of the Constitution to participate in a free, fair and just election , 
particularly in the constitution  of national or provincial assemblies 
where interference was made by a person not below the status of a 
functiona ry who was head of the State  and symbol of unity as per 
Article 41(1) of the Co nstitution , thus succeeded in  form ing 
government through a group of political parties of his choice .   
41.  It is to be noted that the instant proceedings were initiated 
on a letter addressed to the then Chief Justice by a political worker, 
who earlier hap pened to be an officer  and Chief  of the Pakistan Air HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  68 
Force, bringing into Court’s notice certain actions of the highest 
functionaries including the then Head of State, Chief of Army Staff and 
Director General, ISI. The allegation mainly was that they, with  mala 
fide intention, and with the object of benefiting a particular group of 
politicians, had interfered in the electoral process, whereby the 
fundamental right of the people at large of electing their 
representatives by fair, free and just election, was violated. In order to 
determine the correctness of the allegation, the matter was registered 
as Human Rights case and notices were issued to the persons allegedly 
involved in the distribution of funds. There is a clear admission by all 
that sums were disbu rsed to a group of politicians by individuals, who 
were members of the Armed Forces , in particular ISI and MI with a 
view to maneuvering the election results in derogation of the 
Fundamental Right guaranteed under Article 17(2) of the Constitution 
as inter preted by this Court in the above referred judgments. This case 
is of great significance and the Court, in exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is called upon to discharge its 
responsibility of enforcing Fundamental Rights of the people 
guaranteed under the Constitution.  Thus objection on maintainability 
of the petition is discarded and it is held that the same is maintainable. 
It may also be observed that these proceedings being in the nature of 
public interest litigation a re inquisitorial, and not adversarial, 
therefore, this Court is not called upon to issue notices to all and 
sundry allegedly involved in the matter. It is well settled that this 
Court has ample powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon a case if it 
falls within the ambit of inquisitorial proceedings. Reference in this 
behalf may be made to the cases of Watan Party v. Federation of 
Pakistan
 (PLD 2011 SC 997), All Pakistan Newspapers Society v. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  69 
Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 2012 SC 1)  and Workers’ Party Pakist an’s 
case
 (supra ).  
42.  The learned Attorney General argued that there was a 
strong appearance of bias on the part of the Hon’ble Judges 
constituting the present Bench, therefore, according to him, if justice 
was to be seen to be done, then all the three Hon’ble Members may 
consider the propriety of recusing themselves from the Bench, and the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice may constitute a larger bench, excluding the 
present three Hon’ble Members of the Bench.  
43.  The questions involved in the instant case have t o be dealt 
with in view of the material brought before this Court already referred 
to hereinbefore, therefore, before undertaking the exercise we 
consider it appropriate to deal with the arguments of the learned 
Attorney General in respect of bias on the p art of the Judges and  his 
request for constitution of larger Bench.  
44.  A somewhat similar objection was raised in Pakistan v. 
Abdul Wali Khan
 (1975 PSCR 1) regarding the sitting of the two Judges 
on the Bench hearing that case wherein, at page 214 of th e report, it 
was observed as follows: -  
“As regards the objection taken to the constitution of the 
Bench, learned counsel were informed on the very first day 
that no party to a litigation can claim the right to be tried 
by a particular Judge or Judges of his choice. In the case of 
superior Courts it is entirely a matter for the Judge or 
Judges concerned to decide as to whether they will or will 
not sit in that particular case. Mr. Wali Khan has been 
informed that both the learned Judges, against whom the 
objection has been raised, have now recorded minutes in 
writing which have been placed on the record of these 
proceedings to say that they do not feel embarrassed in 
sitting to hear this proceeding. The objection based purely 
on conjectures is, therefore, i n our view, unwarranted. 
Judges concerned are fully conscious of their own 
responsibilities. There is nothing to show that they are in 
any way disqualified from sitting to hear this reference. 
The objection is, accordingly, overruled.”  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  70 
 
 
In the case of Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 1998 SC 161) it 
has been held as under: - 
“… … Mere apprehension in the mind of a litigant that he 
may not get justice such as is based on inferences drawn 
from circumstantial indications will not justify the raising o f 
the plea The facts adduced must be such that the 
conclusion of bias follow necessarily therefrom on no 
weaker ground can any person be permitted to attack the 
impartiality of a superior Court and consequently should 
the proof fail to satisfy the requisit e standard, he may be 
found in contempt " (The underlining is by us) S.A. 
Rehman, J. who was also one of the Members of the Bench 
which heard M.H. Khondker's case ( supra ), concluded as, 
follows, on the plea of bias by a party against a Judge of 
Supreme Cou rt:- 
  
Reference may also be made to the Canons of Professional Conduct 
and Etiquette of the Pakistan Bar Council, Chapter III (Duty to the 
Court) thereof reads as follows: -  
(1) It is the duty of an Advocate to maintain towards the 
Court a respectful att itude, not for the sake of the 
temporary incumbent of the judicial office, but for the 
maintenance of its supreme importance. Judges, not being 
wholly free to defend themselves, are peculiarly entitled to 
receive the support of the Bar against unjust criti cism and 
clamour. At the same time whenever there is a proper 
ground for complaint against a judicial officer, it is the 
right and duty of an Advocate to ventilate such grievances 
and seek redress thereof legally and to protect 
complainant and person affec ted. 
 
It is thus well settled that in the case of superior Courts it is entirely a 
matter for the concerned Judges to decide as to whether they will or 
will not sit in any particular case. In the instant case, the objection 
raised by the learned Attorney G eneral is based purely on conjectures 
and is unwarranted , particularly when the learned Attorney General 
himself has been appearing in the instant case and participating in the 
proceedings ever since its hearing was taken up by the present Bench 
in April t his year . During this period, the case was heard on more than HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  71 
30 dates. Be that as it may, t he Members of the present Bench are 
fully conscious of their responsibilities and are capable of dispensing 
justice without fear or favour, ill -will or affection. T he objection of the 
learned Attorney General is untenable and is overruled.   
45.   It is also established in the instant proceedings that the 
then President directly involved himself in the matter of first arranging 
funds from an illegal source and then g etting the same disbursed to a 
group of political parties and various other persons through the 
members of Armed Forces in the name of great national interest with a 
view to influence the election results in derogation of the people’s right 
to freely choos e their representatives. The Court is, thus, called upon 
to dilate upon the role of President in the scheme of the Constitution .  
46.  Historically , there is no gain saying that the office of 
President , both  during military and civil governments, has been 
indulging in  politics . There have been constitutiona l deviations, from 
time to time,  due to which parliamentary system was weakened and 
could not flourish in the country as envisaged by the Constitution. The 
political stalemate has been summarized by this court in the case of 
Sindh High Court Bar v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 2009 SC 879)  as 
under : -  
“17. … … The first major event in this behalf was the 
dissolution of the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan by 
Governor -General Ghulam Muhammad in 1954 , … … This 
act of the Governor -General was challenged by Moulvi 
Tamizuddin Khan, President of the Constituent Assembly, 
in the Chief Court of Sindh. The Chief Court of Sindh 
allowed the petition and declared the dissolution of the 
Assembly as illegal. It was held that the Acts of the 
Constituent Assembly when it did not function as the 
Federal Legislature did not require the Governor -General’s 
assent. The Federation of Pakistan challenged the 
judgment of the Sindh Chief Court before the Federal 
Court. The Federal C ourt reversed the judgment of the 
Sindh Chief Court on the ground that the assent of the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  72 
Governor -General was necessary to the validity of all the 
laws and the amendments made in the Government of 
India Act, 1935. The Court held that since section 223 -A of 
the Government of India Act under which the Chief Court 
of Sindh assumed jurisdiction to issue the writs did not 
receive assent of the Governor -General, it was not yet law, 
and that, therefore, the Chief Court had no jurisdiction to 
issue the writs. … ….  
 
23. Next case of significant relevance was the Reference 
by H. E. The Governor -General
 reported as PLD 1955 FC 
435. The Federal Court having held in Maulvi  Tamizuddin 
Khan’s case  that assent of the Governor -General was 
necessary to all laws passed by the  Constituent Assembly, 
the Governor -General sought to validate such Acts by 
indicating his assent, with retrospective operation, by 
means of the Emergency Powers Ordinance, 1955 
(Ordinance No. IX of 1955) issued under section 42 of the 
Government of India Act, 1935. The Federal Court in Usif 
Patel’s case
, however, declared that the Acts mentioned in 
the Schedule to that Ordinance could not be validated 
under section 42 of the Government of India Act, 1935, 
nor could retrospective effect be given to them. A 
noteworthy fact was that the Constituent Assembly had 
ceased to function, having already been dissolved by the 
Governor -General by a Proclamation on 24th October 1954, 
and no legislature competent to validate these Acts was in 
existence.  
 
24. The Governor -General made a Reference to the 
Federal Court under section 213 of the Government of 
India Act, 1935 asking for the Court’s opinion on the 
question whether there was any provision in the 
Constitution or any rule of law applicable to the situation 
by which  the Governor -General could, by Order or 
otherwise, declare that all orders made, decisions taken, 
and other acts done under those laws, should be valid and 
enforceable and those laws, which could not without 
danger to the State be removed from the existin g legal 
system, should be treated as part of the law of the land 
until the question of their validation was determined by the 
new Constituent Convention.  
 
25. The answer returned by the Federal Court (by 
majority) was that in the situation presented by th e 
Reference, the Governor -General had, during the interim 
period, the power under the common law of civil or state 
necessity of retrospectively validating the laws listed in the 
Schedule to the Emergency Powers Ordinance, 1955, and 
all those laws, until th e question of their validation was 
decided upon by the Constituent Assembly, were, during 
the aforesaid period, valid and enforceable in the same 
way as if they had been valid from the date on which they 
purported to come into force.  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  73 
The case of State v. Dosso
 (PLD 1958 SC 533) was commented as 
under: -  
“28. The Supreme Court, on the basis of the theory 
propounded by Hans Kelsen, accorded legitimacy to the 
assumption of power by General Ayub Khan holding that 
coup d’état was a legitimate means to bring ab out change 
in the government and particularly so when the new order 
brought about by the change had been accepted by the 
people. It was held that where a Constitution and the 
national legal order under it was disrupted by an abrupt 
political change not wit hin the contemplation of the 
Constitution, then such a change would be a revolution 
and its legal effect would not only be the destruction of the 
Constitution but also the validity of the national legal 
order, irrespective of how or by whom such a change w as 
brought about. In the result, in accordance with the 
judgments of the majority, the proceedings for writs in 
each of these cases were held to have abated. The result 
was that the directions made and the writs issued by the 
High Court were set aside. ”   
 
The case of Asma Jilani v. Government of the Punjab
 (PLD 1972 SC 
139) was discussed as under:  -  
“32. It was held that Kelsen’s theory was, by no means, a 
universally accepted theory nor was it a theory which could 
claim to have become a basic doctrine of  the science of 
modern jurisprudence, nor did Kelsen ever attempt to 
formulate any theory which favoured totalitarianism.  
 
33. The seizing of power by Yahya Khan having been 
declared by the Supreme Court to be entirely illegal, 
question arose whether ever ything (legislative measures 
and other acts) done during his illegal regime, whether 
good or bad, could be treated in the same manner and 
branded as illegal and of no effect. … … ”   
 
Regarding the next constitutional deviation, which occurred in 1977, 
this Court, in the case of Begum Nusrat Bhutto v. Chief of Army Staff 
(PLD 1977 SC 657) held that the Armed Forces of Pakistan, headed by 
the Chief of Army Staff, General Mohammad Zia -ul-Haq intervened to 
save the country from further chaos and bloodshed, to s afeguard its 
integrity and sovereignty, and to separate the warring factions which 
had brought the country to the brink of disaster. It was held that this HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  74 
undoubtedly was an extra -constitutional step, but was dictated by 
considerations of State necessity a nd welfare of the people. Then the 
validity of constitutional deviation of 1999 was considered by this 
Court in the case of Syed Zafar Ali v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 2000 
SC 869) and b y the Short Order dated 12.05.2000, the action of 
12.10.1999 was val idated on the basis of the doctrine of State 
necessity and the principle of salus populi est suprema lex  as 
embodied in Begum Nusrat Bhutto’s case .
 It was  also  held that 
General Pervez Musharraf was entitled to perform all acts or legislative 
measures, whi ch were in accordance with, or could have been made 
under the Constitution, including the power to amend it and to perform 
all such measures as would establish or lead to the establishment of 
his declared objectives. As to the power to amend the Constituti on, it 
was held that constitutional amendments could be resorted to only if 
the Constitution failed to provide a solution for attainment of his 
declared objectives, but no amendment shall be made in the salient 
features of the Constitution, i.e. independen ce of judiciary, federalism, 
parliamentary form of government blended with Islamic provisions; 
and last but not the least, three years’ period from the date of Army 
takeover, viz., 12th October, 1999 was allowed to him for achieving his 
declared objectives . … … The review petition against the above 
judgment was filed by Mr. Wasim Sajjad, but the same was dismissed 
vide judgment reported as Wasim Sajjad v. Federation of Pakistan
 
(PLD 2001 SC 233). It is important to note that General (R) Pervez 
Musharraf  promulgated the President’s Succession Order 2001 (Chief 
Executive’s Order No. III of 2001) on 20 .06.2001 in pursuance 
whereof Mr. Muhammad Rafiq Tarar, President of Pakistan was ousted 
from office and he himself assumed that office  on 21.06.2001 .  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  75 
47.  The l ast major event in the successive constitutional 
deviations was the imposition of emergency and promulgation of PCO 
on 03.11.2007, which was dealt with by this Court in Sindh High Court 
Bar Association’s case .
 For the first time in our Constitutional  histo ry, a 
7-Member Bench of this Court passed a restraint order against the 
imposition of emergency and enforcement of PCO  on the very day  and 
the Judges of the Superior Courts refused to make oath under the new 
dispensation. This sparked an enthusiastic lawye rs’ movement, which 
was joined  in and supported by members of civil society and media, 
which continued demanding restoration of judiciary unconstitutionally 
deposed on 03.11.2007. Consequently, on 16.03.2009 Government of 
Pakistan restored the judiciary. Thereafter , a number of petitions were 
filed before this Court challenging action of President/Chief of Army 
Staff, General (R) Pervez Musharraf. This Court on 31.07.2009 
accepted the petitions vide its judgment in Sindh High Court Bar 
Association’s case
 wherein it was  held, inter alia, as under: -  
    
“22. As a consequence thereof: - 
 
i) the Chief Justice of Pakistan; the Judges of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan; any Chief Justice of any of the 
High Courts and the Judges of the High Courts who were 
declared  to have ceased to hold their respective offices in 
pursuance of the afore -mentioned alleged judgments or 
any other such judgment and on account of the 
instruments mentioned in Para 21 above, shall be deemed 
never to have ceased to be such Judges, irrespec tive of 
any notification issued regarding their reappointment or 
restoration;  
ii) it is declared that the office of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan never fell vacant on November 3, 2007 and as a 
consequence thereof it is further declared that the 
appointment  of Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar as the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan was un -constitutional;  void ab 
initio and of no legal effect;  
 
 Provided that subject to whatever is contained 
hereinafter, the said un -constitutional appointment of Mr. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  76 
Justice Abdul Hame ed Dogar as the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan shall not affect the validity of any administrative 
or financial acts performed by him or of any oath made 
before him in the ordinary course of the affairs of the said 
office;  
iii)  since Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed D ogar was never a 
constitutional Chief Justice of Pakistan, therefore, all 
appointments of Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, 
of the Chief Justices of the High Courts and of the Judges 
of the High Courts made, in consultation with him, during 
the peri od that he, un -constitutionally, held the said office 
from 3.11.2007 to 22.3.2009 (both days inclusive) are 
hereby declared to be un -constitutional,  void ab initio  and 
of no legal effect and such appointees shall cease to hold 
office forthwith;  
 
 Provided that the Judges so un -constitutionally 
appointed to the Supreme Court while holding the offices 
as Judges of any of the High Courts shall revert back as 
Judges of the respective High Courts subject to their age of 
superannuation and like -wise, the Judges o f the High 
Courts, who were District and Sessions Judges before their 
said un -constitutional elevation to the High Courts shall 
revert back as District and Sessions Judge subject to 
limitation of superannuation;  
iv) the Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakis tan, if any, 
the Chief Justices of the High Court, if any, and the Judges 
of any of the High Courts, if any, who stood appointed to 
the said offices prior to 3.11.2007 but who made oath or 
took oath of their respective offices in disobedience to the 
order passed by a Seven Member Bench of the Supreme 
Court of Pakistan on 3.11.2007 in C.M.A.No.2869 of 2007 
in Constitution Petition No.73 of 2007, shall be proceeded 
against under Article 209 of the Constitution. The 
Secretary of the Law Division of the Governm ent of 
Pakistan shall take steps in the matter accordingly;  
 
 Provided that nothing hereinabove shall affect those 
Judges who though had been appointed as Judges/Chief 
Justices of any of the High Courts between 3.11.2007 to 
22.3.2009 but had subsequently b een appointed afresh to 
other offices in consultation with or with the approval of or 
with the consent of the Constitutional Chief Justice of 
Pakistan;  
 
v) any judgments delivered or orders made or any 
decrees passed by any Bench of the Supreme Court or of  
any of the High Courts which comprised of or which 
included the afore -described Judges whose appointments 
had been declared  void ab initio,  are protected on the 
principle laid down in MALIK ASAD ALI’S CASE
 (PLD 1998 
SC 161);  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  77 
vi) since the Constitution (A mendment) Order, 2007 
being the President’s Order No.5 of 2007 and the 
Islamabad High Court (Establishment) Order being 
President’s Order No.7 of 2007 establishing Islamabad 
High Court for the Federal Capital Territory, have been 
declared to be un -constitu tional and of no legal effect, 
therefore, the said Islamabad High Court shall cease to 
exist forthwith. All judicial matters pending before the said 
High Court before the passing of this order shall 
revert/stand transferred to the courts which had 
jurisdic tion in the said matters before the promulgation of 
afore-mentioned President’s Order No.5 of 2007 and 
President’s Order No.7 of 2007 promulgated on 14th 
December, 2007. The Judges of the said Court shall, as a 
consequence thereof, cease to be Judges excep t such 
Judges or the Chief Justice of the said court, who prior to 
their appointments in the said Islamabad High Court, were 
Judges of some other High Court who shall revert to the 
court of which they were originally the Judges, subject to 
their age of sup erannuation. The officers and employees of 
the said Court shall also cease to hold their respective 
appointments and shall become part of the Federal 
Government Surplus Pool for their further appointments. 
However, if any such officer or employee was an of ficer or 
an employee of some other court or department or office, 
such officers or employees shall revert to their respective 
courts, departments or offices to which they belonged 
before joining the service in the Islamabad High court, 
subject again to the ir age of superannuation;  
 
 We would like to mention here that establishment of 
a High Court or a Federal Court for the Federal Capital 
Territory might be a desirable act but it is unfortunate that 
such a step was taken in an un -constitutional and a highly  
objectionable manner. We may, therefore,  add that 
notwithstanding what has been declared and ordered 
above, the relevant and competent authorities may take 
steps to establish such a court in accordance with the 
Constitution/the law;  
 
vii) the Ordinances  promulgated by the President or a 
Governor of a Province before 3.11.2007 which were given 
permanence by the Provisional Constitution Order No.1 of 
2007 as also the Ordinances issued by the President or a 
Governor between 3.11.2007 and 15.12.2007 (both da ys 
inclusive) which were also, like -wise given permanence 
through the same instrument and which legislative 
measures along with the said Provisional Constitution 
Order had been validated by the afore -mentioned 
judgment delivered in  TIKKA IQBAL MUHAMAD KHA N’S 
CASE,
 stand shorn of their purported permanence on 
account of our afore -mentioned declarations. Since on 
account of the said judgment in  TIKKA IQBAL MUHAMMAD 
KHAN’S CASE
 purporting to be a judgment of this Court, 
the presumption that the said Ordinanc es were valid laws HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  78 
not requiring approval of the Parliament or the respective 
Provincial Assemblies in terms of Article 89 or 128 of the 
Constitution and since it is today that this Court has 
attributed invalidity to the said legislative instruments, 
there fore, the period of 120 days and 90 days mentioned 
respectively in the said Article 89 and the said Article 128 
of the Constitution, would be deemed to commence to run 
from today and steps may be taken to place the said 
Ordinances before the Parliament or the respective 
Provincial Assemblies in accordance with law;  
 
viii) since the Constitution, through its Article 176, 
authorises only the Parliament to determine the number of 
Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan and since the 
Parliament had so done thro ugh the Supreme Court 
(Number of Judges) Act XXXIII of 1997, therefore, the 
increase in the strength of the Judges through the Finance 
Act of 2008 which Act was not passed by the Parliament 
but was passed only by the National Assembly would be 
deemed to be  valid only for financial purposes and not for 
the purposes of Article 176 of the Constitution. It is 
resultantly declared that the number of Judges of the 
Supreme Court for purposes of the said Article 176 shall 
continue to remain sixteen;  
 
ix) in the Cod e of Conduct prescribed for the Judges of 
the Superior Courts in terms of Article 209(8) of the 
Constitution, a new clause shall be added commanding 
that no such Judge shall, hereinafter, offer any support in 
whatever manner to any un -constitutional functi onary who 
acquires power otherwise than through the modes 
envisaged by the Constitution and that any violation of the 
said clause would be deemed to be misconduct in terms of 
the said Article 209 of the Constitution;  
 
x) in view of our findings above regar ding Mr. Justice 
Abdul Hameed Dogar not being a constitutional and a valid 
consultee, the notification dated 26.8.2008 and the 
notification dated 15.9.2008 extending the term of office of 
Mr. Justice Abdur Rasheed Kalwar and of Mr. Justice Zafar 
Ahmed Khan  Sherwani as Additional Judges of the High 
Court of Sindh are declared to be un -constitutional and of 
no legal effect;  
 
xi) that the court acknowledges and respects the 
mandate given by the sovereign authority i.e. electorate to 
the democratically elected  Government on 18th February, 
2008 and would continue to jealously guard the principle of 
trichotomy of powers enshrined in the Constitution, which 
is the essence of the rule of law. Any declaration made in 
this judgment shall not in any manner affect the General 
Elections held and the Government formed as a result 
thereof i.e. the President, the Prime Minister, the 
Parliament, the Provincial Governments, anything done by 
these institutions in the discharge of their functions. These HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  79 
acts are fully protected  in terms of the age old of principle 
of Salus populi est suprema lex  reflected in PLD 1972 SC 
139; 
 
xii) Before parting with the judgment, we would like to 
reiterate that to defend, protect and uphold the 
Constitution is the sacred function of the Supreme  Court. 
The Constitution in its preamble, inter alia , mandates that 
there shall be democratic governance in the country, 
“wherein the principles of democracy, freedom, equality, 
tolerance and social justice as enunciated by Islam shall be 
fully observed; . ................ wherein the independence of 
judiciary shall be fully secured.” While rendering this 
judgment, these abiding values have weighed with us. We 
are sanguine that the current democratic dispensation 
comprising of the President, Prime Minister a nd the 
Parliament shall equally uphold these values and the 
mandate of their oaths.”  
 
48.   It is significant to note that in pursuance of above 
judgment, the Hon’ble Judges of the superior Courts subjected 
themselves to constitutional command for not sup porting any 
unconstitutional order to govern this country. Prior to it , the military  
adventurers had been ruling this country off and on in the name of so-
called doctrine of necessity or State necessity.   
49.   It is to be observed that during the time when the country 
was being governed unconstitutionally, Judiciary and Parliament both 
had been facilitating the adventurers as noted hereinabove , but in the 
Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case
 all the previous judgments 
were revisited and it was finally held that any unconstitutional act of 
the Martial Law Authorities could not be validated by the Judiciary and 
in future , the Hon’ble Judges of the Sup erior Court s shall not take oath 
under any unconstitutional dispensation. It was also held that in the 
Code of Conduct prescribed for the Judges of the Superior Courts in 
terms of Article 209(8) of the Constitution, a new clause would be 
added commanding that no such Judge shall, hereinafter, offer any 
support in whatever manner to any un -constitutional functio nary who HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  80 
acquires power otherwise than through the modes envisaged by the 
Constitution and that any violation of the said clause would be deemed 
to be misconduct in terms of Article 209 of the Constitution. In 
pursuance of above dictum, the Supreme Judicia l Council constituted 
under Article 209 of the Constitution amended the Code of Conduct of 
the Judges and incorporated Article IX therein, as under : -  
“No Judge of the superior judiciary shall render support in 
any manner whatsoever, including taking or a dministering 
oath in  violation of the oath  of office prescribed in the 
Third Schedule to the Constitution, to any authority that 
acquires power otherwise than through the modes 
envisaged by the Constitution of Pakistan.”  
 
50.  Thus, having covered a long distance, during which 
country was faced with unconstitutional era and judiciary was also 
being alleged to support military adventurers, ultimately, for all time s 
to come, the Judiciary as an institution decided not to support any 
unconstitutional regime in future. The o bject is to strengthen the 
institutions of Parliament/ democratic system of government as 
envisaged by the Constitution , wherein the State is to exercise its 
powers and authority through the chosen representatives of the people 
(Article 2A of  the Constitution).    
51.   It may be seen that the military regime s besides derailing 
the parliamentary system of government, from time to time, also 
mutilated constitutional provisions, particularly, with reference to 
instant case, by introducing Article  58(2)(b) by the Eighth 
Constitutional Amendment, 1985 and Seventeenth Constitutional 
Amendment, 200 3. By means of these Constitutional Amendments, 
the President was made stronger  and the  Parliamentary system of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  81 
government was converted into  semi -President ial type, as instead of 
strengthening the Prime Minister of Pakistan , who is the chief 
executive  of the country and Leader of the House in terms of Article 91 
of the Constitution, the powers were shifted to the President of 
Pakistan  who was empowered  to di ssolve the National Assembly  under 
the defunct Article 58(2 )(b) of the Constitution.  
52.  Unfortunately , the National Assembly, comprising chosen 
representatives of the people was subject ed to dissolution in the years 
of 1988, 1990, 1993 and 1996  in exerc ise of power under Article 
58(2)(b) of the Constitution , as a consequence whereof along  with the 
Assemblies the Government of Pakistan at the center  and Provincial 
Assemblies in the Provinces were also dissolved . However , fortunately, 
the present Parliamen t in 18th Constitutional Amendment has repealed 
almost of  those amendments in the Constitution, which were 
introduced during unconstitutional era s, headed by Army General s in 
uniform. What could be more unfortunate for the nation that  from 
1977 to 1988 and  October 1999 to December 2007, the President of 
Pakistan had been, in uniform of Pak Army, purportedly functioning as 
civilian President of Pakistan  against constitutional precepts.   
53.   The result of conferring powers on the President of 
Pakistan under  Eighth Constitutional Amendment  created an 
atmosphere due to which the office of the President remained pitched  
against the political parties with full impunity, without realizing 
constitutional sanctity of the President ’s office, which is the symbol of 
unity of the Republic and as the head of the State  as per Article 41 of 
the Constitution. The dissolution s of Assemblies by the President as 
ordered from time to time under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  82 
were dealt with by this Court in Federation of Pakistan v. Haji Saifullah 
Khan
 (PLD 1989 SC 166), Kh. Ahmed Tariq Rahim v. Federation of 
Pakistan
 (PLD 1992 SC 646), Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case
 
(supra ), Mohtarma  Benazir Bhutto v. President of Pakistan
 (PLD 1998 
SC 388) and Syed Zafar Ali Shah ’s case
 (supra ). A brief account of the 
said cases  is given  in the case of Qazi Hussain Ahmed v. General
 
Perve z Musharraf
 (PLD 2002 SC 853) as under: -  
“19. On 29th May 1988, General Muhammad Zia -ul-Haq 
dissolved the National Assembly and dismissed the 
governm ent of Mr. Muhammad Khan Junejo under Article 
58(2)(b) of the Constitution. The dissolution of the 
National Assembly was challenged in the Lahore High 
Court under its constitutional jurisdiction and through the 
judgment reported as Kh. Muhammad Sharif v. Federation 
of Pakistan (PLD 1988 Lahore 725), the dissolution of the 
Assembly was declared illegal and the matter then came to 
this Court in appeal. On 17th August 1988, General 
Muhammad Zia -ul-Haq died in an air crash and Ghulam 
Ishaq Khan, the then Chairm an of the Senate assumed the 
office of the President of Pakistan. This Court vide 
judgment reported as Federation of Pakistan v. Haji 
Saifullah Khan (PLD 1989 SC 166), which was delivered on 
5th October, 1988, upheld the judgment of the Lahore 
High Court b ut declined to grant the relief of restoration of 
the Assembly on the ground that the whole nation had 
been geared up for election scheduled for 16th and 19th 
November, 1988.  
 
20. As a result of the 1988 election, Pakistan Peoples Party 
led by Mohtarma Ben azir Bhutto formed government at the 
centre while Islami Jamhuri Ittehad (IJI) with Pakistan 
Muslim League being its major component, led by Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif formed government in the 
Province of Punjab. Since the two leaders did not see eye 
to ey e with each other, a state of constant confrontation 
existed. The two of them were not even ready to meet 
each other, what to talk of negotiating or settling issues 
and having consensus on questions of national importance.  
 
21. On 6th August, 1990, Mr. Ghu lam Ishaq Khan, the 
then President of Pakistan, levelled various charges 
including corruption and mal -administration, violations of 
the Constitution, etc., dissolved the National Assembly, 
dismissed the government of Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto 
under Article 5 8(2)(b) of the Constitution and ordered 
fresh election. The order of dissolution was challenged 
before all the four High Courts. However, the cases from 
Balochistan and Sindh were consolidated and heard by the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  83 
High Court of Sindh. Likewise, the cases from NWFP and 
Lahore were consolidated and heard by the Lahore High 
Court. Both the High Courts in their separate judgments, 
distinguished Haji Saifullah Khan’s case and upheld the 
order of dissolution of assemblies and observed that the 
President was justified  in forming the opinion that the 
government of the Federation was not being carried on in 
accordance with the Constitution. The matter came to this 
Court in appeal in the case reported as Kh. Ahmed Tariq 
Rahim v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1992 SC 646) bu t 
the Court refused to grant leave to appeal against the 
judgments of the High Courts and consequently the 
dissolution order was maintained.  
 
22. The general election held in 1990 returned Mian 
Muhammad  Nawaz Sharif to power with Mohtarma  Benazir 
Bhutto s itting on the  opposition benches. The two of them 
continued indulging in confrontation. Differences arose 
between Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif and Mr. Ghulam 
Ishaq Khan, the then President of Pakistan. On 18th April, 
1993 the then President dissolved the Na tional Assembly 
and dismissed the government of Mian Muhammad Nawaz 
Sharif under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution. The 
matter came before this Court in the case reported as Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan (PLD 
1993 SC 473) and by ma jority of 10 to 1, this Court held 
that the order of dissolution did not fall within the ambit of 
the powers conferred on the President under Article 
58(2)(b) of the Constitution and other enabling powers 
available to him in that behalf and in consequence the 
National Assembly, Prime Minister and the Cabinet were 
restored. However, in the peculiar situation then obtaining, 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif advised the then President 
to dissolve the assemblies on 18th July, 1993.  
 
23. In the election held in Octobe r 1993, Mohtarma  
Benazir Bhutto with the help of allied parties again came to 
power and Mr. Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari was elected as 
President of Pakistan while Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif 
formed the opposition. The degree of tension between the 
two old riv als rather increased. On 5th November, 1996, 
President Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari dissolved the 
National Assembly and dismissed the government of 
Mohtarma  Benazir Bhutto under Article 58(2)(b) of the 
Constitution. This dissolution was also challenged in thi s 
Court in the case reported as Mohtarma  Benazir Bhutto v. 
President of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 388), but it was held 
that the action of the President was legal and 
constitutional.  
 
24. In the election held in February 1997, Mian 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif return ed to power with a 
thumping majority in the Assemblies with Mohtarma  
Benazir Bhutto as the opposition leader. Mian Muhammad 
Nawaz Sharif continued his policies of confrontation not HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  84 
only with the opposition but also with other institutions of 
the State incl uding judiciary and the armed forces. The 
former Chief of Army Staff, General Jehangir Karamat 
suggested the formation of National Security Council, 
which was not taken in good taste by the Prime Minister 
and resultantly the then Chief of Army Staff had to  quit. 
With the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1997, 
Article 58(2)(b) was repealed and the power to appoint 
Services Chiefs vested with the Prime Minister and thus 
Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, after the resignation of 
General Jehangir Karamat, app ointed General Pervez 
Musharraf as the Chief of Army Staff.  
 
25. Differences between the Prime Minister and the Chief 
of Army Staff General Pervez Musharraf arose on the Kargil 
issue. At one point of time, it seemed that the tension has 
come to an end when  General Pervez Musharraf was 
appointed as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee. 
However, a few days later, the Prime Minister issued order 
of removal of General Pervez Musharraf when the latter 
was returning from an official tour to Sri Lanka and 
appointed Lt. General Ziauddin Butt as the Chief of Army 
Staff. This act of the Prime Minister was resented by the 
Pakistan Army and was construed as interference in the 
Army affairs and an attempt to politicize and destabilize it. 
The then Prime Minister had  directed that the plane 
carrying General Pervez Musharraf to Pakistan be not 
allowed to land at the Karachi Airport, but due to the 
prompt action of the Pakistan Army, the Prime Minister 
could not achieve his objective. Consequently, the Pakistan 
Army too k exception to the action of the Prime Minister 
and Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif was removed and 
General Pervez Musharraf, Chief of Army Staff took control 
of the affairs of the country.  
 
26. After takeover of the government by General Pervez 
Musharraf, on 1 4th October 1999, a Proclamation of 
Emergency was issued in pursuance of the deliberations 
and decisions of the Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces 
and the Corps Commanders of the Pakistan Army. … … The 
takeover by the Army was challenged in this Court thr ough 
several Constitution Petitions and the same were disposed 
of with certain guidelines through a unanimous judgment 
authored by Irshad Hasan Khan, C.J. (as he then was) in 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah and others v. General Pervez 
Musharraf, Chief Executive of Pa kistan and others (PLD 
2000 SC 869).”  
 
The fact s noted therein along  with the grounds of dissolution of 
Assemblies have been noted separately in each case .  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  85 
54.   As noted in the preceding paragraph s, in the instant case, 
in the year 1990 the office of Pre sident of Pakistan once again moved 
“in the name of national interest ” and established an Election Cell in 
the Presidency to support a particular group of politicians, who ha d 
formed an alliance to contest election ag ainst the political party then in 
power , i.e. Pakistan Peoples Party as is evident from the record 
available with us.  Considering the overwhelming material brought on 
record, which has been referred to hereinabove, one of the most 
important questions with which we have been encountered is  as to  
what was the legal justification for the President of Pakistan, Chief of 
Army Staff, Director General, ISI and various other officers of the 
Army to become a party to an unconstitutional and unlawful activity? 
Regardless of the nature and quantum of power s vested in the 
President under the Constitution, whether before or after the Eighth 
and the Seventeenth Constitutional Amendments, the President 
remains  the Head of the State and represents the unity of the 
Republic, therefore, after having  been  sworn in as the President of 
Pakistan, he owes a constitutional duty to represent the unity of the 
Republic as Head of the State and is not supposed under the 
Constitution to support any favoured candidate  in the elections  or a 
group of political parties like IJI with reference to the instant case. At 
this stage, i t may be pertinent to refer to Article 41(1) of the 
Constitution , which provides that there shall be a President of Pakistan 
who shall be the Head of the State  and shall  represent the unity of the 
Republi c as well as to the wording of the oath prescribed for the 
incumbent of the office of President, which is administered to him 
before entering upon such office. It reads as under: -  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  86 
“(In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most 
Merciful.)  
 
I, ____ ________, do solemnly swear that I am a Muslim 
and believe in the Unity and Oneness of Almighty Allah, 
the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran being the last of them, 
the Prophethood of Muhammad  (peace be upon him) as 
the last of the Prophets and that there can  be no Prophet 
after him, the Day of Judgment, and all the requirements 
and teachings of the Holy Quran and Sunnah:  
 
That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:  
  
That, as President of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, 
and perform my funct ions, honestly, to the best of my 
ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and always in the 
interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well - being 
and prosperity of Pakistan:  
  
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my 
official conduct or my official decisions:  
 
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:  
  
That, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of  
people, according to law, without fear or favor, affection or 
ill- will:  
 
And that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or 
reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought 
under my consideration or shall become known to me as 
President of Pakistan, except as may be required for the 
due discharge of my duties as President.  
 
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).”  
 
55.  The learned Attorney General argued that by all means, 
President’s office is a political office. In this behalf, he  has referred to 
the oaths of the Prime Minister and the Federal Ministers, which are 
similarly worded and has argued that his  oath is no different from that 
of other  holders of constitutional office s. In this respect, he has also 
drawn our attention to th e oath of members of the Armed Forces, 
which  specifically bars political activity , but the political activity is not 
there in the oath of Judges, but when we see code of conduct, the 
court will not go into a political question, therefore, judges should not  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  87 
enter into political questions, or a question of law, wh ich includes a 
political question . He argued that such words are not there in 
President’s oath. He argued that  if a President has sympathies for the 
party to which he belongs, that is natural. He further argued that the 
President is not there to destabilize the democracy, government and 
dissolve the Assemblies. However, if there is evidence against 
President to rig the elections, it is not permissible. He also argued that 
it is not the job of the Supr eme Court to r egulate the office of 
President, which  has no power to add to or subtract anything from 
what is written in the Constitution.  He submitted that the observations 
of this Court in Muhammad Nawaz Sharif’s case
 relied upon by the 
learned counsel f or the petitioner were made in a different context. H e 
stated that he  would adopt the arguments of Mr. S.M. Zafar , Sr. ASC  
made by him in Pakistan Lawyers Forum v. Federation of Pakistan
 
(PLD 2011 Lahore 382 ). 
56.  It may be mention ed here that Parliamenta ry democracies 
today exist in one of two forms. They are either Constitutional 
Monarchies or Republics. Historically speaking, the Monarch 
represented the State. Parliaments and democracy gained authority 
through the right to exercise power in the name of the Monarch. 
Ultimately, Parliaments became the centres of power and authority 
with the heads and ministers of government being elected from them. 
The Monarch however, remained the symbol of the state, an icon of its 
unity and identity, regardless of what faction governed in his name. All 
functions of state, while exercised and decided by elected 
governments, were carried out in his name. This included establishing 
courts, recruiting civil servants, receiving and sending ambassadors, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  88 
waging war , etc. Over t ime, many countries deposed their Monarchs 
and replaced them with Presidents. The nature and role of the office of 
Head of State has remained the same, with the governments 
maintaining the same treatment of dignity, respect and symbolic 
reverence towards t he President as was held for the King. And 
similarly, the powers of the President have not been available for 
exercise in his own discretion, but have rather continued to be 
exercised in his name by elected representatives of the people. The 
need of a cent ral lynchpin in the political system that represents the 
State as an entity over and above the partisan squabble of factions 
and inspires the people as a symbol of sovereign independence has 
preserved the separation of Head of State and Government in 
parliamentary systems.  
57.  The Parliamentary systems of today are also divided into 
two great legal traditions of the world. The first is the Common Law 
tradition that emanated from the legal developments in England. And 
the second is the Civilian Law (or Rom an Law) tradition that is 
prevalent in continental Europe and emanates from the Corpus Juris 
Civilis  of Roman Emperor Justinian I. Within these two great systems 
of law, there are countries that are Parliamentary Constitutional 
Monarchies while others are Parliamentary Republics, the only 
difference between them being that the first States are headed by 
Monarchs while the Heads of State in the la tter are Presidents. The 
relationship between a Head of State and a Government, however, is 
identical within the traditions.  
58.  The Common Law is a tradition that was built by the 
rulings and preceden ts of the Common Law courts. The common law HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  89 
gives great preference to tradition, continuity and principles of 
antiquity that are immortalised by adherence [ Mohammad S ohail v. 
Govt of NWFP
  (1996 PLC CS 364)] . The Civilian system , however, is 
built on textual sources and reflects reliance on recourse to the written 
law and its textual rather than historic interpretation. This difference is 
also highlighted by the nature  of statutes in the two systems. The 
Common Law statutes set a basic premise and depend on precedent 
for building upon the interpretation and implementation of the law 
while the civilian system believes in exhaustive codification of 
principles into writing . This distinction is starkly visible in the mere size 
of corresponding statutes in either system.  
59.  The role and nature of the office of President or Monarch is 
the same in every Parliamentary form of government. What differs is 
the form in which that  role is laid down. In Civil Law countries, the role 
of the President and restrictions upon his office and person are 
enumerated in great detail in the Constitutions. Almost all 
constitutions of Parliamentary Republics in Civil Law Countries contain 
an art icle expressly prohibiting the partisan involvement of Presidents 
with political factions.  
60.  On the other hand, the relationship of the British Monarch 
and the British Parliament developed and has sustained with the force 
of practice and tradition. Thi s is no surprise considering the fact that 
the United Kingdom and even New Zealand do not have codified 
constitutions today. The parliamentary system follows the same 
configuration between Head of State and Parliament in the Common 
Law world as it does in the Civil Law world. It however regulates that 
relationship through constitutional conventions that underpin the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  90 
system rather than express provisions. Over time, most common law 
countries adopted written constitutions, yet preserved the unwritten 
conventi ons that bind together the codified articles of the 
constitutions.  
61.  Out of this tradition, it is interesting to observe that none 
of the constitutions in the Common Law world (and the former 
Commonwealth Realm) that adhere to the Parliamentary system 
contain express provisions barring the Head of State from partisan 
affiliation. Nor do the oaths of office prescribed therein make reference 
to the same. Yet, at the same time, the constitutional jurisprudence 
and legal commentary by jurists in all these c ountries maintains the 
same role and position for a Head of State as do constitutions in Civil 
Law countries maintaining express provisions.  
 
62.  In Pakistan additionally we have Article 41 ibid which 
envisages the same Constitutional position.  Disregard ing the 
constitutional conventions and common law traditions about the role of 
the Head of State would render the entire framework and written 
provisions of the constitutions dysfunctional. It is this reason that 
while the two systems go about it different ly, they ultimately prescribe 
the exact same role for Presidents and Monarchs in Parliamentary 
systems of government. The need for a symbolic figurehead who is 
representative of the State in its majesty is central to the structure of 
the parliamentary syst em.  
63.  The constitutional system of government in Pakistan as 
laid out in Part III  of the Constitution is that of a Parliamentary 
Republic [ Muhammad Khan Achakzai v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 
1997 SC 420)] . This distinguishes it from Parliamentary for ms that are HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  91 
not republics e.g. Australia, Canada, New Zealand, UK etc which are 
parliamentary constitutional monarchies. However, Pakistan, like them 
also draws important features of its constitutional tradition from the  
same historical traditions .  
64.  To seek comparison with other constitutional 
arrangements, we must also look at other parliamentary republics 
such as, Turkey, Greece, Italy, Germany, etc. Most of these are also 
Federations which helps draw closer comparisons with the Role of the 
President s in these countries. However, these countries have their 
systems of law based in Civilian (Roman) Law and therefore different 
from Pakistan in terms of their constitutional traditions.  
65.  The closest comparison can, however, be drawn with 
countries tha t are both Parliamentary Republics and also have their 
constitutional traditions rooted in the Commonwealth that they were 
once a part of. These include India, Bangladesh, Ireland, Malta, 
Botswana, Mauritius , etc.   
66.  The role of a President as Head of State is almost identical 
in most Parliamentary systems of government. As most of these 
countries were former Constitutional Monarchies (including Pakistan 
until 1956 as part of the Commonwealth), or still are, the position 
closely mimics the figurative po sition of a symbolic Monarch in 
parliamentary constitutional monarchies.  Some of the key features of a 
President in a Parliamentary system are:  
- Head of State (Article 41)  
- Ceremonial/ Figurative head of the executive  
- Actions in his name are actually taken  by elected 
governments (Article 48)  
- Commander in Chief or Supreme Commander of 
military forces (Article 243)  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  92 
- Symbol of Union, Federation or State and thus 
representative of all State as well as Central 
Governments (Article 41)  
- Indirectly elected (with ver y few exceptions) (Second 
Schedule)  
- Non-political/ non -partisan in nature of office  
It is important to note that all Presidents in Parliamentary Republics 
are expected to be apolitical/non -partisan and objectively disengaged 
with any and all affiliations of a political, ethnic, linguistic, or 
geographic nature. For a discussion on the non -partisan role of the 
President, refer to Pakistan Lawyers’ Forum v. Federation of Pakistan
 
(PLD 2011 Lahore 382).    
67.  This is regardless of whether there are any expre ss 
provisions forbidding such engagement in the respective constitutions.  
For example, the Constitutional provisions or the Presidential Oaths 
prescribed in India, Bangladesh, Ireland, etc., do not have  any express 
provisions forbidding a President from en gaging in a Political role or 
holding a political party office. Yet, all constitutional commentaries, 
jurisprudence and conventions demand and expect of the President in 
these countries to refrain from any exhibition of political leanings, 
preference, bias  or association. It is understood that doing so  would 
harm the unity of the State that the President represents. These 
countries do not have such express provisions because  the former 
commonwealth countries headed by the British Monarch in the past or 
today have relied upon constitutional  norms and  conventions to dictate 
the exclusion of the head of State  from all political roles . The Supreme 
Court of Pakistan has held in Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 
1998 SC 161)  that a constitutional convention,  once established has 
the same binding effect as a Constitutional provision and that any HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  93 
breach of such convention can be treated by the court as a breach of 
the constitution to which the convention relates.  
68.  An important question that arises in this regard is: Why 
should Parliamentary Republics like Pakistan which have codified their 
constitutions as the basis of their system of government continue to 
adhere to the constitutional conventions especially when their own 
constitutions contain no express r estrictions as found in other 
countries? The answer is manifest from our own constutional history. 
The framers of the Constitution in 1973 had a very clear idea as to the 
constitutional role and function of the President. Thus we had the first 
President un der the Constitution namely, late Chaudhry Fazal Elahi 
while the first Chief Executive  was late Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto. The 
President, in line with the wording and spirit o f the Constitution was a 
figure head representing the unity of the republic as envis aged in 
Article 41 of the Constitution. He did not perform any executive 
functions other than to go by the advice of the Prime Minister who was 
leader of the directly elected National Assembly. We may also add that 
the historical role of the first Presiden t late Chaudhry Fazal Elahi and 
the first Prime Minister late Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto can and must be 
seen as a contemporaneous exposition of the role envisaged for the 
President of the republic. This is particularly significant because the 
exponents and t he framers of the Constitution including late Mr. 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto were themselves part of the government and were 
thus responsible for ensuring that the form of the government was 
exactly in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Constitution 
which they had themselves framed. We, therefore, need not look at HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  94 
foreign constitutions even though the same may be suggestive of the 
role of President similar to that envisioned in our Constitution.  
69.  There can be no better or more concrete understanding  of 
the role of the President and the provisions inter alia,  of Article 41 ibid, 
to demonstrate practically what was envisaged as the  role of the 
President. Thus, as noted above, it is our own constitutional history 
enacted by no less a group of elected re presentatives who both framed 
the Constitution and then implemented it  which must inform our 
understanding of the Constitution and its interpretation . No one could 
have had a better grasp and comprehension  of the apolitical  and 
neutral  role of the Presiden t than such framers of our Constitution. The 
historical record also shows that although late Chaudhry Fazal Elahi 
was originally a member of the Pakistan Peoples Party, after assuming 
the office of President, he did not indulge in partisan activity of poli tical 
nature. In any event, consistent with the ethos of a Parliamentary 
democracy the working relationship between an apolitical and non -
partisan head of State and a Prime Minister as Chief Executive under 
our Constitution would be that which was demonstr ated by the first 
President and the first Prime Minister under the 1973 Constitution. Any 
deviation from such role would run counter to our constitutional 
scheme. We have already held in the case titled Province  of Sindh vs. 
Rasheed A. Rizvi
 (PLD 2012 SC 6 49), that contemporaneous exposition 
is a recognized and well understood mode of interpreting a legal text.  
It “enjoys a great deal of sanctity and cannot lightly be set aside in 
favour of a materially different expression”  
70.  The aforesaid constitutiona l norm as expounded by 
contemporaneous exposition was disfigured  and distorted through HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  95 
unconstitutional intervention by military dictators. They assumed 
presidential office and thereafter made all out efforts to pervert  the 
letter, spirit and scheme of the  original Constitution. This was done 
inter alia, by means of provisions such as Article 58(2)(b) which, as 
noted above, was meant to subvert our parliamentary democracy by 
shifting the centre of power from the directly elected House (National 
Assembly) to  a uniform ed person holding the office of President. It is 
as a result of the 18th Amendment that Article 58(2)(b) has been done 
away with being a deviation from the concept of parliamentary 
democracy . There has thus been a roll -back of some of the invidio us 
distortions made in the Constitution of 1973. The Constitution thus has 
to be interpreted on the basis of our own constitutional history and 
conventions and to ensure the strengthening of parliamentary 
democracy as originally envisioned. The apolitical role of the President 
under our Constitution cannot be over emphasized in the light of the 
historical background narrated above.  
71.  Such established norms  have been made use of by the 
Superior Courts to interpret the Constitution in important judgments 
such as Al-Jehad Trust v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 1997 SC 84) and 
Sajjad Ali Shah v. Asad Ali
 (1999 SCMR 640). It would be impossible 
to imagine a parliamentary system continuing to be a democracy 
where an indirectly elected President chose to ignore t he advice of 
government and acted in his own name [ Benazir Bhutto v. President of 
Pakistan
 (PLD 1998 SC 388)].  
72.   The oaths of office in most of the countries are the same 
as those prescribed for Heads and Ministers of Government. NONE OF 
THESE COUNTRI ES have express provisions forbidding a political role HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  96 
for the President, yet their constitutional jurisprudence demands just 
that. These countries, include Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Ireland, 
Canada, Australia.  
BANGLADESH:
 
Article 48
.  
(1) There shall be a  President of Bangladesh who shall be 
elected by members of Parliament in accordance with law.  
(2) The President shall, as Head of State, take precedence 
over all other persons in the State, and shall exercise the 
powers and perform the duties conferred and im posed on 
him by this Constitution and by any other law.  
Oath
:  
THIRD SCHEDULE  
[Article 148]  
OATHS AND AFFIRMATIONS  
 “I,............,do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will 
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of President of 
Bangladesh according  to law :  
That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh :  
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution :  
And that I will do right to all manner of people according to 
law, without fear or favour, affection or ill -will.” 
 
IRELAND:
 
Article 12
.  
1. There shall be a President of Ireland (Uachtarán na 
hÉireann), hereinafter called the President, who shall take 
precedence over all other persons in the State and who 
shall exercise and perform the powers and functions 
conferred on the Preside nt by this Constitution and by law.  
…………………………………  
…………………………………  
8.   The President shall enter upon his office by taking and 
subscribing publicly, in the presence of members of both 
Houses of the Oireachtas, of Judges of the Supreme Court 
and of the High Court, and other public personages, the 
following declaration:  
"In the presence of Almighty God I, do solemnly and 
sincerely promise and declare that I will maintain the 
Constitution of Ireland and uphold its laws, that I will 
fulfil my duties faithfully and conscientiously in 
accordance with the Constitution and the law, and 
that I will dedicate my abilities to the service and 
welfare of the people of Ireland. May God direct and 
sustain me."  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  97 
Reference in this behalf may be made to Article 60 of the Cons titution 
of India, which reads as under:  -  
60. “Every President and every person acting as President 
or discharging the functions of the President shall, before 
entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the 
presence of the Chief Justice of India or,  in his absence, the 
senior -most Judge of the Supreme Court available, an oath 
or affirmation in the following form, that is to say — 
"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will faith 
solemnly affirm fully execute the office of President (or 
discharge  the functions of the President) of India and will to 
the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the 
Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to 
the service and well -being of the people of India”.  
Dr. Ambedkar, the Chairman of the Dr afting Committee of the Indian 
Constitution is quoted on page 32 of the ‘Constituent Assembly 
Debates: Official Report’,  New Delhi: Lok Sabha Secretariat 1999 as 
follows:  
“... the President occupies the same position as the King 
under the English Constitut ion. He is the head of the state 
but not of the Executive. He represents the nation but 
does not rule the nation. His place in the administration is 
that of a ceremonial device on a seal by which the nation’s 
decisions are made”  
 
The judgment of the Supre me Court of India by Krishna Iyer , J., in the 
case of Samsher Singh v. Punjab
 (AIR 1974 SC 2192)  expounds the 
role of the President in India which is of great persuasive value for 
describing the role of President in any Federal Parliamentary Republic 
with a similar constitutional arrangement such as ours:  
“We have, in the President and Governor, a replica of a 
Constitutional monarch and a Cabinet answerable to HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  98 
Parliament, substantially embodying the conventions of the 
British Constitution --not a turn -key pr oject imported from 
Britain, but an edifice made in India with the know -how of 
British Constitutionalism.  
... What are the basic fabric, the animating spirit, and 
juridical ideas of our Constitutional structure and 
dynamics?  
The law of our Constitution, an y student of Indian political 
history and of comparative Constitutional systems will 
agree, is partly eclectic but primarily an Indo -Anglian 
version of the Westminster model with quasi -federal 
adaptations, historical modifications, geo -political 
mutations and homespun traditions --basically a blended 
brew of the British parliamentary system, and the 
Government of India Act, 1935 and near -American, 
nomenclature -wise and in some other respects.  
Not the Potomac, but the Thames, fertilises the flow of the 
Yamun a, if we may adopt a riverine imagery. In this thesis 
we are fortified by precedents of this Court...  
Shri K.M. Munshi expressed the historical reason for the 
acceptance of the parliamentary system:  
“... it is the rule of the majority in the legislature, f or 
it supports its leaders in the Cabinet, which advises 
the Head of the State, namely, the King or the 
President. The King or the President is thus placed 
above party. He is made really the symbol of the 
impartial dignity of the Constitution.  
The power of  the Cabinet in England today is no whit 
less than the powers enjoyed by the President of the 
United States of America. By reason of the fact that 
the Prime Minister and the whole Cabinet are 
members of the Legislature, the conflict between the 
authority w ielding the executive power and the 
legislature is reduced to minimum; really there is 
none at all; because, at every moment of time, the 
Cabinet Subsists only provided it carries with it the 
support of the majority in the Parliament.”  
Participating in the  same discussion, President Rajendra 
Prasad said ( ‘Correspondence and Select Documents: 
August to December 1948’, by Rajendra Prasad,  page xxii, 
Preface):  
“We have had to reconcile the position of an elected 
President with an elected legislature, and in do ing 
so, we have adopted more or less, the position of the 
British monarch for the President.... His position is 
that of a Constitutional President. Then we come to 
the Ministers. They are, of course, responsible to the 
Legislature and tender advice to the President who is 
bound to act according to that advice. Although there 
are no specific provisions, so far as I know, in the 
Constitution itself making it binding on the President HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  99 
to accept the advice of his Ministers, it is hoped that 
the convention under which in England the King acts 
always on the advice of his Ministers will be 
established in this country also and the President, 
not so much on account of the written word in the 
Constitution, but as a result of this very healthy 
convention, will become a Constitutional President in 
all matters.”  
These solemn words were uttered by the President of the 
Constituent Assembly at the great moment when the 
motion or final adoption of the Constitution was put to the 
vote of the Chamber.  
The Ambedkar approach, uneq uivocally accepted, was 
(‘Constituent Assembly of India’ – Volume VII, Thursday 
the 30th December 1948):  
“It is the Prime Minister's business, with the support 
of the Ministers, to rule the country and the 
President may be permitted now and then to aid and  
advise the Council of Ministers. Therefore, we should 
look at the substance and not at the mere 
phraseology which is the result of conventions.”  
If the 'inner voice' of the founding fathers may be any 
guide, it is proved beyond reasonable doubt that the 
President and, a fortiori, the Governor, enjoy nothing more 
and nothing less than the status of a Constitutional head in 
a Cabinet -type government --a few exceptions and 
marginal reservations apart.  
If we hold that in a conflict between the Ministry and the 
President, the President's voice should prevail in the last 
resort, either generally or even in a particular class of 
cases, this, would mean the elimination to that extent of 
the authority of a Ministry which is continuously subject to 
control or criticis m by the House of the People, in favour of 
the authority of a President who is not so subject. It would 
thus result in a reduction of the sphere of 'responsible 
government'. So important a subtraction must be justified 
by some express provisions in our Con stitution.  
Does this reduce the President, under the Indian 
Constitution, to a figurehead? Far from it , like the King in 
England, he will still have the right 'to be consulted, to 
encourage and to warn'. Acting on ministerial advice does 
not necessarily me an immediate acceptance of the 
Ministry's first thoughts. The President can state all his 
objections to any proposed course of action and ask his 
Ministers in Council, if necessary, to reconsider the matter. 
It is only in the last resort that he must accep t their final 
advice. It has been observed that the influence of the 
Crown --and of the House of Lords as well --in England has 
grown with every curtailment of its legal powers by HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  100 
convention or statute. A similar result is likely to follow in 
India too; for,  as has been well said, "the voice of reason 
is more readily heard when. it can persuade but no longer 
coerce", One can conceive of no better future for the 
President of India than that he should be more and more 
like the Monarch in England, "eschewing leg al power, 
standing outside the clash of parties and gaining in moral 
authority." These words of Constitutional wisdom come, 
from one who played a key role in shaping the framework 
of the Republic and had no political affiliations.  
If the President, in a pa rticular case where his own views 
differ from those of his Ministers, ultimately accepts their 
advice in defence to a well -understood convention, then 
even if the act should result in a breach of some 
'fundamental right' or 'directive principle' enunciated  in the 
Constitution, the responsibility will be that of the ministers 
and not of the President.  
Sir Ivor Jennings has acknowledged that 'the President in 
the Union, or the Governor in a State, is essentially a 
Constitutional monarch. The machinery of gove rnment is 
essentially British and the whole collection of British 
Constitutional conventions has apparently been 
incorporated as conventions.' The text, the author notes, 
vests vast powers in the President but past history must 
provide the modus vivendi.  
The analysis which appeals to us, in the light of this 
Court's rulings, accords with the view expressed by Mr. 
[Arthur Berriedale] Keith in his Preface to 'The King and 
the Imperial Crown': [the powers and duties of His 
Majesty] (Longmans, Green and Co, Lon don: 1936):  
“It is a conviction of the public in the self -governing 
Dominions of the Crown that the Governor -General 
in matters official serves no more distinguished 
purpose than that of a ‘rubber stamp’.”  
As for the semantic gap between the verbal and the  real, 
even in England as William Paley has explained (‘ The 
Works of William Paley’, by William Paley, Thomas Nelson 
and Peter Brown, Edinburgh: 1828, page 115):  
“There exists a wide difference between the actual 
state of the government and the theory. Whe n we 
contemplate the theory of the British government; 
we see the king vested with ... a power of rejecting 
laws. Yet when we turn our attention from the legal 
extent to the actual exercise of royal authority in 
England we see these formidable prerogatives  
dwindled into more ceremonies; and in their stead a 
sure and commanding influence of which the 
Constitution, it seems, is totally ignorant.”  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  101 
In Blackstone's commentaries on the Laws of England, said 
Dicey, students might read that the Constitution 
concent rated all executive power in the hands of the King. 
'The language of this passage', he remarked, 'is 
impressive... It has but one fault: the statements it 
contains are the direct opposite of the truth".  
The President in India is not at all a glorified ciph er. He 
represents the majesty of the State, is at the apex, though 
only symbolically, and has rapport with the people and 
parties, being above politics. His vigilant presence makes 
for good government if only he uses, what Bagehot 
described as, 'the right to be consulted, to warn and 
encourage'. Indeed, Article 78 wisely used, keeps the 
President in close touch with the Prime Minister on matters 
of national importance and policy significance, and there is 
no doubt that the imprint of his personality may cha sten 
and correct the political government, although the actual 
exercise of the functions entrusted to him by law is in 
effect and in law carried on by his duly appointed mentors, 
i.e., the Prime Minister and his colleagues. In short, the 
President, like th e King, has not merely been 
constitutionally romanticised  but actually vested with a 
pervasive and persuasive role. Political theorists are quite 
conversant with the dynamic role of the Crown which 
keeps away from politics and power and yet influences 
both. While he plays such a role, he is not a rival center of 
power in any sense and must abide by and act on the 
advice tendered by his Ministers except in a narrow 
territory which is sometimes slippery.  
73.  The above exposition reflects the position in our 
Constitution and is also strictly in accord with the respective roles of 
the first President and the first Prime Minister (discussed above) 
elected under the 1973 Constitution. In our considered opinion, the 
above judgment is capable  of answer ing the argum ents of learned 
Attorney General that President, under our constitutional provisions, 
noted hereinabove . Thus, it is held that, “he (President) represents the 
majesty of the State, is at the apex, though only symbolically, and has 
rapport with all manner o f people and parties , being above politics”. 
Therefore, action of President in the year 1990 supporting his favoured 
candidates or a group of political parties was against fundamental 
rights of citizens under Article 17 of the Constitution. Consequently, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  102 
opponent political party had to los e allegedly half of the seats in the 
National Assembly.  
 
74.  Reverting to the case in hand, it may be observed that a 
President of Pakistan  before entering upon office, in the oath of his 
office, solemnly  swear s that he is a Muslim and believes in the unity 
and Oneness of Almighty Allah, the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran 
being the last of them, the last of the Prophets and that there can be 
no Prophet after him, the Day of Judgment, and all the requirements 
and teachings  of the Holy Quran and Sunnah, that he will not allow his 
personal interest to influence his official conduct or his official 
decisions, and that he will do right to all manner of people, according 
to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill -will. Thu s, as the 
constitutional Head of the State, the incumbent  of such a high office  is 
obliged to perform his functions and duties  neutrally and  impartially . It 
is pertinent to refer to the observations of Saiduzzaman Siddiqui J in 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif ’s case
 (supra)  as under : -  
“No doubt, the President as the symbol of the unity of the 
Federation occupies a neutral position in the Constitution, 
and in that capacity he is entitled to highest respect and 
regard by all the functionaries of the State. But it is equally 
important that in order to protect and preserve the dignity 
of this high office and this neutral image under the 
Constitution  the President must keep aloof from all 
political imbroglio .
 If the President is unable to ward off 
the temptation to keep away from political game or he 
starts siding with one or the other political element in the 
Assembly he is likely to lose his image as the neutral 
arbiter in national affairs and as a symbol of unity of 
Federation under the Constitution. In the latter even t, his 
conduct may also come under criticism from those who 
may feel betrayed.”  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  103 
  
75.  In the light of the above discussion, argument so raised by 
learned Attorney General is repelled and we hold that the President 
being the  symbol of the unity of the Fed eratio n occupies a neutral 
position under  the Constitution and is not envisaged by the 
Constitution to be support ing or back ing any particular  political party 
or a group of political parties, or certain individual politicians or 
candidate s contesting elect ion from a given platform to the 
disadvantage of any other political party , politician, political worker,  
individual , etc. We respectfully follow and reiterate the enunciation 
made by this Court in Muhammad Nawaz Sharif’s case
 (supra ).  
Learned Attorney Ge neral also lost sight of another important aspect 
of the case, namely, the President of Pakistan after entering into his 
office obtained the status which falls under the definition of a person 
who is in the “Service of Pakistan”. According to Article 260 o f the 
Constitution, service of Pakistan means any service, post or office in 
connection with the affairs of the Federation or of a Province, and 
includes an All -Pakistan Service, service in the Armed Forces and any 
other service declared to be a service of  Pakistan by or under Act of 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) or of a Provincial Assembly, but does not 
include service as Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chairman, Deputy 
Chairman, Prime Minister, Federal Minister, Minister of State, Chief 
Minister, Provincial Minis ter, Attorney -General, Advocate -General, 
Parliamentary Secretary or Chairman or member of a Law 
Commission, Chairman or member of the Council of Islamic Ideology, 
Special Assistant to the Prime Minister, Adviser to the Prime Minister, 
Special Assistant to a Chief Minister, Adviser to a Chief Minister or 
member of a House or a Provincial Assembly . The said Article HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  104 
specifically excludes certain offices from the Service of Pakistan that 
are listed after the phrase “but does not include”. The office of 
Presiden t and the Governors of the provinces are not listed among 
these exceptions.  
76.  It is pertinent to mention here that the Constitution of 
1956 included the President in the list of exclusions from the Service of 
Pakistan, while the Constitutions of 1962 a s well as the current 
constitution of 1973 did not include the office of President in the list. 
There is no provision to the contrary that excludes the office of the 
President from being subject to the earlier part of the above stated 
definition, that is, "Service of Pakistan" means any service, post or 
office in connection with the affairs of the Federation or of a Province. 
Furthermore, the definition elaborates that service of Pakistan includes 
ANY post or office in addition to a service.  
77.  The Supre me Court in Salahuddin v F rontier  Sugar Mills 
and Distillery Ltd.
 (PLD 1975 SC 244)  considered the extent of  the 
term “in connection with the affairs of the Federation or a Province” in 
great detail. Relevant portion from the said judgment is reproduced 
hereinbelow : - 
“Now, what is meant by the phrase "performing functions 
in connection with the affairs of the Federation or a 
Province". It is clear that the reference is to governmental 
or State functions, involving, in one form or another, an 
element of exe rcise of public power. The functions may be 
the traditional police functions of the State, involving the 
maintenance of law and order and other regulatory 
activities; or they may comprise functions pertaining to 
economic development, social welfare, educat ion, public 
utility services and other State enterprises of an industrial 
or commercial nature. Ordinarily, these functions would be 
performed by persons or agencies directly appointed, 
controlled and financed by the State, i.e., by the Federal 
Government or a Provincial Government. ” 
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  105 
The Court further discussed the position of a ‘public office’ in relation 
to the phrase service of Pakistan  in the following terms: - 
“The term 'public office' is defined in Article 290 of the 
Interim Con stitution as includin g any office in the Service 
of Pakistan and membership of an Assembly. The phrase 
'Service of Pakistan' is defined, in the same Article, as 
meaning any service, post or office in connection with the 
affairs of the Federation or of a Province and includes a n 
All-Pakistan Service, any defence service and any other 
service declared to be a Service of Pakistan by or under 
Act of the Federal Legislature or of a Provincial Legislature 
but does not include service as a Speaker, Deputy Speaker 
or other member of an  Assembly. Reading the two 
definitions together, it becomes clear that the term 'public 
office', as used in the Interim Constitution, is much wider 
than the phrase 'Service of Pakistan', and although it 
includes any office in the Service of Pakistan, it co uld not 
really refer to the large number of the posts or 
appointments held by State functionaries at various levels 
in the hierarchy of Government. ” 
 
The English judgment in Henry Farran Darley v. Reg.
 [(1846) 8 ER 
520] is also referred whi ch states that: - 
“A public office is the right, authority and duty created and 
conferred by law, by which an individual is vested with 
some portion of the sovereign functions of the Government 
to be exercised by him for the benefit of the public, for the 
term and by the tenure prescribed by law. It implies a 
delegation of a portion of the sovereign power. It is a trust 
conferred by public authority for a public purpose, 
embracing the ideas of tenure, duration, emolument and 
duties. A public officer is thus to be distingui shed from a 
mere employment or agency resting on contract, to which 
such powers and functions are not attached . . . The 
determining factor, the test, is whether the office involves 
a delegation of some of the sovereign functions of 
government, either exec utive, legislative or judicial, to be 
exercised by the holder for the public benefit Unless his 
powers are of this nature, he is not a public officer. ” 
 
The above discussion is also strengthened by referring to the following 
authorities:  - 
“This view seems  to have held the ground throughout. As 
summed up Ferris (Extraordinary Legal Remedies, 1925 
Edition, p. 145), "a public office is the right, authority and 
duty created and conferred by law, by which an individual 
is vested with some portion of the soverei gn functions of 
the Government to be exercised by him for the benefit of 
the public, for the term and by the tenure prescribed by HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  106 
law. It implies a delegation of a portion of the sovereign 
power. It is a trust conferred by public authority for a 
public pur pose, embracing the ideas of tenure, duration 
emolument and duties. A public officer is thus to be 
distinguished from a mere employment or agency resting 
on contract, to which such powers and functions are not 
attached . . . . . The determining factor, the  test, is 
whether the office in volves a delegation of some of the 
sovereign functions of Government, either executive, 
legislative or judicial, to be exercised by the holder for the 
public benefit. Unless his powers are of this nature, he is 
not a pu blic officer.  
  
This definition of the term 'public office', as well as the almost 
analogous definition given by Halsbury (in Volume 11) have been 
referred to with approval in Lahore Central Co -operative Bank 
Ltd. v. Saifullah Shah (P L D 1959 S C (Pak.)210), P akistan v. 
Nasim Ahmed (P L D 1951 SC 445), Faiz Ahmed v. Registrar, 
Co-operative Societies (P L D 1962 S C 315), Managing 
Committee of Co -operative Model Town Society Ltd. v. M. Iqbal 
(P L D 1963 S C 179), Masudul Hassan v. Khadim Hussain (P L D 
1963 S C 203), Zainul Abiain v. Multan Central Co -operative 
Bank Ltd. (P L D 1966 S C 445), Abdul Hafeez v. Chairman, 
Municipal Corporation (P L D 1967 Lah. 1251), R. T. H. Janjua v. 
National Shipping Corporation (P L D 1974 S C 146), and M. U. 
A. Khan v. Rana M. S ultan (P L D 1974 S C 228). In all these 
cases the question had arisen directly or indirectly whether the 
office in dispute was a public office to which restoration could be 
ordered by way of mandamus. ” 
 
78.  Besides the office of the President, the Judges  and Chief 
Justices of the superior courts are also included in the scope of service 
of Pakistan by failing to make reference to them among the exclusions 
from ‘Service of Pakistan’ in Article 260.  The definition under Article 
260 must be read together wit h Article 63 of the constitution, which 
reads as under : - 
(1) A person shall be disqualified from being elected or 
chosen as, and from being, a member of the Majlis -
e-Shoora (Parliament), if:  
(d)  he holds an office of profit in the service of 
Pakistan other t han an office declared by law 
not to disqualify its holder;  
According to the above provision, a person is disqualified from being 
elected or chosen as and from being a member of parliament. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  107 
Therefore, whosoever falls within the definition of a person in th e 
“service of Pakistan”, he would be disqualified to contest elections. At 
the same time, in the wisdom of the constitutional scheme, Article 
44(2) expressly declares the person holding the post of President to be 
re-elected for a second term of office . However, beyond this express 
provision for re -election, Article 63(1)(d) disqualifies an incumbent of 
the office of President from being elected to Parliament. This is 
stressed by the phrase “subject to the constitution” that qualifies the 
express allowance for the President to contest re -election to the same 
office. This excludes the re -election of the President from the 
aforementioned disqualification but does not create an exception for 
the application of disqualification on the President for being elected  to 
Parliament. This is further subject to the provision of Section 
99(1A)(d) of the Representation of the People Act 1976:  
“(1A)  A person shall be disqualified from being 
elected as, and from being, a member of an 
Assembly, if — 
(d) he holds an office of profit in the service of 
Pakistan other than an office declared by law 
not to disqualify its holder; ” 
79.  The Supreme Court of Pakistan explained the 
disqualification of a holder of such a public office in Syeda Abida 
Hussain v . Tribunal for NA 69
 (PLD 19 94 SC 60 ) as under : - 
“5. … … The authorities under the Representation of the 
People Act have held, that the petitioner stood disqualified from 
contesting the election under sub -clause (k), ibid. Learned 
counsel for the petitioner has contested this findin g. His case is 
that sub -clause (k) is applicable only to those persons who are 
regularly in the service of Pakistan and that the petitioner could 
not be regarded as such as she was merely performing a 
contract which she had entered into with the Government  of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  108 
Pakistan. According to him the test for determining whether a 
person is or is not in the service of Pakistan lies in discovering 
whether his terms and conditions of service are regulated by 
the statute envisaged by Article 240 of the Constitution. 
Applying this test, he contends, that as the appointment of the 
petitioner was founded on a contract for a fixed period and her 
terms and conditions were not regulated by the Civil Servants 
Act enacted in pursuance of the provision of Article 240, ibid, 
she co uld not be treated as one in the service of Pakistan. He 
also points out that she is not covered by the definition of the 
expression `civil servant' as given in the Civil Servants Act. He 
further argues that her case fell under clause (n) of Article 
63(1) and as the contract of her employment was no longer in 
force there was no bar to her being a candidate in the election 
to the National Assembly.  
  
6. It is difficult to subscribe to the contention of the learned 
counsel. The expression `service of Pakistan ' has been defined 
in Article 260(1) of the Const itution. It reads as follows: - 
“ ‘Service of Pakistan’  means any service, post or office in 
connection with the affairs of the Federation or of a 
Province, and includes an All -Pakistan Service, service in 
the Armed Forces and any other service declared to be a 
service of Pakistan by or under Act of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) or of a Provincial Assembly, but does not 
include service as Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chairman, 
Deputy Chairman, Prime Minister, Fede ral Minister, 
Minister of State, Chief Minister, Provincial Minister, 
Attorney -General, Advocate -General, Parliamentary 
Secretary or Chairman or member of a Law Commission, 
Chairman or member of the Council of Islamic Ideology, 
Special Assistant to the Pri me Minister, Advisor to the 
Prime Minister, Special Assistant to a Chief Minister, 
Adviser to a Chief Minister or member of a House or a 
Provincial Assembly;”  
  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  109 
Learned counsel for the petitioner rightly concedes that the post 
of an Ambassador is a post in  connection with the affairs of the 
Federation. It will be seen that the definition does not take 
notice of the manner in which a post in connection with the 
affairs of the Federation or a Province may be filled. Thus, so far 
as the inclusion of a post in the service of Pakistan is concerned, 
it is immaterial whether the holder thereof has come to occupy it 
through a special contract or in accordance with the recruitment 
rules framed under the Civil Servants Act; consequently, the 
mere fact that a person is  not a civil servant within the meaning 
of the Civil Servants Act would not put him beyond the pale of 
the said Constitutional definition. The contention that the case of 
the petitioner was covered by sub -clause (n), ibid, is entirely 
misconceived as ex fa cie it does not apply to situations where 
the relationship of master and servant exists between the 
parties. Here, the petitioner was a whole -time employee of the 
Government and except for matters which were specifically 
provided in the letter of appointme nt she was governed by the 
ordinary rules of service applicable to the civil servants. It may 
perhaps be of interest to mention here that these rules were 
framed in pursuance of the provisions of Article 240, ibid. Thus, 
the assertion on her behalf that wh ile serving as an Ambassador 
she could not be treated as one in the service of Pakistan merely 
because her appointment to the post owed its origin to a special 
contract cannot be accepted. Admittedly, a period of two years 
has not passed since she relinqui shed charge of the said post. 
Therefore, she has been rightly held to be suffering from the 
disqualification laid down in clause (k), ibid. We find merit in this 
petition.  
  
The functions and roles designated for the President are limited to 
those provided  for by the constitution. These include the provisions of 
Article 45, the Presidential grant of pardon; Articles 48, limiting the 
exercise of Presidential functions to the advice of the cabinet; or 
Article 56, providing for the President to address either or both Houses HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  110 
of Parliament etc. It is also important to distinguish the constitutional 
office of the President from other offices of civil service within the 
service of Pakistan that are appointed under Article 240 of the 
Constitution. This distinction i s elaborated upon by the Supreme Court 
in Muhammad Mubeen -us-Salam v . Federation  of Pakistan
 (PLD 2006 
SC 602 ), wherein it has been held as under : -  
“Both these expressions [Civil Service and Service of Pakistan] 
are not synonymous, as declared by this Co urt in the case of 
Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan v. Wali Muhammad [1997 
SCMR 141] . Relevant Para. theref rom is reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
“We would like to mention here that from the trend of 
arguments at the bar it appeared that two expressions 
`service of Pakistan' and `Civil servants' were treated as 
synonymous. This in our opinion is not so. Service of 
Pakistan is defined in Article 260 of the Constitution as 
meaning, any service, post or office in connection with the 
affairs of Federation or a Pr ovince. This expression also 
includes an All Pakistan Service and service in the Armed 
Forces or any other service declared under an Act of the 
Parliament or a Provincial Assembly as Service of Pakistan. 
The terms `Civil Servant' is defined in the Civil Se rvants 
Act 1973 as a person, who is a member of an All Pakistan 
Service or of a civil service of the Federation or a person 
holding a civil post in connection with the affairs of 
Federation, including a civil post connected with the 
defence. ”  
…………..  
“On a careful examination of the definitions of `Service of 
Pakistan' as given in Article 260 of the Constitution and the 
`Civil Servant' as mentioned in Civil Servants Act, 1973, it would 
'appear that the two expressions are not synonymous. The 
expression `Se rvice of Pakistan' used in Article 260 of the 
Constitution has a much wider connotation than the term `Civil 
Servant' employed in the Civil Servants Act. While a `Civil HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  111 
Servant' is included in the expression `Service of Pakistan', the 
vice versa is not tru e. `Civil Servant' as defined in the Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 is just a category of service of Pakistan 
mentioned in Article 260 of the Constitution. To illustrate the 
point, we may mention here that members of Armed Forces 
though fall in the category of ` Service of Pakistan' but they are 
not civil servants within the meaning of Civil Servants Act and 
the Service Tribunals Act. The scope of expression `Service of 
Pakistan' and `Civil Servants' came up for consideration before 
this Court in the case of Syeda  Abida Hussain v. Tribunal for N.A. 
69 [PLD 1994 SC 60] .”  
 
…………………..  
“At this juncture, reference to the case of Qazi Wali Muhammad 
(ibid) would not be out of context, wherein this Court while 
examining the status of employees of the Supreme Court has 
held that " the expression `service of Pakistan' used in Article 
260 of the Constitution has a much wider connotation than the 
term `civil servant' employed in the Civil Servants Act; while the 
`civil servant' is included in the expression service of Pakistan ', 
the vice versa is not true; `civil servant' as defined in the Civil 
Servants Act, 1973 is just a category of service of Pakistan 
mentioned in A rticle 260 of the Constitution.”  It was further 
observed that “to illustrate the point, it is stated that memb ers 
of Armed Forces though fall in the category of `service of 
Pakistan' but they are not civil servants within the meaning of 
Civil Servants Ac t and the Service Tribunals Act” .” 
 
Thus, the above discussion leads us to conclude that the President of 
Pakist an being in the service of Pakistan, is not supposed to indulge in 
politics as it has been established in instant case in respect of role of 
President Ghulam Ishaq Khan.  
80.  Learned Attorney General contended that there is no 
difference in the oath of Pr ime Minister, Ministers, etc., and if they can 
enter into politics, the President i s not prohibited from doing so. We HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  112 
are not in agreement with him for the reason that all these 
functionaries do not fall within the definition of persons in the service 
of Pakistan” in terms of Article 260 of the Constitution, as their cases 
are covered by exceptions to this constitutional provision. In addition 
to it, the President is elected indirectly whereas Prime Minister and 
others are directly elected and they represen t their electors.  
81.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC for the petitioner has stated 
that it is established that various actions were taken by the senior 
most officers of the armed forces without there being any firm 
legislative basis in the name of supreme na tional interest, security, 
etc. Is not stated from where these actions were  derived especially, in 
the circumstances where they were mandated not to engage in the 
political activities.  He argued that  these individuals at the highest 
levels  in the Armed For ces were unclear about their mandate what 
they were required to do, what they should or should not do. There 
have been attempts in the past to make legislation in this regard. 
Control and regulation is a legislative function.  
82.  On the other hand, the l earned Attorney General stated 
that w here any of the members of any institution, such as Army, ISI or 
any other institution observing discipline are involved in any 
wrongdoing in a chain of command,  the institution automatically  gets 
involved . According to  him, if  the head of an institution is doing 
anything, to say that the institution is not involved , is not wholly true. 
The decisions within an institution are given at the top, therefore, in 
the instant case, responsibility cannot be transferred to the si x lac 
members of the Armed Forces . Here, allegation is on the respondent 
No.1 who was COAS at the relevant  time , respondent No. 2, who was 
DG, ISI and respondent No. 3, who was EVP/Regional Chief in the HBL. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  113 
Therefore, according to the learned Attorney Gen eral, i t is to be 
determined as to who was the person at the top who ordered these 
things to be done because the greatest responsibility shall be his . 
When these things were being done, all the officers and institutions 
including, Army, ISI and judiciary became silent spectators  and when 
the elected governments were overthrown, the judiciary became a 
party to it.  It may be observed that any violation of the oath of office 
or any other illegal act committed by a State functionary is a personal 
act for which  the individual concerned would be liable in accordance 
with law, and the institution to which such individual may belong 
would not be involved in it in any way.  
83.  The role and functions of Armed forces have been 
discussed in detail in Sindh High Court Bar Association ’s case
 (supra ) 
wherein it has been observed that on a plain reading of the provisions 
of Article 245(1), the functions of the Armed Forces can be bifurcated 
into two categories, namely; they shall defend Pakistan against 
external aggression  or threat of war; and subject to law, act in aid of 
civil power when called upon to do so. Under clause (1) of Article 243, 
the control and command of the Armed Forces is vested in the Federal 
Government, therefore, in the performance of both the categori es of 
functions, the Armed Forces act under the directions of the Federal 
Government. Thus, the provisions of clause (1A) of Article 243 under 
which the supreme command of the Armed Forces vests in the 
President, does not, in any manner, derogate from the power of the 
Federal Government to require the Armed Forces to defend Pakistan 
against external aggression or threat of war, or to act in aid of civil 
power in accordance with law. The Constitution does not envisage any 
situation where the Armed Forces may  act without any direction by the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  114 
Federal Government. Clause (3) ibid, provides that the President shall, 
in consultation with the Prime Minister appoint the Chairman, Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Committee; the Chief of the Army Staff; the Chief of the 
Naval Sta ff; and the Chief of the Air Staff. Under Article 244, every 
member of the Armed Forces makes oath, inter alia , to the effect that 
he will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan and uphold the 
Constitution of Pakistan, and that he will not engage himse lf in any 
political activities whatsoever. Any action of the Armed Forces 
undertaken without a direction by the Federal Government shall be 
unconstitutional, illegal, void ab initio  and consequently of no legal 
effect. Thus, it was held that any member of the Armed Forces, 
including the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee and the three 
Service Chiefs, namely, the Chief of Army Staff, the Chief of Naval 
Staff and the Air Chief, or any person acting under their authority, or 
on their behalf, who acts in  the performance of either of his functions 
of defending Pakistan against external aggression, or of acting, subject 
to law, in aid of civil power without any direction by the Federal 
Government acts in violation of the Constitution and the law and does 
so at his own risk and cost.  
84.  In the said judgment, it was further observed that the 
people of Pakistan are committed and dedicated to preserving 
democracy achieved by their unremitting struggle against oppression 
and tyranny, as duly voiced and recogni zed in the Preamble to the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. The Founder of 
Pakistan, the Quaid -e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah declared that 
Pakistan would be a democratic State based on Islamic provisions of 
social justice. While addressing a gathering of civil officers of 
Balochistan on 14th February, 1948, he said that our present HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  115 
provisional Constitution based on the fundamental principles of 
democracy, not bureaucracy or autocracy or dictatorship . Therefore, 
the military rule, direct or ind irect, is to be shunned once and for all. It 
was wrongly justified in the past and it ought not to be justified in 
future on any ground, principle, doctrine, or theory whatsoever. 
Military Rule is against the dignity, honour and glory of the nation that 
it achieved after sacrifices; and it is against the dignity and honour of 
each and every soldier of the Armed Forces of Pakistan, who is oath -
bound to bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan and uphold the 
Constitution. Within the prescribed parameters, a  soldier must remain 
committed to defending Pakistan until the last drop of his blood 
against external aggression or threat of war, and subject to law, acting 
in aid of civil power when called upon to do so under the directions of 
the Federal Government. I n the course of the discharge of his duties, a 
soldier, therefore, is obligated to seeing that the Constitution is 
upheld, it is not abrogated, it is not subverted, it is not mutilated. If a 
member of the Armed Forces does any of the above acts, or any oth er 
similar act, he violates his oath and renders himself liable to action 
under and in accordance with the Constitution and the law.  
85.  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC appearing on 
behalf of the respondent No.1 submitted that his client was bound to 
follow the orders of the then President of Pakistan in terms of section 
33 of the Pakistan Army Act, 1952. For reference the said section is 
reproduced herein below: -  
33. (1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in 
such a manner as to show a wilful  defiance of authority a 
lawful command given personally by his superior officer, 
knowing or having reason to believe him to be such, shall, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  116 
on conviction by court Marshal, be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years, or with such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys the lawful 
command of his superior officer, knowing or having reason 
to believe him to be such, shall, on conviction by court 
Marshal, if he commit s such offence on active service, be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years, or with such less punishment as 
is in this Act mentioned; and if he commits such offence 
not on active service, be punished with rigorou s 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, 
or with such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
 
86.   On the other hand, Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC has 
argued that the President has never had the operational control over 
the Armed Forc es of Pakistan. That always happens on the advice of 
the Prime Minister through the Defence Ministry. This was not an 
exigency on the battlefield. In this regard, t he head of the Army is no 
different to a Federal Secretary. He further argued that the COAS 
takes oath under the Constitution; therefore, it is his responsibility to 
ascertain what the Constitution says. The duty is much greater as 
compared to others. In terms of Article 244 of the Constitution, the 
members of Armed Forces take oath which has bee n provided in the 
Third Schedule to the Constitution and is reproduced hereinbelow: -  
“Members of the Armed Forces  
 
(In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most 
Merciful.)  
I, ____________ do solemnly swear that I will bear true 
faith and allegian ce to Pakistan and uphold the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan which HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  117 
embodies the will of the people, that I will not engage 
myself in any political activities whatsoever and that I will 
honestly and faithfully serve Pakistan in the Pakista n Army 
(or Navy or Air Force) as required by and under the law.  
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).”  
 
According to him, the members of the Armed Forces are oath bound to 
uphold the Constitution, which embodies the will of the people. They 
are under an obligation to ensure that because here they are  not on 
the battlefield.  
87.  Mr. Justice Ch. Ijaz Ahmed, i n his concurring note recorded 
in the Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case
, observed that the 
Constitution of 1973 for the first time has prescribed oath for the 
members of the Armed Forces, earlier they only took oath prescribed 
in the Army Act, 1952. While interpreting Article 243 of the 
Constitution reference was made to the case of Sh. Liaquat Hussain v. 
Federation of Pakistan
 [PLD 1999 SC 504] wherein it was held that the 
personnel of the Armed Forces are under the final administrative 
control of the Federal Government; and that every member of the 
Armed Forces has to take oath in the form set out  in the Third 
Schedule in the term s of Ar ticle 244. Reference has also been made to 
the case of Darwesh M. Arbey, Advocate v. Federation of Pakistan Thr. 
The Law Secretary
 [PLD 1980 Lah. 206] wherein the Lahore High 
Court laid down the following principles: - 
(a)  Armed Forces which owe allegianc e to Pakistan 
cannot be used for political motive by the party in 
power.  
(b)  It not only is violative of the oath prescribed in the 
third Schedule which prohibits engagement of the 
Army in political activities and further tarnishes the 
image of the Army.  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  118 
 
The view has been quoted with approval by this court in the case of 
Justice Hasnat Ahmed Khan v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 2011 SC 
680).  
88.   According to Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC, it is clear 
without any doubt that public funds have been plundered  and siphoned 
away at the behest of senior functionaries of the State. These funds  
have remain ed unaccounted for. The attempt to take refuge behind 
the alleged existence of some political cell in the ISI can be  no 
defence, as senior Army officers Gen (R) Beg and Gen (R) Durrani 
were not constrained by the unknown terms of reference of the so -
called Political Cell to act in a manner so as to subvert the 
Constitution. The fact is that in his statement filed before this Court on 
17.10.2012 through CMA 4417/201 2, respondent No.2  has clearly 
stated that he was not even aware of the existence of a political cell in 
the ISI which he headed. He also stated that a cell might have existed 
at various times. It is clear that the unlawful operation of 
September/October 1 990 was not an operation in accordance with the 
terms of reference of some established political cell. This was an 
unlawful attempt to undermine  the electoral process in pursuit of a 
subjectively held notion of the ‘national interest’.  He further contended  
that whatever instructions were there from the then President, these 
must have been communicated through his associates in an informal 
way. There exists no institutional record of such communications. 
These communications, if at all, were in the nature of  illegal 
instigations to violate the constitution in a surreptitious manner and 
did not even bear the colour of an official order.  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  119 
89.    Learned Attorney General stated that no State functionary, 
be he President who is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces 
of Pakistan, or the Prime Minister, who is the chief executive of the 
country, or the Federal Ministers, or anyone else is empowered to give 
illegal orders. No body can violate the Constitution, nobody can rig the 
elections. Such a duty is not upon anybody in Pakistan, therefore, the 
President of Pakistan cannot be isolated in this respect, inasmuch as 
oath of his office is no different to the other oaths prescribed in the 
Constitution.  
90.    Thus, it is held that the President could not have issued  
any command to the Army Chief or the DG ISI as the President did not 
have any operational authority with respect to the Armed Forces even 
after the Eighth Constitutional Amendment.  While as per Article 243 
of the Constitution, the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces was 
said to vest in the President, no independent executive authority was 
given to the President. The said Constitutional Amendment had 
created two broad categories of functions as regards the President. 
The first category was that of actions to be performed by the President 
in accordance with Article 48 on and in accordance with the advice of 
the Prime Minister.  The second category was that of actions to be 
performed by the  President in his discretion upon being satisfied with 
respect to a pa rticular state of affairs.  Reference in this regard may be 
made to the erstwhile provision of Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution 
where the President would act in his discretion.  It is clear that the 
vesting of the Supreme Command in the President did n ot empower 
the President, even  after the Eigh th Amendment, to act in his 
discretion or upon his satisfaction.  Consequently, no question of a 
command, let alone a lawful command having been made by the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  120 
President to make disbursements of money among favoure d politicians 
arises.  Without prejudice to the foregoing, only lawful commands are 
required to be obeyed. All officers who obey unlawful commands are 
individually liable. All superior officers giving unlawful commands or  
who fail to prevent unlawful actio n on the part of their subordinates 
are liable and culpable. In the event of failure of the relevant State 
authorities to take action, the rights of the people of Pakistan are to be 
upheld by this Court making all necessary directions to the 
functionaries and institutions of the state, including the Election 
Commission of Pakistan, including the direction to investigate and 
prosecute.  
91.  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC argued that the 
respondent No.1 had not taken oath under the Constitution of 1973, 
therefore, he was not bound by the oath prescribed for the members 
of Armed Forces in the Third Schedule to the Constitution. On the 
other hand Mr. Salman Akram Raja, l earned ASC for the petitioner 
argued that t he sanctity of the oath of office is inviolab le, particularly 
that of the oath of the members of the Armed Forces of Pakistan 
prescribed under Article 244 of the Constitution and contained in the 
Third Schedule thereto.  
92.   The argument of the learned counsel for the respondent 
No.1 that the officers of the Armed Forces who had taken oath prior to 
the coming into force of the Constitution of 1973 could not be held 
liable for subverting the Constitution  is untenable . It is to be noted 
that Article 5 imposes upon every citizen of Pakistan an inviolab le 
obligation to obey the Constitution. Furthermore, any earlier oath that 
required allegiance to Pakistan necessarily includes allegiance to the 
present Constitution of Pakistan. Pakistan as a nation state is defined HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  121 
by its Constitution. There can be no a llegiance to Pakistan without 
allegiance to the Constitution of Pakistan. Therefore, the respondent 
No.1 cannot take the position that as Army Chief , he was not required 
to obey the Constitution.  On the sanctity of the oath of office and the 
obligation not  to obey unlawful command in violation of the 
Constitution  and that o bedience to the Constitution is the basic duty of 
all citizens , reference may be made to the following cases: -  
(a) Sind High Court Bar Association v. The Federation
 (PLD 
2009 SC 879) at 103 2, Paras 54, 56, 57.  
(b) Hasnat Ahmed Khan v. Federation of Pakistan
 (PLD 2011 
SC 680) at page 731, Para 40.  
(c) Watan  Party v. Federation (Law and order situation in 
Karachi)
 (PLD 2011 SC 997) at 1022.  
(d) NRO Judgment Implementation: Adnan A. Khawaja v. 
State [Crimi nal Miscellaneous Application No. 486 of 2010 
in Criminal Appeal No. 22 of 2002 and Suo Moto Case No. 
4 of 2010). Order dated 10 -01-2012.  
93.  It may be observed that t he distribution of funds to a 
group of politicians stands admitted by all  those who are  arrayed as 
respondents  to the instant proceedings . The respondent No. 2 , not 
only in his letter dated 07.06.1994, but also in his affidavit dated 
24.07.1994, his concise statement dated 08.03.2012  and the 
statement made by him while appearing before the C ourt has 
consistent ly taken the stand that he provided logistic support, under 
instructions from respondent No.1, the then Chief of Army Staff, to the 
disbursement of donations made by respondent No.3  for the election 
campaign of IJI.  Whereas, respondent No.1, in his reply dated 
23.02.1997 to the petition stated that he was informed by respondent 
No.3 that President’s Election Cell ha d instructed him to make 
available a sum of Rs.140 million. Later on, he was informed by L t. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  122 
Gen. (R) Durrani that various co ver accounts were opened by ISI and 
Rs.140 million were deposited by respondent No.3  in those accounts. 
He stated that t he DG, ISI had made arrangements for disbursement 
of the said amount amongst various politicians on the instruction of 
Election Cell. The respondent No.2  has already owned it. He also 
stated  that in a meeting with the then President, Mr. Ghulam Ishaq 
Khan, he had informed him about the donations made by respondent 
No.3 and its utilization by DG, ISI. Respondent No.3 , in turn, in his 
affida vit dated 08.03.2012 has stated that he was asked by 
respondent No.1 that the then President Ghulam Ishaq Khan had 
asked him to arrange Rs.350 million (thirty five crores) before the 
election in GREAT NATIONAL INTEREST
. He further stated that 
respondent No.1 had introduced him to President Ghulam Ishaq Khan 
and told him (President) that as per his desire, the matter had been 
discussed with him ( respondent No.3 ) for the arrangement of required 
funds  and ultimately he arranged Rs. 1480 million (148 crores) af ter 
loans were sanctioned by Provincial Committee and Executive 
Committee of the Habib Bank Ltd . in the name s of his friends and 
business acquaintances , namely,  Yousuf Memon , Rafiq Moor, etc. etc.   
94.  A combined reading of the statements/affidavits of 
respondents No.1 to 3 clearly shows that a certain sum of money was 
raised by respondent No.3  for the purpose of supporting  favoured 
candidates of a certain political group in the 1990 general elections ; 
the money was raised under instruction s received from  the Election 
Cell established  in the President’s House ; the disbursement was 
carried out under the supervision of respondent No.2  by opening 
certain accounts . In this behalf, it is noteworthy that in the course of 
the proceedings, i t was alleged that o ne of the recipients , namely, HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  123 
Syeda Abida Hussain , as per reports published in the newspapers , had 
acknowledged receipt of the money .  
95.  It is also clear from the statements of the above 
individuals that  there was a cell  in the Presidency, which was 
overse eing the aforesaid activity of disbursement of money  and some  
officers of the Presidency under the direct supervision of the President 
were involved in it . All these three individuals directly or indirectly take 
the trail to the Presidency/President. In th is view of the matter, 
whether it was done under the  verbal instruction  of the President 
himself or someone acting on his behalf and under his 
direction/guidance discreetly  is clear . Respondent No.2  while 
appearing before the Court made an admission that h e had done  so, 
though under direction from respondent No.1. Since he stated that 
under his supervision , the operation was supervised by Brig. (R) 
Hamid Saeed of MI, therefore, a notice was issued to him to appear 
before the Court. Accordingly, he appeared and filed written 
submissions before the Court , which have already been reproduced 
hereinabove.  
96.  Learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that it 
is not a result of a 1975 memo , that ISI would be having a Political 
Cell. Reliance on it may  be appropriate up to a certain time . According 
to learned ASC, ISI  have been doing things in their own perception of 
what they thought was in the national interest. The gravity of actions 
could not have been mandated by a notification of 1975, which are t o 
be seen on their own. The declaration is regarding indiscipline. It is 
important to know as to how the affairs of the State are carried out. 
There has to be some semblance of authorization  and a legal basis  for 
the action . One of the alleged persons , nam ely, Mr. Roedad Khan  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  124 
vehemently denied the existence of such Cell . The court may presume 
there was no cell as such, otherwise there is nothing to corroborate 
the existence of the cell. At no point of time in the year 1990, the 
President was free of the adv ice of the Prime Minister  in such matters 
as are before us .  
97.  It has been established on record that in the year 1975 , 
the then Prime Minister/Chief Executive created a Political Cell in the 
ISI under an executive order, issued in the month of May, 197 5. One 
of its wings was assigned to perform political duties . Presumably, it 
could have been anything with  respect to this aspect, except to assist 
the Federal Government in its political affairs. We have already noted 
hereinabove that despite our repeated  directions, said notification was 
not produced and it has been withheld. As far as the performance of 
functions of intelligence sharing on strategic matters by this 
organization is concern ed, the Armed Forces are discharging their 
functions to defend the country against internal and external 
aggression, according to Article 243 of the Constitution. This Court , 
while exercising its jurisdiction to ascertain as to whether the 
fundamental rights of voters/electors under Article 17(2) of the 
Constitution  are v iolated or not,  is not supposed to delve  into this 
aspect. However, we have strongly noticed , while looking back towards 
the historical aspect , in pursuance whereof at various  times, Ma rtial 
Law was imposed by the Armed Forces, thereby derailing the 
democr atic system . A duly elected representative being the Prime 
Minister or the Chief E xecutive under no circumstances  has power to 
encourag e any political  or unconstitutional activities of ISI . In response 
thereto , its head of department, DG, with full knowled ge and 
information of the then Chief of Army Staff , with illegal orders, blocked HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  125 
the flow of democratic order instead of allowing the 
citizens/voters/electors to elect their chosen representatives freely, 
fairly and justly. Such action by uniformed General s of the Army not 
only violated discipline but also brought a bad name to the institution 
of th e Armed Forces while their action  negated the constitutional 
mandate on the subject.  
98.   Thus, no other conclusion can be drawn except that 
respondents No.1 a nd 2, being the General s of Pak istan Army  in 
uniform , with the connivance of the then President of Pakistan Ghulam 
Ishaq Khan  (late) , supported the latter  in ensuring the success of 
favoured candidates or a political party or a group of political parties t o 
achieve the desired result as they indulged into corruption and corrupt 
practices by furnishing and providing finances to some of the political 
personalities, alleged in the affidavit of respondents No. 2 & 3 . And in 
this manner , the election process was  corrupted  and the people of 
Pakistan were deprived  of being represented by their chosen 
representatives . There is no gain saying, as we have already discussed 
hereinabove while considering the role of Armed Forces, that a 
member of the Armed Forces must r emain committed to defend ing 
Pakistan until the last drop of his blood against external and internal 
threat s and, subject to law, act ing in aid of civil power when called 
upon to do so under the direction of the Federal Government. In the 
course of dischar ge of his duties, a soldier, therefore, is obligated to 
seeing that the Constitution is upheld; it is not abrogated; it is not 
subverted; it is not mutilated. Thus, in view of such observations, it is 
held that although the President of Pakistan being the Supreme 
Commander of the Armed Forces exercises jurisdiction, which has 
been conferred upon him under the Constitution, he obviously has no  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  126 
authority to create an election cell or to manage, in any manner, to 
support a favoured candidate/political party/gr oup of political parties, 
either by issuing directions to the Armed Forces or to civilians to make 
efforts for achieving desired result s. And if any such illegal order is 
transmitted, the same is not worthy to be obeyed .  
99.  It is to be noted that this C ourt has held time and again 
that Government functionaries are expected to comply with only those 
orders/directions of their superiors which are legal and within their 
competence. C ompliance of an illegal or incompetent direction/order 
can neither be justi fied on the plea that it came from a superior 
authority nor could it be defended on the ground that its non -
compliance would have exposed the concerned Government servant to 
the risk of disciplinary action. In this regard reference may be made to 
the case of Zahid Akhtar v. Government of Punjab
 (PLD 1995 SC 530), 
wherein it has been held as under: -  
“We need no stress here that a tamed subservient 
bureaucracy can neither be helpful to Government nor it is 
expected to inspire public confidence in the admini stration. 
Good governance is largely dependent on an upright 
honest and strong bureaucracy. Therefore, mere 
submission to the will of superior is not a commendable 
trait in a bureaucrat. Elected representatives placed as 
incharge of administrative departme nt of Government are 
not expected to carry with them a deep insight in the 
complexities of administration. The duty of a bureaucrat, 
therefore, is to apprise these elected representatives the 
nicety of administration and provide them correct' 
guidance in d ischarge of their function in accordance with 
the law. Succumbing to each and every order of direction 
of such elected functionaries without bringing to their 
notice the legal infirmities in such orders/directions may 
sometimes amount to an act of indiscre tion on the part of HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  127 
bureaucrats which may not be justifiable on the plane of 
hierarchical discipline. It hardly needs to be mentioned 
that a Government servant is expected to comply only 
those orders/directions of his superior which are legal and 
within hi s competence. Compliance of an illegal or an 
incompetent direction/order can neither be justified on the 
plea that it came from a superior authority nor it could be 
defended on the ground that its non -compliance would 
have exposed the concerned Government servant to the 
risk of disciplinary action.”  
 
In the case of Muhammad Akhtar Shirani v. Punjab Tex Book Board
 
(2004 SCMR 1077), the same view was reiterated by this Court as 
under: - 
“We have noted with pain that departmental authorities 
responsible to ru n its affairs do submit to whims and 
wishes of their superiors and never feel hesitation in 
implementing even an illegal order, knowing well that it 
has no legal sanction and if such order is implemented it is 
bound to give rise to a number of complication s in the 
future. This Court time and again has emphasized that the 
departmental functionaries are only obliged to carry out 
lawful orders of their superiors and if they are being 
pressurized to implement an illegal order they should have 
put on record thei r dissenting note and if such practice is 
followed chances of issuing/passing illegal orders shall be 
minimized.”  
 
Reference in this behalf may also be made the cases of Province of 
Punjab v. Ibrar Younas Butt
 (2004 SCMR 67), Iqbal Hussain  v. 
Province of S indh
 (2008 SCMR 105), Government of Pakistan v. 
Farheen Rashid
 [2009 PLC (C.S.) 966], Human Rights Cases No.4668 
OF 2006, etc.
 (PLD 2010 SC 759) and Muhammad Afsar v. Malik 
Muhammad Farooq
 (2012 SCMR 274).  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  128 
100.   Thus, it is clear that respondents No. 1 & 2 were required 
to comply with only those orders/directions of their superiors which 
were legal and within their competence. Compliance with an illegal or 
an incompetent direction/order from the then President can neither be 
justified on the plea that it c ame from a superior authority nor could it 
be defended on the ground that its non -compliance would have 
exposed them to the risk of disciplinary/adverse action.    
101.  From the material, which has come on record during 
course of the proceedings referred t o hereinabove, there is no 
controversy or dispute that an amount of Rs. 140 million was arranged 
from HBL through the respondent No. 3 for the purpose of distributing 
it among certain politicians/individuals before the 1990 ’s general 
election in the name o f ‘greater national interest’.  It is also proved on 
record that without logistic support of the respondents No.1 and 2, 
distribution of the said amount would not have been possible. As 
regards disbursing the amount to different persons, no convincing and 
legally acceptable evidence was brought on record by the respondent 
No. 2. Therefore, in pursuan ce of order 22.06.2012, he filed concise 
statement on 30.07.2012 vide CMA No. 3307/2012, contents whereof 
are reproduced as under: -  
“Concise statement on behal f of respondent No. 2  
 That the honourable court vide order 22.6.2012 was 
pleased to observe as under: -  
 That in the meanwhile, learned counsel appearing for 
General R etd. Asad Durrani may place on record concise 
statement, supporting evidence or affida vits explaining the 
details of the persons to whom allegedly certain amounts 
were distributed under the directions of the then Army 
Chief General Aslam Beg and as far as the names of the 
persons to whom the amount was to be distributed used to HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  129 
receive from  Mr. Ijlal  Haider Zaidi, who was heading the 
team constituted in the presidency by the then President of 
Pakistan late Ghulam Ishaq Khan.  
 That the total amount distributed through 
undersigned was approximately 70 million out of 140 
million and the remai ning was deposited in the special fund 
of ISI.  
 That the answering Respondent assigned this job to 
officers of the MI, who were cognizant that the money 
disbursed was for election purpose and they, in turn, 
distributed the money and apprised the Answering  
respondent about the distribution.  
 That names of these offices and some of the 
classified documents available with the undersigned tender 
herewith sealed cover will be submitted in Court. The 
Answer ing Respondent reckons that the e are of classified 
nature.” [sic.]  
  
As regards the classified nature of the document produced by him, it 
may be mentioned that it was a mere statement containing names of 
the persons to whom the amounts were distributed, but without any 
supporting documents to substantiate the  allegation against them. 
Therefore, after having seen the same, it was returned to him for 
keeping the same in safe custody to be produced it whenever required. 
In this view of the matter , the factum of receipt of the money by the 
individuals name d by the  respondent No. 2 as per details attached with 
his affidavit dated 24.07.1994 and in the statement of respondent No. 
3 under section 161 Cr.P.C. recorded by FIA in Mehran Bank’s case , 
the same have to be established in accordance with law in a 
transparent manner through an investigating agency.  The alleged 
names/details of disbursement of money as alleged by respondent  No. HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  130 
2 in annexure to his affidavit , and respondent No. 3 in his above 
referred statement are given hereinbelow: -  
Details/n ames of the reci pients of money given by 
Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad Durrani in his affidavit dated 
24.07.1994
: -  
 
N.W.F.P
 -  Mir Afzal    - 10 million    
        
PUNJAB
 -  Nawaz Sharif   -3.5 million   
-  Lt. Gen. (R)  -5.6   “ (for media)  
      Rafaqat      
    
   -  J.I,    -5.0     “  
    -  Abida Hussain   -1.0   “ 
   -  Altaf Hussain  
      Qureshi &    -0.5   “  
      Mustafa Sadiq        
   
   -  Misc. & smaller   -3.339 “   
      group     
  
SINDH
 -  Jatoi   -5.0    “ 
   -  Jam Sadiq    -5.0  “ 
   -  Junejo    -2.5 “ 
   -  Pir Pagara    -2.0 “ 
   -  Maulana Salah   -0.3 “ 
       Ud-Din 
   -  Misc. & smaller   -5.4 “ 
      group    
 
BALOCHISTAN
 -  Humay un Mari   -1.5 
      (Bugti’s son -in-law) 
 
   -  Jamali    -4.0 “ 
   -  Kakar    -1.0 “ 
   -  K Baluch    -0.5 “ 
-  Jam Yousaf   -0.75  “   
-  Bazinjo    -0.50  “  
-  Nadee m Mengal   -1.00  “  
 
Through [May be] Golf course:   0.5 m    
 Misc. (bank charges :   1.1117 m  
expenses etc .)  
 
 
Details/n ames of the recipients of money given by 
Lt. Gen. (R) M. Asad Durrani in his letter dated 
07.06.1994
: -  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  131 
 
(a) Khar 2 Millions, Hafeez Pirzada  3, Sarwar 
Cheema 0.5 and Mairaj Khalid 0.2 Millions. The 
last two were not on the wrong side. It was 
merely someone’s “soft corn er” that benefited 
them.  
(b) The remaining 80 Ms were either deposited in 
the ISI’s ‘K’ fund (60 M) or given to Director 
External Intelligence for special operations .   
 
 
 
Details  regarding distribution of money given by Lt. 
Gen. (R) M. Asad Durrani in his 
concise statement 
vide CMA No. 3307/2012  dated  30.07.2012 : -  
 
The total amount distributed through un dersigned 
was approximately 70 million out of 140 million and 
the remaining was deposited in the special fund of 
ISI.  
 
Respondent No. 2 assigned this job to officers of the 
MI, who were cognizant that the money disbursed 
was for election purpose and they,  in turn, 
distributed the money and apprised the Answering 
respondent about the distribution.  
 
Names of the office rs and some of the classified 
documents available with respondent No2. were 
produced in Court in sealed cover claiming 
confidentiality, but t he same were returned to him 
for keeping the same in safe custody to be 
produced it whenever required.  
 
Details/n ames of the recipients of money given by 
Brig.  (R) Hamid  Saeed  Akhtar in his statement dated 
18.10.2012  made before the Court
: - 
In compliance  with the directions six accounts were opened 
in different banks. Funds started pouring in from 16th 
September 1990 onwards. By 22nd October 1990, Rs. 140 
Million had been received in these accounts. Thereafter HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  132 
following amounts were remitted as ordered by  DGMI:  -  
a. Rs.40 Million   to GHQ account.  
b. Rs.10.5 Million  to regional office of MI Quetta.  
c. Rs.5 Million   to interim PM Mr. Ghulam  
   Mustafa Jatoi  
d. Rs.5. Million   to interim CM Sindh Mr. Jam 
   Sadiq Ali  
e. Rs.2.5 Million   to Mr. Muhammad Khan  
   Junejo.  
f. Rs.3 Million   to Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada  
g. Rs.2 Million   to Mr. Sibghat -Ullah Pir sahib 
   Pagara.  
h. Rs.03 Million   to Mr. Muzaffar Hussain Shah.  
i. Rs.03 Million   to Mr. Muzaffar Hussain Shah  
j. Rs.0.3 Million   to Mr. Ghulam Ali Nizaman i. 
k. Rs.02 Million   to Mr. Arbab Ghulam Rahim  
l. Rs.03 Million   to Mr. Salah -ud-Din (Takbeer).  
m. Rs.05 Million   to Mr. Yousaf Haroon  
n. Rs.3,828 Million  to Sindh Regimental Centre, 
   and also used for construction 
   of men’s living barracks,  
   interrogation cells  
 
The remaining balance of Rs.67, 628,511/ - including 
interest was later on sent to GHQ along with up -to-date 
bank statements. [I would like to state that during my 
service with the Military Intelligence, I was of the opinion 
that the funds were coming from GHQ ].  
 
 
Furthermore, certain other material, though unauthentic and would be 
required to be proved in accordance with law,  has also been placed on 
record, which gives details concerning drawl and transfer of the money 
in question as unde r: -  
 
Details /information  concerning drawl and transfer of 
the amounts in question  in the shape of some 
important points  as per document at page 163 of the 
paper book
: -   
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  133 
SOME IMPORTANT POINTS
 
 
(1) Rs. 6.72 were subsequently transferred to GHQ 
Welfare Fund.  Reportedly Rs. 3 Crores 
approximately were drawn and given to “FRIENDS” 
under the instruction of Gen. Beg during his last 
days as Army Chief. The remaining amount is 
available in the GHQ Welfare Fund.  
(2) Out of 4 crores, 2 crores were given to Punjab and 
2 crores to NWFP. The details of expenditures / pay 
off are available with the commendations of 
respective MI / Units.   
(3) All the payments in Sindh were made by Lt. Col. 
Mir Akbar Ali Khan who is under cover appointment 
in Saudi Arabia.  
(4) 6 to 8 pseudonymous ac counts were opened under 
the instructions of Gen. B eg who accorded verbal 
approval Survey & construction Group Karachi, 
whereas the accounts in the name of 202 Survey & 
Construction Group were not brought to the notice 
of Gen. B eg.  
(5) The number of said acco unts were communicated 
to Mr. Yunus  Habib who deposited Rs. 14 crores 
through one of his representatives on various 
dates.  
(6) The details of the amounts spent in Quetta are 
known to Brig. Amanullah presently heading M.I. 
Karachi.  
(7) The details of amount distr ibuted among the 
politician in Punjab are known to Gen. B eg, Gen. 
Asad Durrani and the then Commandants of the 
M.I. Units posted in Punjab and NWFP.  
(8) Late Gen. Asif Nawaz also agitated and showed his 
displeasure on the shifting of the amounts to 
‘Friends’ by Gen. Aslam B eg. 
Account of distribution of funds as per documents at 
pages 220 & 221 of the paper book
: -   
 
“POLITICAL AND OTHER PAY OFFS
 
 
Yunus  Habib, as per his statement recorded under section 161 Cr. P. 
C. before Investigating Officer at Karachi di sclosed Political and other 
Pay Offs as: -  
 HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  134 
- Gen ( Retd.) Mirza Aslam Beg Rs. 140 m  
- Jam Sadiq Ali (the then Chief Minister 
Sindh)  Rs. 70 m  
- Altaf Hussain (MQM)  Rs. 20 m  
- Yousaf Memon (Advocate) (for 
disbursement to Javed Hashmi, MNA and 
others  Rs. 50 m 
-                                                        Total:  Rs. 280 m  
- Jam Sadiq Ali (1992)  Rs. 150 m  
- Liaqat Jatoi (1993)  Rs. 01 m  
- Chief Minister Sind Through Imtiaz Sheikh. 
(1993)  Rs. 12 m  
- Mr. Afaq (MQM) (1993)  Rs. 05 m  
- Chief Minis ter Sind through Imtiaz Sheikh 
(1993)  Rs. 01 m  
- Ajmal Khan, Ex Federal Minister (1993)  Rs. 1.4 m  
- Mr. Nawaz Sharif, Ex Prime Minister (1993)  Rs. 3.5 m  
- Mr. Nawaz Sharif, Ex Prime Minister (27 -9-
90) Rs. 2.5 m  
- Mr. Jam Mashooq (26 -9-93) Rs. 0.5 m  
- Mr. Dost Mohammad Faizi (26 -9-93) Rs. 1.0 m  
- Mr. Jam Haider (26 -9-93) Rs. 2.0 m  
- Mr. Jam Mashooq (26 -9-93) Rs. 3.0 m ” 
 
POLITICAL PAY OFFS TO MR. JAVED HASHMI M. N. A.
 
 
- Mr. Javed Hashmi was the partner of M/s ADAGE Advertising 
(Pvt) Ltd., from 30 -10-1986 and resigned on 6 -1-1990.  
- The following payments were made to Mr. Javed Hashmi 
through Telegraphic Transfer and the Bank Drafts by Mr. Yousaf 
Memon (a man in between Yunus  Habib and Javed Hashmi) 
through various bank transfers:  
 
   - T.T. from UBL Adamjee Nagar Karachi, on  
 
Date Drawn at  Drawn by  Amount  
11-11-1990 UBL Multan  Javed Hashmi  Rs. 2.5 M  
15-12-1990 UBL Multan  Javed Hashmi  Rs. 1.0 M  
20-12-1990 UBL Multan  Rahat Malik  Rs. 0.1 M  
27-03-1991 UBL Islamabad  Rahat Malik  Rs. 1.0 M  
09-4-1991 UBL Islamabad  Rahat Malik  Rs. 2.0 M  
12-5-1991 UBL Islamabad  Javaid Hashmi  Rs. 0.3 M  HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  135 
 - T. T. from HBL Ichara, Lahore, on  
10-02-1991 MCB Multan  Khurshid S. 
Shah.  Rs. 2.5 M  
 - Bank Draft from UBL Adamjee Nagar, Karachi, on  
23-02-1991 UBL Multan  Mukhtar 
Hashmi  Rs. 2.0 M  
 - Bank Draft from Faisal Islamic Bank, Karachi, on  
27-04-1991 HBL Multan  Javaid 
Hashmi  Rs. 1.4 M  
  Total:   Rs. 12.8 M  
- According to the statement of Mr. Rahat Malik, the 
amount drawn by him was handed over to Mr. Javed 
Hashmi.  
- Rs. 14.9 million was paid by Mr. M. Yamin in presence 
of Mr.   Yousaf Memon in Oct 1990 in cash to Mr. 
Javaid Hashmi in  Room No.1 of MNA Hostel, 
Islamabad.  
  G. Total:  Rs. 27.7 M   
 
Details/n ames of the beneficiaries of money given 
by Muhammad Yunus A. Habi b in CMA 
No.1034/2012 : -
 
 
That Mr. Yousaf Memon Advocate in two different TV 
Programmes of GEO News channel (one by Kamran Kha n 
and the other by Nazir Laghari ) admitted that a house was 
purchased in F -6/2 Islamabad in the name of Mr. Javed 
Hashmi. He also admitted that 50% of the amount was 
invested in the purchase of house (Kasim 1 al -Multan)
.  
 
Admission of one of the recipients: -  
 
In the course of the proceedings, it was alleged that one of 
the recipients, namely, Syeda Abida Hussain, as per 
reports pu blished in the newspapers, had acknowledged 
receipt of the money
.  
 
102.  Above are the reasons for our short order of even 
date whereby the instant petition was disposed of as under: -  
“The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
commands that i t is the will of the people of Pakistan to 
establish an order wherein the State shall exercise its 
powers and authority through the chosen representatives 
of the people, wherein the principles of democracy, 
freedom, equality, etc., shall be fully observed,  so that the 
people of Pakistan may prosper and attain their rightful 
and honoured place amongst the nations of the world, and 
make their full contribution towards international peace HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  136 
and progress and happiness of humanity. People of 
Pakistan had been stru ggling to establish a parliamentary 
and democratic order since long within the framework of 
the Constitution and now they foresee a strong system 
which is established by the passage of time without any 
threat and which is subject to the constitution and ru le of 
law.  
 
2. The essence of this Human Rights case is based on 
the fundamental right of citizens enshrined in Article 17 of 
the Constitution. It raises an important question of public 
importance to enforce the fundamental rights, inter alia , 
noted herei nabove, therefore, in accordance with the 
provisions of Article 184(3) of the Constitution, jurisdiction 
has been assumed and exercised to declare, for the 
reasons to be recorded later, as under: - 
 
(1) That citizens of Pakistan as a matter of right are free 
to elect their representatives in an election process 
being conducted honestly, justly, fairly and in 
accordance with law.  
(2) The general election held in the year 1990 was 
subjected to corruption and corrupt practices as in 
view of the overwhelming material pr oduced by the 
parties during hearing it has been established that 
an “Election Cell” had been created in the 
Presidency, which was functioning to provide 
financial assistance to the favoured candidates, or a 
group of political parties to achieve desired re sult by 
polluting election process and to deprive the people 
of Pakistan from being represented by their chosen 
representatives.  
(3) A President of Pakistan, in Parliamentary system of 
government, being head of the State represents the 
unity of the Republic un der Article 41 of the 
Constitution. And as per the oath of his office in all HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  137 
circumstances, he will do right to all manner of 
people, according to law, without fear or favour, 
affection or ill -will. Thus, holder of office of President 
of Pakistan, violates  the Constitution, if he fails to 
treat all manner of people equally and without 
favouring any set, according to law, and as such, 
creates/provides an occasion which may lead to an 
action against him under the Constitution and the 
Law.  
(4) The President of Pa kistan, Chief of Army Staff, DG 
ISI or their subordinates certainly are not  supposed 
to create an Election Cell or to support a political 
party/ group of political parties, because if they do 
so, the citizens would fail to elect their 
representatives in a n honest, fair and free process of 
election, and their actions would negate the 
constitutional mandate on the subject.  
(5) However, in the instant case it has been established 
that in the general elections of 1990 an Election Cell 
was established in the Presi dency to influence the 
elections and was aided by General (R) Mirza Aslam 
Beg who was the Chief of Army Staff and by General 
(R) Asad Durrani, the then Director General ISI and 
they participated in the unlawful activities of the 
Election Cell in violation of the responsibilities of the 
Army and ISI as institutions which is an act of 
individuals but not of institutions represented by 
them respectively, noted hereinabove.   
(6) ISI or MI may perform their duties as per the laws to 
safeguard the borders of Pakistan  or to provide civil 
aid to the Federal Government, but such 
organizations have no role to play in the political 
activities/politics, for formulation or destabilization of 
political Governments, nor can they facilitate or show 
favour to a political party o r group of political parties HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  138 
or politicians individually, in any manner, which may 
lead in his or their success.   
(7) It has also been established that late Ghulam Ishaq 
Khan, the then President of Pakistan with the 
support of General (R) Aslam Beg, General ( R) Asad 
Durrani and others, who were serving in M.I and now 
either have passed away or have retired, were 
supporting the functioning of the ‘Election Cell’, 
established illegally.  
(8) Mr. M. Yunus  A. Habib, the then Chief Executive of 
Habib Bank Ltd. at the di rection and behest of above 
noted functionaries, arranged/provided Rs.140 
million belonging to public exchequer, out of which 
an amount of Rs.60 million was distributed to 
politicians, whose incomplete details have been 
furnished by General (R) Asad Durran i, however, 
without a thorough probe no adverse order can be 
passed against them in these proceedings.  
(9) The Armed Forces of Pakistan, under the directions 
of Federal Government, defend Pakistan against 
external aggression or threat of war and, subject to 
law, are to act in aid of civil power when called upon 
to do so under Article 245 of the Constitution, thus, 
any extra -constitutional act, calls for action in 
accordance with the Constitution of Pakistan and the 
law against the officers/officials of Armed F orces 
without any discrimination.  
(10) The Armed Forces have always sacrificed their lives 
for the country to defend any external or internal 
aggression for which it being an institution is deeply 
respected by the nation.  
(11) The Armed Forces, in discharge of thei r functions, 
seek intelligence and support from ISI, MI, etc., and 
on account of security threats to the country on its HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  139 
frontiers or to control internal situations in aid of civil 
power when called upon to do so. However, ISI, MI 
or any other Agency like I B have no role to play in 
the political affairs of the country such as formation 
or destabilization of government, or interfere in the 
holding of honest, free and fair elections by Election 
Commission of Pakistan. Involvement of the 
officers/members of sec ret agencies i.e. ISI, MI, IB, 
etc. in unlawful activities, individually or collectively 
calls for strict action being, violative of oath of their 
offices, and if involved, they are liable to be dealt 
with under the Constitution and the Law.  
(12) Any Election Cell/Political Cell in Presidency or ISI or 
MI or within their formations shall be abolished 
immediately and any letter/notification to the extent 
of creating any such Cell/Department (by any name 
whatsoever, explained herein, shall stand cancelled 
forthwi th.   
(13) Late Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the then President of 
Pakistan, General (R) Aslam Beg and General (R) 
Asad Durrani acted in violation of the Constitution by 
facilitating a group of politicians and political parties, 
etc., to ensure their success against the rival 
candidates in the general election of 1990, for which 
they secured funds from Mr. Yunus  Habib. Their acts 
have brought a bad name to Pakistan and its Armed 
Forces as well as secret agencies in the eyes of the 
nation, therefore, notwithstanding that t hey may 
have retired from service, the Federal Government 
shall take necessary steps under the Constitution 
and Law against them.  
 
(14) Similarly, legal proceedings shall be initiated against 
the politicians, who allegedly have received 
donations to spend on e lection campaigns in the HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  140 
general election of 1990, therefore, transparent 
investigation on the criminal side shall be initiated by 
the FIA against all of them and if sufficient evidence 
is collected, they shall be sent up to face the trial, 
according to la w. 
 
 Mr. Yunus  Habib shall also be dealt with in the same 
manner.  
 
(15) Proceedings shall also be launched against the 
persons specified hereinabove for affecting the 
recovery of sums received by them with profit 
thereon by initiating civil proceedings, accord ing to 
law.  
(16) An amount of Rs.80 million, statedly, ha s been 
deposited in Account No. 313 titled Survey and 
Construction Group Karachi, maintained by MI, 
therefore, this amount with profit shall be 
transferred to Habib Bank Ltd. if the liability of HBL 
has n ot been adjusted so far, otherwise, the same 
may be deposited in the treasury account of 
Government of Pakistan. ”  
 
103.  Before parting with the detailed reasons noted 
hereinabove, we place on record our thanks to the learned counsel 
appearing on behalf  of the petitioner , learned counsel representing the 
respondents No.1 & 3 and learned Attorney General for providing 
assistance in the decision of the instant case, which was pending since 
long for one or the other reason.  
 
104.  While hearing this  case vid e order dated 14.03.2012 the 
attention of the learned Attorney General was drawn towards a news 
item published on 14.03.2012 in Daily Express Tribune, caption ed as  
“GOVT WITHDREW MILLIONS FROM INTELLIGENCE BUREAU HRC 19/1996 [Detailed Judgment]  141 
ACCOUNT ” complaining therein that an amount  of Rs.270 Million were 
doled out of I B accounts for the purpose of toppling the Government of 
Punjab  in the year 2008 -09. Notices were issued to the Publishers, 
Printers and Reporters  of the said newspapers, who produced certain 
documents to substantiate the allegation reported  in the news item.  
The news item may be registered as CMA and after de-linking the 
same from instant case, be fixed in Court , with notice to  the 
Publishers, Printers  and Reporters of the said news papers as well as  
DG, IB and the Atto rney General for a date after two weeks.  
 
105.  The instant Human Rights case stands disposed of in the 
above terms.  
 
 
 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ 
 
 
 
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J  
 
 
 
Khilji Arif Hussain, J  
Islamabad, 19th October,  2012
  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
  