IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J.  
MR. JUSTICE GHULAM RABBANI  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 43 OF 20 09 
(Petition under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
against molestation and hum iliation of Eunuch and 
Restoration their fundamental Rights)  
 
 
Dr. Mohammad Aslam Khaki & another  
…. Petitioner s 
 
Versus  
 
Senior Superintendant of Police (Operation) Rawalpindi & others  
…. Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioner    Petitioner in person  with   
     Almas Bobi, President  
Shemale Rights of Pakistan  
 
For the Federation   Mr. Mujtaba Haider Sherazi, D.A.G.  
     Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR  
     Mr. Haroon Joyia, SP City Islamabad  
     Mr. Azhar Hussain Shah, DSP Legal  
     Mr. Sajid Abbas, Inspector Legal  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan   Mr. Muhammad Azam Khattak, Addl.AG  
     Mr. Abdullah Baloch, Director (S.W.)  
     
For Govt. of KPK    Syed Arshad Hussain Shah, Addl. AG  
 
For Govt. of Punjab   Ch. Khadim Hussain Qaiser, Addl. AG  
     Qazi Zahoorul Haq, EDO (Edu.)  
     Mr. Irshad Ahmad, S.O. (S&GAD)  
     Mr. Muhammad Shahid Rana, D.O.(S.W)  
     Mr. Israr Ahmad Khan, SP, (Pothohar)  
     Raja Akhtar, D.S.P  Taxila  
     Mr. Muhammad Yar, SHO Taxila  
 
For Govt. of Sindh    Mr. Miran Muhammad Shah, Addl. A.G.  
     Raja Abd ul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
Date  of hearing    22.3.2011 
     
 
O R D E R  Const.P. 43/2009  2 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, C.J. -  
Petitioner in person states that Chairman and Deputy Chairman of 
NADRA in compliance with directions of this Court have shown 
significant progress to resolve  the issue of recording parentage and sex 
of the eunuchs and deliberations in this behalf are under 
consideration.  A report has also been received from NADRA.  We do 
appreciate for making efforts to resolve the problems of eunuchs about 
their identity.  E ssentially it is an important issue and we are hopeful 
that the Chairman NADRA on account of his sincere commitments and 
efforts shall be in a position to ensure that eunuchs are provided 
National Identity Cards so their status in the society is recognized  and 
on account of showing sincere efforts we hereby observe that all 
concerned functionaries should extend cooperation to them. 
 
2.  Needless to observe that eunuchs in their own rights are 
citizens of this country and subject to the Constitution of the I slamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973, their rights, obligations including right to 
life and dignity are equally protected.  Thus no discrimination , for any 
reason,  is possible against them as far as their rights and obligations 
are concerned.  The Government functionaries both at Federal and 
Provincial levels are bound to provide them protection of life and 
property and secure their dignity as well ,  as is done in case of other 
citizens.  
 
3.  Similarly, Federal and Provincial Governments are 
equally responsibl e to recognize their rights .  The efforts so far made in 
this behalf on the part of the Governments of KPK, Punjab  and Sindh 
are, however, appreciated and we expect that Government of Const.P. 43/2009  3 
Balochistan would also protect the life and property as well as the 
dignity of the eunuchs accordingly.  
4.  It is true that some progress has been made but the 
Provincial Governments through the Secretaries Social Works 
Department are required to make more efforts to implement the 
directions of this Court contained in the orde rs dated 17.8.2009 and 
23.12.2009 .  Copies of these orders be dispatched to them as well as the 
Commissioner Islamabad and to the Ministry of Social Welfare & 
Special Education, Government of Pakistan for implementation and 
report on the next date of heari ng. 
 
5.  It has been noticed that whatever the complaints are 
registered for and against the eunuchs the same with action taken 
thereon are not intimated by the police  to the Registrar of this Court .  
Direction so contained in the order dated 17.08.2009 be  repeated to all 
the PPOs and the I.G. Police, Islamabad for compliance in letter and 
spirit.  
 
6.  While hearing this case it has been noticed that there is 
some gap of communication between the administration and the 
eunuchs perhaps for the reason that t hey have no representation o r 
they do not have a focal person, therefore, Secretaries Social Welfare 
and Special Education, Islamabad, may adopt a strategy to appoint one 
or more than one focal person amongst them who may interact with 
the administration.  
 
7.  In the orders noted above we have pointed out for 
initiating process to locat e the ascendants  (parentage) of the eunuchs 
with a view that if the  latter  have any right of inheritance in moveable 
and immoveable properties , they should get the same  accor ding to law Const.P. 43/2009  4 
but it seems that no progress has been made in this behalf so far.  
Secretaries Social Welfare of all the provinces and Commissioner 
Islamabad who have already registered the eunuchs may seriously 
look into this aspect of the case and ma ke effo rts to ensure that their 
rights in the property as are devolved on them according to law , are 
fully protected . 
 
8.  Petitioner contends that after passing the orders a 
significant progress has begun to take place and social status of the 
eunuchs is being gradually recognized yet due to lack of 
awareness/knowledge/ideas and information about the right s and 
obligations concerning the eunuchs not conveyed in every nook and 
corner , they are not getting what is actually due to them, therefore, 
NGOs should come f orward to disseminate the same  appropriately .  In 
this, it is h owever , observed that this is for the petitioner to interact 
with NGOs for the purpose because this Court is only interested , as it 
has been pointed out time and again, that in terms of Article  184(3) of 
the Constitution the fundamental rights of the eunuchs are to be fully 
protected.  
 
9.  Let the case be adjourned for a period of four weeks for 
further proceedings and the reports shall be submitted before the next 
date of hearing enabling the C ourt to go through the same to save the 
time.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
22.03.2011  
Zulfiqar    