IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice  Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ  
Mr. Justice  Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry   
Mr. Justice  Gulzar Ahmed  
 
 
CMA No.3393 of 2013  
[Application by Syed Adil Gillani against appointment of Federal  Ombudsman ] 
IN  
Const.P.No.30 of 2013  
 
Khawaja Muhammad Asif  Petitioner (s) 
VERSUS  
Federation of Pakistan & others  Respondent (s) 
 
 
Applicant (s) : In person  
On Court’s Notice:  : Mr. Shah Khawar, Addl. Attorney General.  
For Wafaqi Mohtasib Sectt . : Hafiz Ahsan Ahmed Khokhar, ASC  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR 
For M inistry of  Law : Nemo  
For Establishment Division  : Nemo  
For PSPM  : Nemo  
For Mr. Salam Farooqi  : Nemo  
Date of Hearing  : 03.07.2013 
 
ORDER  
  The learned counsel appearing for the Wafaqi Mohtasib 
(Ombudsman ) Secretariat is directed to place on record : - 
i) Request made by the Ombu dsman to the AGPR for 
issuing  the salary cheques as in such like cases 
where a separate account in the name of 
incumbent is not open ed or the LPC has not been 
received then on the request of the office 
payments are made by the AGPR on the basis of CMA No.3393 of 2013 in Const.P.No.30 of 2013  - 2 - 
 extract bills, therefore, in view of both the 
situations, if any had occurred in this case, 
relevant summary or copy of the extract bill is to 
be placed on record;  
ii) Notification of gran ting leave to Mr. Salman 
Farooqi based on the summary which has to be 
sent by the Secretary  to the competent  authority 
for sanctioning  of leave during his absence along 
with the NOC allowing him to travel outside the 
country for the purpose of attending hi s ailing lady 
wife, be also placed on record .   
 
2.  Similarly, the AGPR is also directed  to:- 
i) Place on record certified copies from the receipt 
register showing the receipt of the notification  of 
appointment  of Mr. Salman Far uqui in their office 
and co py of the LPC issued by the functionaries 
where he had been serving prior to joining the 
office of Ombudsman and ; 
 
ii) Explain as to why and under what circumstances 
two cheques No. 4304413 & 4304414 respectively 
for the months of March and April, 2013 , have 
been issued simultaneously or prepared for the 
purpose of making payment of the salary along 
with the sanction order passed by the competent 
authority to make payment s by these cheques.  
 
iii) The AGPR is also directed to produce certified copy 
of the pa y slip of Mr. Salman Far uqui, Former 
Principal Secretary to the President indicating that 
till when he has been drawing the salary against 
the post which he was holding along with the CMA No.3393 of 2013 in Const.P.No.30 of 2013  - 3 - 
 notification of charge relinquishment of his earlier 
position.   
 
3.  The Managing Director,  Printing Press is also directed  
to:- 
i) Produce on record the gazette copy of Oath, if 
taken, by Mr. Salman Far uqui of the office of 
Wafaqi Mohtasib ( Ombudsman ) allegedly on 
01.03.2013 .   
 
4.  The Law Secretary is also directed to :- 
i) File copy of the amended Act both of the Federal 
Ombudsman For Protection Against Harassment Of 
Women At Workplace and Banking Mohtasib along 
with the draft bill and salary prepared on the same 
to ascertain that under what circumstances t he 
same was initi ated and final  draft and then 
amendment as per the Ordinance . 
5.  Let the case be fixed tomorrow i.e. 04.07.2013.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
Islamabad  Judge  
03.07.2013  
*Hashmi * Judge  
 