IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
                    (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
    
    PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, HCJ 
MRS. JUSTICE AYESHA A. MALIK  
MR. JUSTICE ATHAR MINALLAH  
   
CIVIL PETITION NO.5633 AND 5833 OF 2021  
(Against the judgment date d 29.09.2021 of the Peshawar 
High Court, Mingora Bench (Dar ul Qaza) Swat passed in 
Writ Petition  No.564 -M/2021 ) 
 
Government of Pakistan thr.  
Secretary Interior, etc.    … (in CP -5633/21 ) 
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  
thr. Chief Secy.Peshawar, etc.    … (in CP -5833/21 ) 
      Petitioners  
 
        Versus  
 
Zia Ullah Khan and others    …Respondents (in both cases ) 
 
For the petitioner(s) : Mr. Rashdeen Nawaz Qasoori, Addl. A ttorney General  
    a/w Mujahid Khan, Dy. Director, NADRA  
    (In CP -5633/21)  
 
    Atif Ali Khan, Addl. A.G. KP K. 
    a/w Ali Rahman, Inspector  
    Shakirullah, S.O.  
    (in CP -5833/21)  
Respondent(s):   Mubarak Ali, in person.  
    Amir Nawab, in person.  
    Zia Ullah, in person.  
     
Date of hearing:   01.12.2022 
    ORDER   
 
 Athar Minall ah, J.- The Federal Government and the Provincial 
Government of Khyber -Pakhtunkhwa have sought leave against the 
judgment dated 29.09.2021 of the Peshawar High Court, whereby the 
proceedings initiated and actions taken by the Prime Minister’s 
Performance, Delivery Unit (‘Unit’)  and Pakistan Citizen’s Portal (‘Portal’) 
have been declared as unconstitutional. The Unit was established by the 
Federal Government to promote citizen -centric and participatory 
governance. It serves as a complaints and grievance redr essal forum 
particularly to facilitate overse as Pakistanis, women, special persons and 
foreigners. It was established under the Rules of Business, 1973. The Portal 
is a government owned system based on mobile application intended to be 
used as a tool to pr omote citizen -centric and participatory governance. It 
enables the citizens to raise issues/complaints.  CPs-5633 and 5833 of 2021.doc  2
2.  A complaint was received on the Portal on 02.02.2021 alleging 
that the private respondents had acquired chemical and biological weapons 
and that th ey were terrorist  facilitators . The complaint was transmitted to 
the Inspector General of Police, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and was forwarded by 
the latter to the District Police Officer, Swat. After investigating, it was 
concluded that the allegations were false  and, therefore, the competent 
authority ordered that the complaint be filed. The private respondents were 
aggrieved because they felt being subjected to harassment during the 
course of investigation. They filed a complaint on the Portal and sought 
informa tion regarding the identity of the complain ant. After their request 
was denied, they invoked the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court 
under Article 199 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973. The prayers sought by the privat e respondents were not granted but 
the working and functions of the Unit and the Portal were declared to be 
unconstitutional. The High Court was of the opinion that the working of 
both the forums was transgression of the executive authority of the 
Province .  
3. We have heard the learned Additional Attorney General who has 
argued that the High Court had not properly appreciated the working and 
functioning of the Unit and the Portal. With the assistance of the learned 
Additional Attorney General, we have peru sed the record and we are of the 
opinion that the High Court had assumed that the Unit and Portal had 
exercised powers in the nature of transgression into the domain of the 
provincial government. The Unit and the Portal merely receive complaints 
and th ey are automatically transmitted to the concerned authorities for 
consideration. Neither t he Unit nor Portal exercise s any power that would 
amount to prejudicing the rights of the citizens  or treated as interference in 
the executive domain of the province . The  transmission of information to 
the concerned authorities of a province , by no stretch of imagination , can 
be construed as interference or transgression in its domain. After receiving 
the information transmitted by the Unit or the Portal as the case may be , 
the concerned  provincial authorities are expected to consider the same and CPs-5633 and 5833 of 2021.doc  3
thereafter proceed in accordance with the law. They are not bound to act in 
a particular manner nor can any direction or order be passed by the Unit or 
the Portal. In the case in hand, the complaint received on the Portal was of 
a serious nature and its transmission to the competent authority in the 
province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa was not in the nature of exercise of 
executive authority by the Federal Government. The High Court had also 
not served a notice on the Attorney General for Pakistan as required under 
Order XXVII -A of the Civil Procedure Code , 1908  (“CPC”). The 
constitutionality of the working and functioning  of the Unit and the Portal 
was not challenged by the private respo ndents. They were aggrieved 
because the investigation had subjected them to inconvenience and 
harassment and , therefore, they sought details of the identity of the 
complainant. To th at extent, the ir prayer was not granted because the 
identity of the compla inant was to be kept protected. The grievance of the 
Federal Government is restricted to the declaration made by the High Court 
regarding the constitutionality of the working and functioning of the Unit 
and the Portal. The High Court had indeed not appreci ated the working and 
functioning of both the mobile application forums. Moreover, the 
transmission of a complaint or information by the Federal Government to 
the concerned authorities of a province does not constitute interference or 
transgression in the e xecutive domain of th at province. The impugned 
judgment, therefore, has not correctly appreciated and interpreted the 
status and functioning of the Unit and the Portal. The petitions are, 
therefore, disposed of in terms of the above observations.  
 
          Chief Justice  
 
 
                             Judge  
 
 
        Judge  
Islamabad  the, 
1st December, 2022  
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  
M. Azhar Malik . 