IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
[Appellate/Original Jurisdiction]  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT:   
 
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.796 OF 2007 AND CMA NO.4560 & 4561 OF 2009 
AND CMA NO.11 6 OF 2011 & CMA NO.403 & 406 OF 2012  
 
(On appeal from the judgment of the High 
Court of Balochistan, Quetta dated 
26.06.2007 passed in Constitution Petition 
No. 892/2006)  
 
Maulana Abdul Haque Baloch and others   … … PETITIONERS  
Versus  
Government of Balo chistan through Secretary Industries  
and Mineral Development and others   … … RESPONDENTS  
   
CONSTITUTION PETITION No.68 OF 2010 & CMAs NO.3687 of 2010, 
117, 151, 215, 324, 414 & 690 OF 2011  
 
M. Tariq Asad, Advocate     … … PETITIONER  
Versus  
Federal Gover nment through its Federal Secretary,  
M/o Petroleum and Natural Resources, Islamabad  
and others        … … RESPONDENTS  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.69 OF 2010    
 
Watan Party and another     … … PETITIONERS  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan and others    … … RESP ONDENTS  
 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITIONS NO.1 OF 2011 AND 95 OF 2012 IN 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.69 OF 2010   
 
Watan Party and another     … … PETITIONERS  
Versus   
The Federation of Pakistan and others   … … RESPONDENTS  
 
CRIMINAL MISC. APPLICATION NO.8 OF 2011 I N CIVIL PETITION 
NO.796 OF 2007   
 
Ehsan Ullah Waqas, MPA, Punjab    … … PETITIONER  
Versus  
Tethyan Copper Company and others   … … RESPONDENTS  
 
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  2 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.1 OF 2011  
 
Qazi Siraj -ud-Din Sanjrani and another   … … PETITIONERS  
Versus  
Federation o f Pakistan & others    … … RESPONDENTS  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.4 OF 2011 & CMA NO.295 OF 2011  
 
Senator Mohammad Azam Khan Swati, etc.  … … PETITIONERS  
Versus  
Federal Government through its Federal Secretary,  
M/o Petroleum and Natural Resources,  
Islama bad, etc.       … … RESPONDENTS  
 
AND 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.5377 -P OF 2010  
 
Application by Kh. Ahmed Tariq Rahim, Sr. ASC … … APPLICANT  
 
 
For the petitioner        : 
(In CP No.796/2007)  
 Mr. Raza Kazim, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR assisted by  
Mr. Usman  Raza Jamil, Advocate  
 
Petitioner         : 
(In Const. P NO.68/2010)  
 Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC in person  
 
Petitioner         : 
(In Const. P No.69/2010 & 
Crl.O.Ps.1/11 & 95/12)  
 Barrister Zafarullah Khan, ASC in person  
 
For the petitioners       : 
(In Const. P No.1/11)  
 Sahibzada Ahmed Raza Khan Qasuri,  
Sr. ASC  
For the petitioners       : 
(In Const. P No.4/11)  Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC with  
Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan Sawati   
 
For the applicant        : 
(In Crl. M. A No.8/2011)  
 Mr. Hasnain Ibrahim Kazmi, ASC  
For the applicant        : 
(CMAs No.3687/10 & 151/11)  
 Malik Shakeel -ur-Rehman, ASC  
For the applicant        : 
(CMA No.215/11)  
 Mr. M. Ikram Chaudhry ASC  
For the applicant        : 
(CMAs No.324/11 & 718/12)  
 Raja Abdul Rehman, ASC  
 
For the applicant        : 
(CMA -414/11)  
 Mr. Saleem Khan, ASC  
Ms. Afshan Ghazanfar, ASC  
For the applicant        : 
(CMA -690/11)  Mir Aurangzeb, ASC/AOR  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  3 
 
 
Applicant (In CMA. 2924/12)      :  
Ms. Robina Shah, Social Worker  
In Person  
 
For the Respondents:  
  
 
For Government of Balochista n  : 
(Resp. Nos.1 in C.P.796/07)  
(Resp. No.2,3&5 in Const.P.68/10)  
(Resp. No.3&4 in Const.P.69/10)  
(Resp. No. 1 in Const.P.01/11)  
(Resp. No.2 -4 in Const.P.04/11)  
 Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, AG  
Mr. Ahmar Bilal Soofi, ASC  
Mr. M. Aslam Ghuman, ASC  
Raja Abdul Gha foor, AOR with  
Mr. Zarbat Khan, Director   
Mr. Azhar Ghaffar, Dy. Dir. (Mining)  
Assisted by M/S Noor Ahmed Zeb, 
Shehzad Haider & Osman Karim Khan, 
Advocates  
 
For the Federation through  
M/o Petroleum, etc       : 
(Resp. No.3 in C.P. 796/07)  
(Resp. No.1&4 in Const.P.68/10)  
(Resp. No.1&2 in Const.P.69/10)  
(Resp. No.2,3&5 in Const.P.01/11)  
(Resp. No.1 & 8 in Const.P.04/11)  
 Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
Mr. Irshad Ali Khokhar, DG, Mineral  
Mr. M. Iqbal, Dir.  (Mining)  
 
For Tethyan Copper Co. Pakistan :  
(Resp. No.4  in C.P.796/07)  
(Resp. No.6 in Const.P.69/10)  
(Resp. No. 4 in Const.P.01/11)  
(Resp. No. 6 in Const.P.04/11)  
 Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC  
Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR  
Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR assisted by  
Barrister Zeeshan Adhi & Mr. Anas 
Makhdoom, Advocates  
For Antofagasta Plc London &  
Barrick Gold Corp. Canada      : 
(Resp. No.5 & 7 in C.P. 796/07)  
 Mr. Mansoor Ahmed Sheikh, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
For Muslim Lakhani       : 
(Resp No.6 in C.P.796/07)  
 Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
For BHP Minerals        : 
(Resp. No.8 in C.P. 796/07)  
(Resp. No.5 in Const.P.04/11)  
 Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Ali Ch. AOR Assisted by  
M/s Mustafa Aftab Sherpao and  
Hamid Ahmad, Advocates  
 
For Balochista n Development 
Authority         : 
(Resp. No.2 in C.P.796/07)  
 Mr. Hadi Shakeel Ahmad, ASC  
For State Bank of Pakistan      : 
(Resp. No.5 in Const.P.69/10)  
 Qazi Ahmed Naeem Qureshi, ASC  
 
For Dr. Samar Mubarakmand      : 
(Respondent No.6 in Constitution 
Petitions No.68/10 & 01/2011)  
 Nemo  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  4 
For M/s Shaheen Sehbai &  
Ahmad Norani        : 
(Resp. No.7 in Const.P.68/10)  
 Nemo  
For Sardar Atif Ali Sanjarani      :  
(Resp.No.7 in Const. P No.1/11)  
 Raja Muqsit Nawaz Khan, ASC  
For Benway Corporation      : 
(Resp. No.  7 in Const.P.04/11)  
 Mr. Shahid Kamal Khan, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
 
On Court notice        :  Nemo for TCC  
 
Dates of hearing:  13-16, 19 -23, 26 -29 November,  
3-7, 10-11, 17 -21 December, 2012     
…  
 
 
J U D G M E N T  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUH DRY, C.J . — Above 
matters were disposed of by this Court vide short order dated 
07.01.2013 in the terms stated therein fo r reasons to be recorded 
later. This judgment provides reasons of the aforesaid short order.  
2.  Reko Diq (earlier known as ‘Koh -e-Dalil’) is a small town in 
a desert area in District Chagai, Balochistan, which is 70 kilometres 
(km) north -west of Naukundi close to Pakistan’s border with Iran and 
Afghanistan. The area is located in Tethyan belt that stretches all the 
way from Turkey and I ran into Pakistan. Reko Diq, which means 
‘sandy peak’ in Balochi language, is also the name of an ancient 
volcano. It is famous because of its vast gold and copper reserves and 
is believed to be the world’s fifth largest goldmine. According to some 
sources , the deposits at Reko Diq include copper porphyry, with total 
mineral resources of 5.9 billion tons of ore with an average copper 
grade of 0.41% and gold grade of 0.22 grams per ton. The 
economically mineable portion of the deposits is calculated at 2.2 
billion tons, with an average copper grade of 0.53% and gold grade of 
0.30 grams per ton, with an annual production estimated at 200,000 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  5 
tons of copper and 250,000 ounces of gold contained in 600,000 tons 
of concentrate.  
3.   On 29.07.1993, Balochistan Dev elopment Authority (BDA), 
a statutory corporation established under  section 3(2) of the 
Balochistan Development Authority Act, 1974,  hereinafter referred to 
as BDA Act, 1974,  entered into a Joint Venture Agreement called “the 
Chagai Hills Exploration Joint  Venture Agreement ” (CHEJVA) with 
respondent BHP Minerals Intermediate Exploration Inc. (BHP), which is 
stated to be incorporated at the State of Delaware, USA and engaged 
in exploration of minerals, for exploring copper and gold in the Reko 
Diq area. The salient features of CHEJVA as per various Article of the 
agreement, i.e., description and relationship of parties, creation of 
joint venture, arbitration and certain other conditions of agreement are 
reproduced herein below: -  
“THIS AGREEMENT  is made the 29th day of July, 1993 between the 
GOVERNOR OF BALOCHISTAN, through the CHAIRMAN BALOCHISTAN 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY a statutory corporation of Balochistan 
Province (hereinafter called the “BDA”) of the first part.  
 
AND BHP MINERALS INTERNATIONAL EXPLORATIO N INC. a 
corporation of the State of Delaware, U.S.A. (hereinafter called the 
“BHPM ”) of the other  part.  
 
ARTICLE 2.   CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT  
 
2.1 This Agreement shall be conditional upon the Parties receiving 
from the Federal Government and/or the Provinci al Government 
(as the case may be) within six (6) months of the date of this 
Agreement or such other period as the parties may agree:   
 
(i) all consents and approvals necessary under Pakistani law;  
   And  
(ii) all assurances as to fiscal parameters for i nvestment in 
any future Mining Venture which either of the Parties may 
have needed for.   
 
2.2 The Parties shall co -operate in making application for any 
necessary consents, approvals and assurances required 
pursuant to Clause 2.1 and shall use all reasonab le endeavours 
to obtain the aforesaid.  
 
2.3 If pursuant to Clause 2.1 any necessary or required 
Governmental consent, approval or assurance is not obtained 
within six (6) months of the date of this Agreement, unless CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  6 
otherwise agreed by the Parties, this A greement shall absolutely 
cease and determine and neither Party shall have any rights or 
claims against the other as a result thereof.   
 
ARTICLE 3   CREATION OF JOINT VENTURE  
 
3.1 Subject both to Article 2 and to the satisfaction of Clause 5.2, 
the Parties hereby establish a contractual joint venture the 
objects of which are to explore for Mineral deposits in the 
Exploration Area and to conduct Feasibility Studies so as to 
evaluate the economic viability of the said Mineral deposits in 
the Exploration Area a nd all acts ancillary thereto which the 
Operating Committee shall resolve to be carried out.  
 
3.2 BHPM shall be entitled to earn a seventy -five percent (75%) 
Percentage Interest in the Joint Venture by conducting within six 
(6) years of the Commencement d ate at its own expense 
(subject to Clause 7.2) Stage One Activities and Stage Two 
Activities and, if resolved that a Feasibility Study should be 
commissioned pursuant to Clause 11.2, then on completion of 
the Feasibility Study within the time allowed by th e Parties for 
undertaking such.  
 
3.3 Subject to satisfactory completion by BHPM of the Exploration 
Programme in accordance with Clause 3.2 and to the provisions 
of Article 13, as at the Commencing Date, BHPM shall be 
deemed to have received a fully vested  legal and beneficial 
seventy -five percent (75%) Percentage Interest in the Joint 
Venture.  
 
3.4 Subject as hereinbefore stated, as at the Commencement Date, 
the Parties’ respective Percentage Interest shall be deemed to 
be as follows:  
 
BDA   25%  
BHPM    75%   
 
ARTICLE 4   RELATIONSHIP OF PARTIES  
 
4.1 The relationship of the Parties shall be one of unincorporated 
joint ventures and subject to this Article, nothing contained in 
this Agreement shall be construed or is intended to constitute 
any Party a partne r, agent or representative of any other Party 
or to create any trust, mining or commercial partnership or new 
or separately taxable legal entity for any purpose whatsoever 
nor, save to the extent provided in this Agreement, shall 
anything contained herein be construed as constituting any 
Party an agent, representative or trustee of any other Party, it 
being expressly understood that each Party is entering into this 
Agreement solely for the purpose of protecting and developing 
its Percentage Interest.   
 
4.3 Each Party shall hold a beneficial interest as tenant -in-common 
in the Joint Venture Property according to its Percentage 
Interest.  
 
4.4. The rights and obligations of the Parties under this Agreement 
shall be several and not joint nor joint and several.  
 
ARTICLE 5   EXPLORATION AREA & PROSPECTING  LICENCES  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  7 
 
5.2 Grant of Exploration Area   
 
The Parties shall seek from the Provincial Government the 
following rights:  
(a) for a period of three (3) years beyond the Commencement Date 
(a period hereinafter call ed the “Initial Period ”), the exclusive 
and unfettered right to undertake Stage One Activities within 
the Exploration Area and, subject only to Clause 5.3, to apply 
for and be granted therein Prospecting Licences; and  
 
5.3 Area Available for Prospecting L icences  
 
5.3.1 The Parties shall seek from the Provincial Government the right 
to apply for Prospecting Licences may, in aggregate, at any time 
for the duration of this Agreement cover up to fifty square 
kilometers (50 sq. km) therein. For this purpose, t he Joint 
Venture may secure its entitlement by means of up to ten (10) 
Prospecting Licences.  
  
5.3.2 Where at any time the Joint Venture is active in ten (10) 
Prospecting Licences having, in aggregate, an area of fif ty 
square kilometers (50 sq km ), it sha ll not be permitted to apply 
for additional Prospecting Licences within the Exploration Area 
unless it first relinquishes from one or more of its existing 
Prospecting Licences an area equivalent to the size of the 
proposed Prospecting Licences. The Joint V enture shall not be 
precluded from relinquishing only a portion of an existing 
Prospecting Licences.  
 
5.3.3 Where the Joint Venture relinquishes any Prospecting Licences 
(the “relinquished area ”) BDA shall be entitled to freely 
undertake such further explo ration activities as it desires in the 
relinquished are. Further, BDA shall be entitled to utilize such 
Mining Information as exists with respect to the relinquished 
area, provided that in dealing with third parties with respect to 
the relinquished area, B DA will maintain strict confidentiality in 
accordance with the requirements of Article 18 as regards all 
other areas within the Exploration Area in respect of which the 
Joint Venture is then active or still interested.  
 
5.4 Application for Prospecting Lic ences within the Exploration Area   
 
5.4.1 The Parties may in accordance with Clause 5.2 apply for 
Prospecting Licences to explore for Minerals within the 
Exploration Area at any time within six (6) years of the 
Commencement Date. During the Initial Period the Parties right 
to grant of the said ‘Prospecting Licences shall be automatic, 
subject only to Clause 5.8 but beyond the Initial Period the 
Parties right to grant of Prospecting Licences shall be subject to 
the normal administrative discretion of the Dir ectorate of 
Mineral Development.  
 
5.4.2 Each of the Prospecting Licences shall be issued to the Joint 
Venture for an initial term of two (2) years with the option to 
extend for up to three (3) years beyond the said initial term, 
provided that where the pa rties have commenced a Feasibility 
Study, the conclusion of which will not be possible until beyond 
efflux ion of the five (5) year term possible for the relevant 
Prospecting Licence. The Directorate of Mineral Development CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  8 
shall grant such further extension  of time as may be reasonably 
required to permit conclusion of the said Study. The Parties shall 
also seek (pursuant to Clause 2.2) to have the said possibility of 
a further extension of time recognized by the Provincial 
Government.   
 
5.5. Satisfaction of Conditions Attaching to Prospecting Licences  
 
The Joint Venture shall hold each Prospecting Licence subject to 
compliance with all conditions attaching thereto, including:  
(a) performance of all basic tenement maintenance works 
and expenditure requirements rel ating thereto; and  
(b) the timely provision of reports to the Directorate of 
Mineral Development concerning specified aspects of Joint 
Venture Activities undertaken within the relevant 
reporting period.   
 
5.6 Exclusive Right  
 
The Parties shall seek (pursuan t to Clause 2.2) additional 
assurances from Provincial Government, as are appropriate, 
namely, that the Parties shall for the duration of each 
Prospecting Licence be:  
(a) entitled to have, insofar as the exploration for Minerals is 
concerned, exclusive posses sion of the area the subject of 
each Prospecting Licence for all the purposes of 
conducting the Joint Venture Activities; and  
(b) take all reasonable steps to ensure that third parties do 
not impede the Joint Venture Activities or jeopardize the 
safety of any  person engaged by the Parties for the 
purposes thereof.  
 
5.7 Application Procedure for Prospecting Licences & Securing of 
Access Rights   
 
5.7.1 Where so directed by the Manager, BDA shall be responsible on 
behalf of the Joint Venture for making all appli cations for those 
Prospecting Licences referred to in such -clause 5.4.1, for Mining 
Lease s required pursuant to Clause 5.9, or pursuant to Clause 
6.5, for Prospecting Licences with respect to Other Minerals.  
 
5.9 Application for Mining Leases  
 
The Partie s shall pursuant to Clause 2.2 seek assurance from 
the Provincial Government, namely, that the Joint Venture shall 
have the right to apply for a Mining Lease at any time during the 
conduct of Stage Three or Stage Four Activities, if in the opinion 
of the M anager, a decision to undertake mining development is 
likely to be made pursuant to either of sub -clauses 8.2.10(d) or 
11.3.2. the said Mining Lease shall be renewed at the 
commencement of any Mining Venture for the during of 
proposed mining operation ther eunder.  
 
7.2  … …  
 
(a)  appropriate administrative support as required for the 
obtaining of all leases, licences, claims, permits or other 
authorities of any kind whatsoever being necessary for the 
conduct of Joint Venture Activities;  
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  9 
10.3 Duties of Man ager 
 
In addition to the Manager’s obligations specified elsewhere in 
this Agreement, the Manager shall undertake on behalf of the 
Parties the following actions:  
 
(a) in consultation with BDA, make timely preparation and 
submission of programmes and budgets a s provided by 
Clause 9.7;  
(b) in accordance with those general directions, instructions 
and parameters for action issued from time to time by the 
Operating Committee, the ability to enter into contracts 
for the purposes of the Joint Venture Activities on behal f 
of the Parties;  
(c) …. 
(d) …. 
 
(e) Make all Joint Venture Expenditure and commitments for 
the Joint Venture Activities on behalf of the Parties in 
accordance with programmes and budgets approved by 
the Committee and, subject to Clause 8, wherever 
possible avoid expe nditures of commitments for Joint 
Venture Activities in excess of any approved budget;  
(f) Furnish to the Committee reports on any matters of 
importance as soon as practicable after their occurrence 
and, in particular, advise the Committee of any factual 
information on the Prospecting Licences or other property 
held by the Venture (or by one Party on behalf of the 
other) which comes to his attention and which might 
reasonably be expected to result in material gains or 
losses to the Parties;  
 
10.6 Authority over  Joint Venture Property  
 
For the purpose of managing the Joint Venture Activities, the 
Manager shall, under the supervision and control of the 
Operating Committee, be deemed to have possession and 
control of all the Joint Venture Property and shall have th e 
authority to make decisions or enter into legally binding 
agreements concerning or relating thereto.  
 
10.7 Contractors & Consultants  
 
The Manager shall have the right to conduct any Joint Venture 
Activities through contractors and the right to employ or engage 
on sound competitive and commercial terms, consultants or 
advisers. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the 
Manager shall, subject to Clause 9.6, have the right to engage 
the services of specialist  in-house research organizations and 
related  Corporations .  
 
 
ARTICLE  DECISION AS TO MINE DEVELOPMENT  
 
11.4.1  Mining development shall proceed either if the Parties so 
decide pursuant to sub -clause 8.2.10(d), and/or if 
pursuant to sub -clause 11.3.2 one or more Participating 
Parties give notic e of an intention that development is to 
proceed.  
11.4.2  Where BDA is a Non -participating Party, then subject both CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  10 
to BHPM obtaining all routine Government approvals 
required and to compliance with Clause 11.6, BHPM shall 
be entitled to undertake sole risk  investment (or form a 
consortium to undertake such investment) in a mining 
development within any of the relevant Prospecting 
Licences.  
 
11.5 Should a mining development proceed pursuant to Clause 
11.4, then within one hundred and twenty (120) days of 
the Election Date the Participating Party and the Non -
participating Party shall in good faith negotiate and agree 
upon the fair value to be paid by the Participating Party to 
Non-participating Party’s Percentage Interest in all the 
Joint Venture Property per taining to proposed Mining Area 
(hereinafter called the “Non-participating Party’s Transfer 
Interest ”. 
 
ARTICLE 15   DISPUTE RESOLUTION  
 
15.1  Consultation  
 
The Parties shall meet periodically to discuss the conduct 
of the Joint Venture Activities and shal l make every effort 
to settle amicably and in good faith disputes of any kind 
whatsoever arising out of or related to the performance of 
this Agreement.  
 
15.4  Arbitration  
 
15.4.1  Any dispute in respect of which:  
(i) amicable settlement has not been reach ed within 
one hundred and twenty (120) days of written 
notice of the dispute;  
(ii) neither Party requests resolution of the dispute by 
the Expert within the thirty (30) day period set 
forth in Clause 15.2 or a decision by the Expert 
pursuant to Clause 15.2  has not become final and 
binding pursuant to sub -clause 15.2.5, or  
(iii) pursuant to sub -clause 15.2.2 the Parties fail to 
agree upon the appointment of an Expert,  
shall be submitted to the International Centre for the 
Settlement of Industrial Disputes (the “Centre”) 
established by the Convention for Settlement of industrial 
disputes between states and nationals of Other States in 
effect since October 14, 1966 (the “ICSID Convention ”) 
 
15.4.2  To the extent required by the ISCID Convention each of 
the Parties agr ees to submit to arbitration  under the 
ICSID Convention, but should sub -clause 15.4.8 operate, 
then the Parties agree to submit to an arbitration 
conducted pursuant to the ICC Rules.  
 
15.4.3  In all cases of arbitration pursuant to this Clause 15.4:  
(a) arbitration shall take place in London, United 
Kingdom, unless the Parties decide otherwise;  
(b) the language of the arbitration shall be English and 
all hearing materials, statements of claims or 
defence, and awards and the reasons supporting 
them shall be i n English; and  
(c) the costs of the arbitration shall be borne by the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  11 
losing Party.  
 
15.4.4  In rendering their decision, the arbitrators shall consider 
the intention of the Parties at the time of entering into 
this Agreement insofar as it may be ascertai ned from the 
Agreement, Pakistan i law, and as provided by Article 16, 
generally accepted standards and principles of 
international law applicable to the mining industry.  
 
15.4.5  Any arbitrator(s) appointed pursuant to this Clause 15.4 
shall have the full p ower to review and revise any 
decision, recommendation or opinion of the Expert related 
to the dispute. No Party shall be limited in the arbitral 
proceedings to evidence or arguments submitted to the 
Expert pursuant to Clause 15.2, and nothing shall preven t 
the Expert from being called as a witness to give evidence 
before the arbitrators.  
 
15.4.6  The award of the arbitral tribunal shall be final and 
binding upon the Parties, and any Party may seek to 
enforce or execute the award in any court of competent 
jurisdiction. The Parties hereby waive any defence or 
sovereign immunity they may have or claim to have in 
relation to any action brought to enforce or execute any 
arbitral award.  
 
15.4.7  For the purposes of arbitration pursuant to the ICSID 
Convention, th e Parties agree that the transactions to 
which this Agreement relates constitute an investment 
within the meaning of Article 25(1) of the ICSID 
Convention.  
 
15.4.8  In case, for whatever reason, the Centre should not 
accept jurisdiction or should reject th e arbitration 
request, the dispute shall be finally settled under the 
Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of the International 
Chamber of Commerce (the “ICC Rules ”) and the 
provisions of sub -clauses 15.4.3, 15.4.4, 15.4.5 and 
15.4.6 shall apply. Arbitrat ion shall be conducted by one 
sole arbitrator appointed by mutual agreement of the 
Parties. This arbitrator shall have extended experience in 
the mining field. In case the Parties cannot agree on the 
choice of the arbitrator, arbitration shall be of a 
nationality other than that of the Parties and shall have 
extended experience in the mining field. In case the 
Parties cannot agree on the choice of the arbitrator, 
arbitration shall be conducted by three arbitrators named 
in accordance with the ICC Rules.  
 
 ARTICLE 16   APPLICABLE LAW  
 
The Law applicable to this agreement is the law of Pakistan 
which the Parties acknowledge and agree includes the principles 
of international law.  
 
ARTICLE 17   CHANGE IN LEGISLATION  
 
If, after the signing of this Agreement, ther e is any change in 
existing laws, regulations rules or policies (a “Change ”) or any 
new laws, regulations rules or policies are introduced (a “New CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  12 
Provision ”) in Pakistan which is applicable to the Joint Venture 
or the activities of any Party in relation t o matters dealt with 
herein and the effect of the Change or New Provision is either to 
provide for preferential treatment to or, conversely, to have an  
adverse effect on the Joint Venture or upon BHPM, in particular, 
then:  
 
(a) if the Change or the New Provis ion is more favourable to 
the Joint Venture or one of the Parties than the relevant 
laws, acts rules or regulations in effect on the date this 
Agreement was signed (and the other Parties are not 
materially and adversely affected thereby), the Joint 
Venture  and the Party concerned shall promptly apply to 
receive the benefits of such Change or New Provision. All 
the Parties shall use their best efforts to cause such 
application to be approved by the relevant Government 
authorities; and  
 
(b) if, because of the Ch ange or New Provision, the economic 
benefits to any Party or the Joint Venture existing or to 
arise under this Agreement are materially and adversely 
affected, directly or indirectly, then this Agreement shall 
continue to be implemented in accordance with its 
original terms. If, for any reason, the provision in the 
preceding sentence cannot be implemented, upon notice 
by the affected party to the other Parties, the Parties shall 
consult promptly and make all such amendments to this 
Agreement and any other r elated documentation as are 
required to maintain or preserve the economic benefits of 
the affected party or the Joint Venture hereunder, 
provided, however, that the Parties other than the 
affected Party are not materially and adversely thereby. ”  
 
ARTICLE 19   LABOUR REQUIREMENTS OF THE VENUTE  
19.3 Where pursuant to Clause 19.3 it is not possible to give 
preference to Pakistani personnel or contractors, the Manager 
may introduce to the Joint Venture such expatriate personnel as 
in his judgment are required to carry out the conduct of the 
Joint Venture Activities efficiently and successfully and the 
Federal Government shall assist in making arrangements for the 
obtaining of all necessary permits for such personnel (including 
visas, work permits and such other  permits as may be 
required).    
 
4.  On 04.03.2000, Addendum No. 1  was executed between 
three parties, namely, Governor of Balochistan, for and on behalf of 
the Province of Balochistan, referred to as “GOB”, and the Balochistan 
Development Authority, a sta tutory corporation created by and 
existing under the BDA Act, 1974, and BHP Minerals , inter alia, with a 
view to clarify the role of the BDA under CHEJVA ; to have the GOB 
confirm and ratify all past actions, matters and things done by the BDA 
in connection  therewith; and to amend certain terms of CHEJVA . It CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  13 
provided definitions and interpretations  of the terms used in CHEJVA , 
clarified the role of BDA ’s appointment as GOB ’s agent , empowered to 
fully bind GOB and  to be deemed as GOB,  and made amendments in 
clause 1.1, gave definitions of the terms ‘affiliate’, ‘area of operational 
activity ’, ‘available cashflow ’, ‘commencement date ’, ‘equity portion ’, 
‘mine development ’, ‘mining operations ’, ‘minerals ’, ‘participating 
interest ’, ‘participating party ’, ‘partie s’, ‘percentage interest ’, 
‘prospecting licence ’, ‘transfer ’, reviewed article 2 to the effect that the 
conditions set out in sub -clauses 2.1(i) and (ii) of CHEJVA  had been 
satisfied or waived; substituted clause 3.2, amended articles 5, 7, 8, 
9, 11, 12, 1 4, 15 and 22.    
5.  On 28.04.2000 , BHP entered into an Option Agreement  
with Mincor Resources, a company incorporated in Western Australia 
with its place of business situated at Perth. Article 2.1 of this 
agreement sets out the intent of the parties to es tablish an exploration 
alliance for the aforesaid purpose under which Mincor will have the 
right to explore, develop, exploit and acquire mineral resources on 
exploration licences held by BHP and its partner GOB, or on 
exploration licences to be acquired b y either party in the region. Article 
2.2.1 provides that in consideration of the payment of $ 100 by Mincor 
to BHP, BHP grants to Mincor the sole and exclusive right and option 
during the Option Period to enter into Alliance with BHP. Under Article 
2.2.4,  BHP acknowledges that Mincor intends to create a specialized 
company to be known as the Tethyan Copper Company ( TCC) to 
finance and operate the Alliance Agreement. BHP agrees to exercising 
of Minor Option by either Mincor or TCC as its nominee, or Minor m ay 
assign its rights under the Agreement to TCC at any time. The terms 
of the Alliance Agreement are set out in Article 3 of the option CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  14 
agreement. The Mincor Option gave the sole and exclusive right to 
Mincor or its nominee to enter into Alliance with BHP to explore copper 
and gold in the region.  Article 3.3 deals with the acquisition and 
Clawback right. It states that the Clawback right applies to any 
significant mineralized occurrence discovered during the term of the 
Alliance Agreement by or on behalf of  Mincor anywhere in the region 
or survey area.  
6.  On 24.10.2000, TCC, as nominee of Mincor, exercised the 
Mincor Option and executed an Alliance Agreement  on 19.04.2002. On 
03.09.2002, after the BMR 2002 were enforced, TCCP applied for an 
Exploration Lic ence (EL) for copper, gold and associated minerals in an 
area of 973.75 sq. km. in Chagai District and was granted EL-5 vide 
letter dated 09.09.2002.  TCC also purchased the Clawback right of 
BHP for US$60 million.  TCC is owned by Atacama, which in turn is 
owned 50% by Antofagasta and 50% by Barrick Gold of Canada.  In 
2006, Antofagasta, a Chilean company registered in the United 
Kingdom through its subsidiary Atacama Copper Pvt. Ltd., made an 
offer to buy shares of TCC, which offer was accepted by the Board of 
TCC. As such, Antofagasta through Atacama acquired the total shares 
of TCC for AUD 220 million.   
7.  On 01.04.2006, Novation Agreement  was entered into 
between the Governor of Balochistan for and on behalf of the Province 
of Balochistan ( “GOB”) acting through its agent, the Balochistan 
Development Authority, ( “BDA”); and BHP (as aforesaid); and Tethyan 
Copper Company Limited (ABN 24 093 519 692) a company 
incorporated in Australia ( “TCC”). The recitals in this Agreement carry 
forward the one sided proce ss of indirectly binding GOB more and 
more through the medium of BDA, inasmuch these recitals reiterate CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  15 
that GOB through Chairman BDA and BHP are parties to CHEJVA and 
provide, inter alia, that the parties have agreed to enter into this 
Agreement to novate  CHEJVA so as to substitute TCC with BHP as a 
party to the said Agreement on the terms set out in the Novation 
Agreement. It further provides that TCC, in replacing BHP, shall enjoy 
all rights and benefits accorded to BHP under CHEJVA and the 
respective pe rcentage interests of GOB and TCC shall be 25% 75%. 
Thus, the 75% interest of BHP in the agreement as well as in EL -5 was 
transferred to TCC. For facility of reference, detail of companies 
somehow concerned in the entire transaction is given below: -  
 
Company  Place of 
Incorpo - 
ration  Nature of 
Interest  Interest 
received 
through  Owned by  
BHP Minerals  Delaware, 
USA Original 
party with 
75% share  CHEJVA 
29.07.1993  BHP Minerals 
Australia  
Mincor NL  Western 
Australia  Assignable 
Mincor 
Option  Option 
Agreement 
28.04.2000 
for $100  Shareholders 
from Iscor 
Ltd. of South 
Africa  
TCC  Western 
Australia  Nominee of 
Mincor for 
Option 
Agreement  Alliance 
Agreement 
03.04.2002 
for future 
investment of 
$2 to 3 million  Atacama  
Atacama  UK Purchased 
shareholding 
in TCC  Share 
Purchase for 
AUD220 
million  Antofagasta 
and Barrick 
Gold 
Barrick Gold  Canada  Shareholder 
of Atacama 
(50%)  Share 
Purchase 
Agreement  Itself Parent 
Company  
Antofagasta  UK 
(FTSE -
100) 
 Shareholder 
of Atacama 
(50%)  Original 
Holding 
Company of 
Atacama  Itself Pa rent 
Company  
TCCP Pakistan  Holder of  
EL-5  Amalgamated 
with TCC 
Branch Office  TCC 
 
8.  TCC started its operations in Pakistan through its Branch 
Office registered with the Board of Investment. It also incorporated a 
local subsidiary in Pakistan called T CCP. In December 2007, TCCP 
approached the Lahore High Court for amalgamation of TCC’s Branch CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  16 
Office in Pakistan and TCCP incorporated in Pakistan, which had been 
functioning simultaneously until that time. Subsequently, the 
Islamabad High Court, to whose file the case was transferred on its 
establishment, vide order dated 11.04.2008 approved the 
amalgamation of both the companies as per the scheme of 
arrangement. As such, licences and properties held by Pakistan Branch 
of TCC stood transferred to TCCP.  
9.  In the year 2006, Maulana Abdul Haq & others filed 
Constitution Petition No. 892 of 2006 in the High Court of Balochistan, 
challenging the legality of CHEJVA, validity of the act of relaxation of 
BMCR 1970 by GOB and the failure of BHP to complete the ex ploration 
at a reasonable pace. The petitioners in the said petition had sought 
the following reliefs: -   
“Under the circumstances, it is respectfully prayed that this 
honourable court may be pleased to declare that all 
transactions, starting from and bas ed upon the CHJV of 
1992-93, including each grant of a licence or other 
concession to any of the respondents and every transfer of 
interest in Reko Diq leading up to the latest acquisition 
(whether contemplated or completed) of respondent No.4, 
by responde nt No.5 and of respondent No.4’s interest in 
Reko Diq by Respondents No.5 and 7, are illegal, ultra 
vines, unconstitutional and mala fide and liable to be set 
aside. This honourable court may be pleased as a 
consequence, to order that interests in Reko Diq  be 
disposed of strictly in accordance with the applicable law, 
rules and policy and after inviting bids.  
 
Any other relief including orders for appropriate inquiries 
and investigations and recovery of fortunes amassed by 
the respondents in the subject dea ls may also be kindly 
granted. ”  
 
 
10.  The learned High Court vide judgment dated 26.06.2007 
dismissed the Constitution Petition and found CHEJVA, the relaxation 
of BMCR 1970 and other acts of GOB/BDA to be legal and valid. The 
said petitioners preferred Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 796 of CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  17 
2007 against the aforesaid judgment of the High Court. Subsequent 
thereto, other petitioners filed the titled Constitution Petitions directly 
before this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, question ing 
the validity of the grant of licence(s) to BHP/TCC on the ground of 
absence of fairness, non -transparency, violation of laws/rules, and also 
alleged possible risks to the vital interests of the Province of 
Balochistan and Pakistan in the grant of minin g lease to BHP/TCC. 
Various miscellaneous applications were also filed for being impleaded 
as parties. All the titled petitions and miscellaneous applications were 
heard together and disposed of by means of the short order referred to 
in the beginning of t his judgment.  
11.  Mr. Raza Kazim, learned counsel for the petitioners 
averred that extraordinary and undue favour was extended to BHP 
under CHIEJVA in the grant of mineral rights in the Reko Diq area, 
inasmuch as after the execution of CHEJVA on 29.07.19 93, BHP, 
knowing fully well that it was not eligible for the grant of mineral titles 
under the BMCR 1970 sought relaxations of the said rules from GOB 
vide letter dated 16.09.1993. And GOB in its turn, on 20.01.1994, 
issued an omnibus order for relaxation of rules, without specifying the 
specific rules to be relaxed in violation of section 5 of the Regulation of 
Mines and Oilfields and Mineral Development (Government Control) 
Act, 1948 [Act XXIV of 1948], which stipulates that relaxation would 
be specified for a particular mineral. The notification dated 
20.01.1994, which purports to grant relaxations in 13 matters, is in 
contravention of rule 98 of BMCR 1970. Learned counsel for the 
petitioners argued that various clauses of CHEJVA are ultra vires the 
BMCR 1970. He referred to Saleem -ur-Rehman v. Govt. of Punjab  
(1986 SCMR 747) wherein it was held that where a relaxation is CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  18 
sought in respect of a certain category, a restricted and not an 
extended meaning is given for understanding and applying a statutory 
provision. According to t he learned counsel , clauses 5.2, 5.4.1, 5.4.2, 
5.6, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 6.1, 6.4, 6.5, 14.1, 14.2 & 18.1 of CHEJVA  are 
violative of different provisions of BMCR 1970. He averred that the 
Reko Diq area was also illegally declared as Expo rt Promotion Zone 
just to benefit the respondents. He also referred to comments of the 
Federation as per letter dated 28.04.1992 wherein it was suggested 
that BDA should be given the right to enhance its percentage share up 
to at least 50% on the commercia l production of the mineral, but the 
same was not done.    
12.  Mr. Tariq Asad ASC, petitioner in C.P. 68/2010, appeared 
in person and argued that the provisions of the Act of 1948 had 
overriding effect over BMCR 1970 or any other rules made 
subsequently un der the said Act, inasmuch as, the Act is primary 
legislation authorizing the Government to make rules. Therefore, any 
provision in the rules inconsistent with the Act of 1948 would be ultra 
vires the rule -making powers granted under the said Act, hence void. 
He argued that the exemptions authorized to be made under the Act of 
1948 were restricted to minerals or a class of minerals only and could 
not be granted to contracts or parties. The power to grant exemptions 
in the Rules is, therefore, violative of t he class of exemptions 
authorized under the Act of 1948. He argued that the definitions of key 
terms as used in CHEJVA are inconsistent, and at variance, with the 
meaning given to them under the Rules. He also stated that 
Addendum No.1 was required to be v alidated within six months of its 
signing under Article 4 ibid, but that was not done. According to him, 
there was no provision in the Act of 1948 or the BMCR 1970 made CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  19 
thereunder for a Joint Venture to apply for, or be issued a prospecting 
licence, especi ally since CHEJVA was unincorporated, whereas, the 
rules required parties to be issued PLs to be incorporated in Pakistan.  
13.  Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC argued that the 
petitioners have significantly ignored and thereby rendered redundant 
rule 3 of BMCR 1970, which provides that except with the previous 
sanction of the Government, no license to prospect for any mineral 
and no lease of mines and minerals shall be granted otherwise than in 
accordance with these Rules. Thus, GOB’s executive authority  remains 
overriding in view of the above provision. Accordingly, GOB had in 
exercise of power under rule 98 of BMCR 1970 expressly relaxed the 
application of certain rules to CHEJVA. He alleged that the petitioners 
were seeking in bad faith for a relaxatio n granted after thorough 
review by GOB and an inter -ministerial committee, and acted upon 
almost one and a half decades earlier to be set aside on spurious 
grounds. The process of grant of relaxation was undertaken at a higher 
administrative level than the  Mines Committee as GOB itself was 
represented. Majority of Mines Committee members were present. 
Therefore, the relaxation was entirely valid. He averred that 
notwithstanding the relaxation there had been substantial compliance 
with BMCR 1970, and the pro visions of the Mineral Policy in particular 
were taken into consideration, which was admittedly approved and 
adopted by GOB. GOB in exercise of its powers under rule 98 of BMCR 
1970 granted to BHP relaxation of provisions of BMCR 1970 relating to 
grant of exploration area, area available for prospecting license, 
satisfaction of conditions attached to prospecting licenses, exclusive 
rights, rights of pre -emption, etc. vide notification dated 20.01.1994. 
Doctrine of ‘substantial compliance’ and doctrine of ‘i ndoor CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  20 
management’ as well as other equitable considerations apply to the 
transaction. The foreign investors had “de-risked ” the project at 
substantial expense. The Feasibility Study had been submitted. 
Promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation were al so relevant and 
applicable. The petitioners and now GOB want the mineral titles to be 
struck down posthumously. Therefore, declaring CHEJVA to be void ab 
initio would not be equitable besides being uncalled for and unjustified.  
14.  Mr. Pirzada further ar gued that CHEJVA was duly 
negotiated by GOB and was duly approved by the Chief Minister of 
Balochistan, Board of Directors of BDA, Law Department, Planning & 
Development Department and Finance Department, and was 
reaffirmed at the time of execution of the Addendum authorized by the 
then Governor, which execution/authorization was protected under 
clause (4) of Article 270AA of the Constitution. He argued that r ule 98 
is intra vires the Act of 1948. Also, it is relevant to take into 
consideration that rule 98  stood repealed over a decade ago on 
promulgation of BMR 2002. The petitioners were requesting the Court 
to examine the vires of a sub -statutory provision, which was repealed 
more than a decade ago. The relaxations granted had been acted upon 
already. The Prospecting Licenses granted had not only been 
relinquished by the area covered by them but are now understood to 
be the subject of other Exploration Licenses held by other parties. 
BMCR 1970 had not been framed under section 5 of the Act of 1948, 
but unde r section 2 thereof and were separate and distinct. If the 
power to make rules was conferred upon GOB, it obviously includes 
the power to relax the same, especially in view of rule 3 ibid. He 
pointed out that the rules relating to petroleum, minerals, etc. , had 
been framed under the Act of 1948 some of which incorporated CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  21 
relaxation provisions. In any event, even if BMCR 1970 were not 
relaxed, rules 3, 6 and 28 empowered GOB clearly to act otherwise. 
The words “except with previous sanction ” did not relate t o the period 
before BMCR 1970 as claimed by the petitioners in CP 68/10 and CP 
4/11. 11. He further argued that the parties to CHEJVA could not be 
required to comply with the provisions of the BMCR 1970, which were 
in force at the time, as GOB itself waive d and relaxed the same in 
favour of the foreign investors to facilitate them. They had never had 
the need to comply with the old rules, which should not apply to them 
after express relaxations were granted by GOB. Learned Sr. ASC 
argued that there was no p rovision in CHEJVA nor was there any other 
material on record (or even formally alleged) that the parties to 
CHEJVA intended to act in violation of BMCR 1970 or agreed to violate 
the applicable law. On the contrary, the entire object of making 
CHEJVA “conditional ” (Article 2) was to ensure that all exploration 
activities were undertaken in compliance and consistent with 
requirements of applicable law. This is evident from the fact that in the 
event of relevant relaxations (referred to as notified orders in CHEJVA) 
were not received within a specified timeframe (Clause 2.3), the entire 
arrangement and proposed Joint Venture would come to an end. He 
clarified and emphasized that CHEJVA as a whole actually only became 
effective upon receipt of the relevant rela xations on 20.01.1994, 
therefore, BHP could not be held culpable for agreeing with GOB to 
seek approvals under BMCR 1970, including those under rule 98 ibid. 
He averred that there was complete misconception that question of 
relaxation of BMCR 1970 was rais ed after the agreement was signed. 
The very text of the conditional agreement was potentially at variance 
(without prejudice) with some of  BMCR 1970 , and therefore, it was CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  22 
inherently incumbent to seek relaxation thereof subject -wise so as to 
harmonize the two instruments. In this context, the power of GOB to 
grant relaxation of the relevant rules was further buttressed and 
reinforced by rule 3 of BMCR 1970 read with its overarching executive 
authority under the Constitution, which independently gave an 
overriding power to it to override the entire set of rules. He argued 
that the foreign companies operating in Pakistan as parties or 
assignees under CHEJVA, such as BHP, Mincor, TCC, etc., were not 
required to be registered or incorporated in Pakistan for carr ying out 
their operations. The learned counsel emphasized that a s far as TCC is 
concerned, it is only bound by the Novation Agreement, which 
effectively extinguished all previous agreements under CHEJVA.   
15.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC appeared on behalf o f GOB and 
averred that the record shows that CHEJVA on the date of its 
execution defeated a large number of provisions of BMCR 1970  as well 
as section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872 and Article 5 of the 
Constitution. He stated that the legal team representin g TCC and BHP 
were unable to produce any precedent from any international or 
foreign jurisdiction where an agreement of this nature was entered 
into defeating and relaxing a host of provisions of the mining laws.  He 
argued that the authority relaxing the r ules did not apply its mind 
independently, inasmuch as neither details of any hardship were 
mentioned in the notification granting relaxations nor the same were 
stated to have been discussed in the meetings wherein the issue of 
relaxations was dilated upon . According to him, the process of grant of 
relaxation fails the test laid down by the Superior Courts regarding 
structuring of discretion in numerous judgments, including Abid 
Hassan  v. P.I.A.C.  (2005 SCMR 25), Government of N.W.F.P.  v. CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  23 
Mejee Flour and General Mills (Pvt.) Ltd.  (1997 SCMR 1804) and Aman 
Ullah Khan  v. Federal Government of Pakistan  (PLD 1990 SC 1092).  
16.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi further argued that CHEJVA was not 
processed under the Foreign Private Investment Act of 1976 and the 
Governor’s  alleged executive orders to execute Addendum, if 
presumed valid for the sake of argument, could not have been issued 
in exercise of the executive authority under Article 130 or Article 173 
of the Constitution as the field is already occupied by the Act of  1948 
and BMCR 1970. Thus, the Governor or the Chief Minister ha d no legal 
space to exercise any executive powers in respect of mining rights that 
were liable to be regulated under the said rules. He placed reliance on 
the case of New National Mining Corpo ration  v. Government of 
Baluchistan (PLD 1977 Quetta 15), wherein the Court observed that 
the Chief Minister is not empowered  under BMCR 1970  to interfere in 
the affairs to be conducted under the rules.  
17.  It may be noted that Article 16 of CHEJVA provi des that 
the law applicable to this agreement is the law of Pakistan which the 
parties acknowledge and agree includes the principles of international 
law. With a view to appreciating the above arguments of the learned 
counsel for the petitioners , and to se e how far CHEJVA complied with 
the primary legislation governing the grant of prospecting/  
exploration rights in the first instance,  we have examined record 
pertaining to the relaxations sought by BHP after execution of CHEJVA 
and various clauses of CHEJVA  in juxtaposition with different 
provisions of BMCR 1970 . In this behalf, it is noteworthy that Mr. 
Martin Harris, BHP’s lawyer from Australia, vide letter dated 
16.09.1993, written on the letter head of BHP, asked BDA to approach 
the Mines Committee for t he relaxation of certain rules. The contents CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  24 
of the said letter are reproduced herein below: -  
“16th September, 1993     BHP Minerals  
         
Mr. Ata Mohammad Jafar,  
Chairman,  
Balochistan Development Authority,  
Civil Secretariat,  
Quetta, Balochistan  
Pakistan 
 
Dear Sir,  
Chagai Hills Joint Venture  
 
We have now reviewed the Balochistan Mining Concession 
Rules, 1970 (the “Rules ”) and have prepared a summary 
of our comments for discussion with the appropriate 
Government authorities (copy attached marked ‘A’).  
 
We must apologise for the time it has taken us to complete 
this task, which has been compounded to some extent by 
Mr. Robert Reid having left this office to take up a position 
in BHP Minerals’ San Francisco Office. I have now assumed 
responsibility for M r. Reid’s work on this project.  
 
In reviewing the Rules we have sought to identify the 
consents, approvals and assurances which we must seek 
from the Government to progress the Joint Venture as 
referred to in Article 2 of the Joint Venture Agreement (the 
“Agreement ”). We understand that this involves seeking 
Gazetted Notified Orders securing rights needed to 
implement the Agreement to the extent such rights are not 
available under or are inconsistent with the Rules.  
 
Rule 98 allows the Government to relax the Rules on terms 
and conditions. Primary responsibility for considering cases 
involving relaxation of the Rules appears to lie with the 
Mines Committee (Rule 2(f)). Subject to any current 
delegation of the Mines Committee’s powers, we would 
suggest appli cation be made to the Committee for Notified 
Orders as described in the attachment to this letter.  
  
We recommend that, for the time being, we limit the 
Notified Orders we are seeking to those needed to facilitate 
Stage One exploration activities, and the refore the 
attached comments do not address our concerns with the 
Rules for the mining phase of a project.  
 
We envisage that once Notified Orders relaxing the Rules 
have been made, these would be incorporated into a deed 
guaranteeing, inter alia, that the  Notified Orders will not be 
revoked or overridden. The parties to the deed would be 
BHP Minerals, the Balochistan Development Authority, the 
Balochistan Government and the Central Government. The 
Central Government would have to be a party as, although CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  25 
the Rules are promulgated by the Balochistan Government, 
they are created pursuant to the Regulation of Mines 
Oilfields and Mineral Development (Federal Control) Act, 
1948 under which the Central Government retains 
overriding powers.  
 
We would suggest that BHP Minerals’ representatives visit 
Pakistan after forthcoming Federal and Provincial elections 
to discuss the above issues with yourself and Government 
representatives. In the interim we would appreciate any 
comments you may have on the approach we have 
proposed.  
 
Regarding the Agreement, we have discovered a number 
of oversights in the version which was executed and will be 
in touch shortly to propose appropriate corrections.  
 
Yours faithfully  
  Sd/-  
Martin Harris  
Senior Lawyer ”  
 
The contents of attach ment ‘A’ are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
1. Grant of Exploration Area  
 
The minutes of the meeting held at BDA’s officers in 
Quetta on 28th April, 1993 indicate that BDA has 
approached the Directorate of Mineral Development in 
relation to this matter. We shoul d now pursue the 
Directorate’s written confirmation of the Joint Venture’s 
rights as per Clause 3.2 of the Agreement. One Important 
aspect of these rights is that the Government agrees not 
to grant any third parties any PLs or Mining Lease ( “MLs”) 
for Mine rals over any part of the exclusive Exploration 
Area, except any areas confirmed by the Government as 
not available to the Joint Venture (see paragraph 2 below).  
Notified Orders addressing Rules 3, 17, 62(a), 63 and 98 
will be necessary to secure these ri ghts. 
 
2. Area Available for Prospecting Licences  
 
Under Clauses 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 the Parties will seek rights 
to apply for up to ten PLs covering an area of up to fifty 
square kilometers in the aggregate including right to 
subsequently relinquish and reapp ly for PLs over other 
areas. Notified Orders will be need which address Rules 10, 
11,17, 18, 28, 62(a), 63 and Annexure IV of the rules, as 
amended by letter of 27 July, 1972 No. S.O.(IND) -5-5/71 
(restricting the number of prospecting licences held by one 
party to two).  
 
Furthermore, we must ask the Government to specify any 
areas within the Exploration Area which are not available 
for PLs or MLs, in accordance with Clause 5.8 and seek CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  26 
appropriate Notified Orders relaxing rules 10, 17 and 82 in 
respect of the remainder of the Exploration Area.  
 
3. Application Prospecting Licences  
 
Rules requiring applicants for a PL to be incorporated in 
Pakistan need to be relaxed to the extent that BHP 
Minerals, as one of the joint applicants, is a foreign 
corporation. W e should reserve our position for the time 
being insofar as the Rules requires applicants for a ML to 
be incorporated in Pakistan, as we anticipate forming a 
locally registered Jointly owned entity for the purpose of 
mining operations. It follows that Rule s empowering the 
licensing authority to require an applicant to secure 
unquantified local investment should be waived in light of 
BDA’s Joint Venture interest.  
 
Rules 6 and 15 referring to the foreign investment 
regulations of the country in which the appl icant is 
incorporated obviously present a problem to us. We 
believe that such Rules are inappropriate if foreign 
investment is to be encouraged given the multi -nationality 
of many international mining companies and the likely 
revision of Pakistan’s own min ing investment laws.  
Other Rules relevant to this issue are; Rule 3, 6(if the word 
“person ” includes companies); Rule 7 (under Notification of 
24th August, 1981) to the extent the First Schedule 
application form (under Notification of 5th August, 1981) 
requires particulars of the company to be incorporated in 
Pakistan by the applicant; and Rules 8(5), 9(3), 14, 15, 
70(a) and 85.  
 
Clauses 5.3.2, 5.4.1 and 5.4.2 of the Agreement anticipate 
the Parties making applications, relinquishments and 
reapplications f or PLs during the Initials Period of six years 
from the Commencement Date of the Agreement, each PL 
to be for a two year period with the option to extend to 
five years, or longer, as necessary to complete a Feasibility 
Study. Beyond the Initial Period the Parties’ right to PLs 
would be subject to the normal administrative discretion of 
the licensing authority.  
 
To accommodate these provisions, we will need Notified 
Orders addressing Rules 3,20,21,21,30,31,35 and 68 (to 
the extent a proposed PL covers a for est reserve), 62(a) 
and 63.  
 
4. Satisfaction of Conditions Attaching to Prospecting 
 Licences . 
 
Under Clause 5.5 the Joint Venture must comply with 
conditions attaching to PLs, including expenditure and 
reporting requirements.  
 
Rule 51 requires the holder  of a PL to submit monthly CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  27 
“production returns ” to the licensing authority. We would 
suggest that this is unnecessarily frequent, and that, as 
with other reports required by the Rules, quarterly returns 
would suffice.  
 
Rule 32 requires a licensee to submi t a prospecting 
scheme for approval by the licensing authority, the 
authority may reject a proposed scheme and require it to 
be revised. The licensee must adhere to an approved 
scheme, and abide by the instructions of the authority 
from time to time in res pect of the prospecting work.  
 
These provisions reflect an outmoded philosophy of 
government control of exploration and mining activities. To 
be competitive with other mineral investment regimes, the 
Rules will need to allow the private investor to determ ine 
and manage its own exploration and development 
programme. The interests of the government can be 
adequately protected by imposing minimum exploration 
expenditure commitments to ensure that the licensee’s 
work level justifies the grant of exclusive righ ts. The 
licensee should periodically report on work performed so 
that the authority can verify that the requisite expenditure 
is being incurred on valid exploration work. However, the 
licensee should be free to determine the best and most 
cost efficient wa y to spend its exploration funds. Any 
prospecting scheme provided to the licensing authority 
should be for information only, not for the authority’s 
approval, and the licensee should be free to depart from or 
modify its scheme as and when its sees fit. Rul es 70(f) and 
(h), 86 and 95 are also relevant to this matter to the 
extent they infer government control of the licensee’s 
activities.  
 
Finally, we would like to discuss some of the technical 
requirements under the rules regarding specifications for 
plans  and signs under Rule 77 & Seventh Schedule so that 
current techniques.  
 
5. Exclusive Rights  
 
The Parties will need to seek Notified Orders to obtain the 
Government’s assurance that it will take reasonable steps 
to protect the Joint Venture’s activities f rom interferences, 
as noted in Clause 5.6. One measure would be to refrain 
from granting prospecting rights to others over a PL area, 
and implicit in this is a Notified order waiving Rule 69.  
 
6. Other Minerals  
 
Under Clause 6.1 the Joint Venture shall seek a  right of 
first refusal over “Other Minerals ” it discovers in the 
Exploration Area. Rule 53 gives a PL holder a preferential 
right in such circumstances, but subject to the broad 
discretion of the licensing authority. We would seek a CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  28 
Notified Order whereby  the Authority’s discretion to deny 
such right is limited to cases where the Government does 
not elect to retain to itself rights over the Other Minerals 
discovered.  
 
7. Government’s Rights Pre -emption Acquisition, 
Merger and taking Control in National Em ergency.  
 
The Parties would need to ensure that the Government 
waived its rights under Rules 56, 57 and 70(g) before the 
Joint Venture commences work. Whilst it may be 
practically impossible for a mining company to prevent a 
forced pre -emption, acquisition  or merger by or at the 
direction of the government of a foreign country, these 
actions should not result from the exercise of an express 
authority. We would view any such action as an 
expropriation for which full compensation would be 
payable, which if no t agreed, would be determined by an 
international arbitral body.  
 
We believe that compensation should also be paid where, 
under Rule 83, the Government takes control of a mine 
during a national emergency.  
 
8. Assignment  
 
Rule 12 would need to be relaxed  to permit BHP Minerals 
to make an assignment of the kind anticipated in Clause 
14.2 of the Agreement, and to permit any necessary 
assignment of rights should a sole “Participating Party ” 
elect to develop a mine pursuant to Clause 11.  
 
9. Application for Mining Lease  
 
It is essential that the Joint Venture, or a sole 
“Participating Party ” under Clause 11, is entitled to convert 
the relevant PL into a ML, if it wishes to develop a mine. 
Currently, the right of a holder of a PL to receive a ML is 
described i n Rule 23 as a “preferential right ” only. The 
subjective discretion of the licensing authority here and 
under Rules 31(2), 38, 62 and 63 must be waived in 
favour of an absolute right of the Joint Venture, or a sole 
“Participating Parry ”, to a ML, provided they comply with 
routine administrative requirement. Clause 11.8.2 of the 
Agreement anticipates this right of transition.  
 
International mining companies will view this aspect of a 
country’s mining regulations as one of the most important. 
The necessary r ight can be secured by appropriate Notified 
Orders.  
 
The requirement under Rue 9(5) for an applicant for a ML 
to provide information about applications for licences and 
leases lodged in other countries would appear 
inappropriate in the case of a large for eign company such CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  29 
as BHP Minerals, unless it is limited to a relatively small 
number of projects. The unqualified discretion of the 
licensing authority to void a ML application for failure to 
furnish evidence “to the satisfaction of the licensing 
authority ” must be removed in favour of defined 
requirements.  
 
The possibility, under Rule 19, that the right of an 
applicant to receive a ML may lapse due to delay in 
executing a lease deed should also be removed.  
 
10. Royalty  
 
The Parties must seek the Governme nt’s confirmation of 
the royalty rate of 2% of the value of the extracted 
minerals, equivalent to the “net smelter return ” as agreed 
at our meeting on 28 April, 1993. Once settled, the rate 
would need to be fixed for the life of any mine by a 
Notified Orde r addressing Rule 65.  
 
11. Penalties, Compensation and Cancellation  
 
The Rule contains a number of approaches to failure of a 
holder of a PL to comply with its obligations under the 
Rules. These include for example: cancellation with or 
without notice (Ru les 32(h), 51, 66, 70(h)); forfeiture of 
the right of renewal (Rule 32(d)): Penalty and cancellation 
(Rules 32(c), 55, 65, 81, 92, 96, 97). For unscientific 
working under a ML, the licensing authority may assess 
damage and an unspecified penalty (Rule 86).  In some 
instances an opportunity is given to remedy a breach (Rule 
95), and in others forfeiture of the security deposit is 
specifically referred to (Rule 70(c)).  
 
Similarly, disputes with the licensing authority are 
approached in a number of ways. Decisi ons of the licensing 
authority may be appealed to the Government (Rule 71) 
but only a limited range of disputes may be taken to 
arbitration under the Arbitration Act (Rule 72). There 
appears to be an inconsistent approach in compensation 
for damage to land s resulting from activities pursuant to a 
PL or ML. Any such compensation is to be assessed by the 
appropriate “Lawful authority ” under the “ the law in force 
on the subject applying to the lands. ” However, only in the 
case of an ML may any dispute be refe rred to the licensing 
authority for arbitration (Rule 34 and 46).  
 
There are also a number of criteria for assessing 
compensation, including: “reasonable compensation ”, 
“reasonable satisfaction and compensation ”, “fair market 
value ”, and “fair and proper compensation ”, (Rules 34, 46, 
56 ad 57 and Clause 14 of Third Schedule).  
 
We suggest that the Rules would be improved if they had a 
simpler and more consistent approach to breaches, CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  30 
penalties and cancellation, and to compensation 
assessments. Where approp riate, the Rules should allow 
an opportunity for remedial action, and for an appeal to an 
independent forum.  
 
We note that Pakistan has acceded to the ISCID 
Convention which is ideally suited to resource sector 
investment disputes.  
  
12. Employment and Tr aining  
 
We are confident we can meet any reasonable 
requirements for employment, training and qualifications. 
We would need to discuss Rule 70(h), 74 and 76 with the 
licensing authority to determine and settle what these 
requirement would be for our explor ation program.  
 
13. Mining Lease  
 
There are many other issues raised by the Rules which are 
relevant to the mining phase of a project. Some of the 
major problems include; exploitations scheme approvals, 
controls on mining operations, production targets, 
beneficiation and marketing controls (Rules 40, 47, 70(f), 
70(h), 86, 94, 95).  
 
It would perhaps be premature to address all of these 
issues now in the same details as those issues raised 
above. We therefore, suggest that discussion relating to 
ML matters await the outcome of Stage On e exploration.  
 
18.  In pursuance of BHP’s letter, BDA vide letter dated 
23.10.1993, requested GOB to relax certain rules mentioned in the 
letter of BHP as under: -  
“No.BDA/PLs/Mines/689 -90 
BALOCHISTAN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
(Mines Division)  
 
    Dated the 23rd October, 1993  
To 
 The Secretary,  
Government of Balochistan,  
Industries, Commerce and Mineral Resources  
  Department, Quetta.  
 
Subject: - RELAXATION OF BALOCHISTAN MINING 
CONCESSION RULES FOR THE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF BDA -BHP JOINT 
VENTURE AGREEMENT FOR THE EXPLORATION 
OF GOLD AND ASSOCIATED MINERALS IN THE 
CHAGAI HILLS AREA, BALOCHISTAN.  
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  31 
Balochistan Development Authority has concluded an 
agreement on 29th July, 1993 with BHP Minerals of 
Australia for the discovery and develo pment of Gold 
resources in the Chagai Hills area of Balochistan.  
Since May, 1990, BDA, BHP Minerals, legal and 
financial experts were engaged to finalize the agreement. 
After a series of negotiations and the amendments of the 
terms and conditions, a final  text of agreement was 
evolved on 27th of June, 1993. During this period, the 
Planning and Development Department, the Chief 
Secretary and the Chief Minister of Balochistan was 
apprised about the latest position from time to time.  
The agreement has been ap proved by the 
Honourable Chief Minister Balochistan (copy of the 
approval enclosed at Flag F/A) as well as by BDA Board of 
Directors (copy enclosed at Flag F/B) and vetted by the 
Law Department Government of Balochistan (copy 
enclosed at Flag F/C).  
Furthe rmore the Planning and Development 
Department and Finance Departments were requested for 
the required vetting, if any, of the draft agreement. A copy 
of the agreement was also forwarded to Industries 
Department for the information, study and comments vide 
our letter to BDA/HQs/MM/158/458 -64, dated 29.6.1993.  
Since the agreement is conditional and in accordance 
with the terms and conditions contained in Article 2 of the 
agreement, BDA has to get the consents and approvals 
from the provincial and/or Federal G overnment within six 
months of the signing of the agreement otherwise the 
agreement shall absolutely cease.  
Now in this connection, we have received a letter 
from BHP Minerals (copy enclosed as F/D) stating that they 
have reviewed the Balochistan Mining C oncession Rules 
1970. In reviewing these Rules, BHP Minerals has sought 
to identify the consents, approvals and assurances which 
they must seek from the government to progress the Joint 
Venture. BHP team has mentioned that this involves 
seeking gazetted no tified orders. Furthermore once 
notified orders relaxing these rules have been made, there 
would be incorporated into a deed guaranteeing that the 
notified orders will not be revoked or overridden.  
It is also worth mentioning that Rule 98 of 
Balochistan M ining Concession Rules 1900 allows the 
Government to relax the Rules on terms and conditions.  
It is accordingly requested that the required Mining 
Concession Rules contained in BHP letter (F/D) may please 
be relaxed for this particular case/project to avo id any 
complications at later stage.  
 
          Sd/ - 
      CHAIRMAN  
   BALOCHISTAN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ” 
 
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  32 
19.  Pursuant to the above, the matter was considered by the 
PDWP in its meeting held on 30.10.1993 wherein following decisions 
were taken: -  
(1) The Industries Department will grant relaxation to 
the proposed clauses of Balochistan Mining 
Concessions Rules, 1970.  
 
(2) The case would be referred to an impartial 
arbitration as per clause 15.4 of the agreement.  
 
(3) The Industries Department will issue the modi fied 
orders pertaining to the relevant clauses within 15 
days.  
 
20.  Thereafter, the Industries, Commerce & Mineral Resources 
Department of GOB, vide notification dated 30.01.1994, granted as 
many as thirteen relaxations to BHP purportedly with a view to 
enabling it to carry out the exploration work without any hindrance. 
The said notification reads as under: -  
“GOVERNMET OF BALOCHISTAN  
INDUSTRIES COMMERCE AND MINERAL  
RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT.  
 
DATED QUETTA THE 20th JAN:1994  
NOTIFICATION  
No:S.O (MR)5 -9/94.25 4.60. In exercise of the powers 
confirmed by Rule 98 of Mining Concession Rules 1970, the 
Government of Balochistan is pleased to grant the 
following relaxation as a special case in favour of BHP 
Company to carry out its exploration work without any 
compli cation: - 
1. Grant of Exploration Areas  
1. Area available for prospecting Licences.  
2. Application for prospecting Licence.  
3. Satisfaction of conditions attaching to 
prospecting Licences.  
4. Exclusive right.  
5. Other Minerals.  
6. Government rights pre -emption acquisitio n 
merger, and taking control in National 
emergency.  
7. Assignment.  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  33 
8. Application for Mining Licence.  
9. Royalty.  
10. Penalties compensation and cancellation.  
11. Employment and training.  
12. Mining Lease.  
Sd/- 
By Order of Governor of  
Balochistan ”  
 
21.  The aforesaid letter of BHP’s counsel Martin Harris , on the 
one hand,  makes  it clear that not only was BHP well aware of the 
restrictions imposed by statute , but they were also attempting to bind 
future governments to ratify the departures being made from the law. 
On the ot her hand, the writing of letter on behalf of BHP nullifies the 
assertion of learned counsel for TCC that the relaxations were granted 
by GOB at their own without asking of the respondents. These 
relaxations  being  in the nature of exemptions being granted f rom the 
application of the Rules to BHP and the entire CHEJVA project  without 
a reference having been made to the provision of rule 3 of BMCR 
1970  rendered nugatory BMCR 1970 in all substantial aspects . In this 
behalf, it is noteworthy that s ection 5 of th e Act XXIV of 1948 
empowers the  Government to grant any exemptions of rules made 
under the Act . Any exemptions made under the BMCR 1970 must, 
therefore, conform to the provision the Act of 1948, which is the 
primary legislation on the subject . Section 5 of  the Act of 1948 
provides that t he appropriate  Government may, by notified order, 
declare that any mineral or mineral oil or any class or description 
thereof shall be exempt from all or any of the provisions of the rules 
made under this Act, or that such p rovisions shall apply thereto with 
such modification or subject to such conditions as  may be specified in 
the order. Thus, the power to exempt a mineral or mineral oil or any 
class or description of minerals from all or any of the rules with or CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  34 
without any  modification lies only with the appropriate Government , 
i.e., Federal Government in relation to mines of nuclear substances, 
oilfields and gas fields and development of such substances, mineral 
oil and gas, and Provincial Government in relation to other m ines and 
mineral development . In the case in hand, the power to grant 
exemptions in relation to a mineral or any class or description of 
minerals lay with the Government of Balochistan . Section 2 of the Act 
of 1948 provides that the appropriate Government shall have the 
power to make rules to provide for all or any of the matters stated 
therein. BMCR 1970  were framed in exercise of the power conferred 
by section 2 of the Act of 1948.  Rule 3 of the said rules provides that 
except with the previous sanction o f the Government, no licence to 
prospect for any mineral and no lease of mines and minerals shall be 
granted otherwise than in accordance with these rules. Admittedly, no 
such previous sanction as envisaged by rule 3 was sought by BDA -
BHP. Instead, BDA-BHP entered into a conditional agreement 
(CHEJVA ) subject to their seeking necessary consents, approvals and 
assurances in terms of article 2 thereof. Thereafter, relying on the said 
provision in CHEJVA , case for relaxation of above mentioned provisions 
of BMCR 1970  was processed purportedly in terms of r ule 98 of BMCR 
1970. Rules 98 provides that t he Government shall have the power to 
relax any or all the provisions of these Rules in cases of individual 
hardship and under special circumstances to be recorded in writing 
and on terms an d conditions to be fixed by it. A plain reading of the 
provision rule 98 makes it clear that it provides for relaxation of any of 
the provisions of BMCR 1970 in cases of individual hardship and under 
special circumstances to be re corded in writing, and that too, on 
certain terms and conditions to be fixed while granting the relaxation.  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  35 
Before proceeding further, it is necessary to understand the term 
‘hardship’ as defined and interpreted in different sources as under: -  
“The sever ity with which a proposed construction of the 
law would bear upon a particular case, founding, 
sometimes, an argument against such construction, which 
is otherwise termed the “argument ab inconvenient. ” 
[Black’s law dictionary]   
 
Hardship   
 
1.  Extreme pr ivation; suffering.  
2.  A cause of privation or suffering.  
[The American Heritage Dictionary of the English 
Language, Fourth Edition]  
 
1.  Conditions of life difficult to endure.  
2.  Something that causes suffering or privation.  
[Collins English Dictionary – Complete and Unabridged ] 
 
The word ‘hardship’ is capable of being descriptive of 
adverse repercussions of every kind. It may be physical … 
… or mental … … [ “Words and Phrases Legally Defined ” 
edited by John B. Saunders, 2nd Edition (Vol. II, p. 347)].  
 
The term “hardship ” includes any matter of appreciable 
detriment, whether financial, personal or otherwise. 
[Stroud’s Judicial Dictionary (4th Edition, p. 1210) and 
Lexicon by Venkataramaiya (2nd Edition, p. 994)].  
 
22.  The term “hardship ” has also received judicial 
interpretation in different jurisdictions. In Government of Andhra 
Pradesh v. Sri D. Janardhana Rao  [(1976) 4 SCC 276], the Indian 
Supreme Court while c onsidering the scope of the power of 
Government to relax the service rules under Rule 47 of General Rules 
held as under: -  
“It is not difficult to see that the occasion for acting under 
Rule 47 may well arise after the attention of the Govt. is 
drawn to a  case where there has been a failure of justice. 
In such cases justice can be done only by exercising the 
power under Rule 47 with retrospective effect, otherwise 
the object and purpose of the rule will be largely 
frustrated. ”  
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  36 
Similarly, in J.C. Yadav v.  State of Haryana  (1990 AIR SC 857), the 
issue of relaxation of rules was dilated upon in the following terms: -  
“...relaxation of Rules to meet a particular event or 
situation, if the operation of the Rules causes hardship. 
The relaxation of the Rules ma y be to the extent the State 
Government may consider necessary for dealing with a 
particular situation in a just and equitable manner. The 
scope of Rule is wide enough to confer power on the State 
Government to relax the requirement of Rules in respect of 
an individual or class of individuals to the extent it may 
consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and 
equitable manner. The power of relaxation is generally 
contained in the Rules with a view to mitigate undue 
hardship or to meet a particul ar situation. Many a times 
strict application of service rules create a situation where a 
particular individual or a set of individuals may suffer 
undue hardship... In such a situation the Government has 
power to relax requirement of Rules. The State 
Gover nment may in exercise of powers issue a general 
order relaxing any particular Rule...  
 
... In B.S. Bansal v. State of Punjab and Ors., [1978] 2 
SLR 553  a Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court 
held that if the power of relaxation could be exercised in 
order to meet a general situation, then the whole purpose 
of the Rule would be frustrated and the Government would 
be armed with an arbitrary power which could cause great 
hardship to some officers. We have already referred to the 
relevant facts which show  that in the instant case, power 
of relaxation was exercised by the State Government to 
meet a particular situation, it did not result into any 
injustice or cause hardship to any one. If power of 479 
relaxation is exercised on extraneous consideration for 
oblique purposes or mala fide, the court has power to 
strike down the same but exercise of power of relaxation 
to meet a particular situation cannot be held to be 
arbitrary or illegal. In B.S. Jain v. State of Haryana, [1981] 
1 SLR 233  the High Court set a side the promotions made 
in pursuance of the relaxation granted under Rule 22 
placing reliance on the decision of the Division Bench in 
B.S. Bansal's case. On appeal, this Court in Ashok Gulati v. 
B.S. Jain, AIR 1987 SC 424  observed that the findings of 
the High Court that the State Government could not have 
relaxed the condition of passing the departmental 
professional examination by taking recourse to Rule 22 
which conferred power of relaxation on the State 
Government could hardly be sustained ...  
... Pow er to grant relaxation may be exercised in case of 
an individual to remove hardship being caused to him or to 
a number of individuals who all may be similarly placed. 
This power may also be exercised to meet a particular 
situation where on account of the o peration of the Rules 
hardship is being caused... ”   CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  37 
 
In M. Venkateshwarlu v. Government of A.P.  [(1996) 5 SCC 167],  the 
Indian Supreme Court held as under: -  
“8. Thus, it could be seen that the Governor is 
empowered to relax the rigour of the General Rul es in such 
manner as may appear to him to be just and equitable in 
the interest of justice and equity. … … ”  
 
In Sandeep Kumar Sharma vs. State of Punjab  [(1997) 10 SCC 298] it 
has been held as under: -  
“The power of relaxation even if generally included in the 
service rules could either be for the purpose of mitigating 
hardships or to meet special and deserving situation. Such 
rule must be construed liberally, according to the learned 
Judges. Of course arbitrary exercise of such poor must be 
guarded again st. But a narrow construction is likely to 
deny benefit to the really deserving case. We too are of 
the view that the rule of relaxation must get a pragmatic 
construction so as to achieve effective implementation of a 
good policy of the Government. ” 
 
In Ashok Kumar Uppal v. State of J&K  [(1998) 4 SCC 179], it has been 
held that: -  
“30. … … the Government can exercise the power to relax 
the Rules in all those cases in which hardship is caused in 
the implementation of those Rules to meet a particular 
situati on or where in justice has been cause d to either 
individual employee or a class of employees. Of course, 
this power cannot be exercised capriciously or arbitrarily to 
give undue advantage or favour to an individual 
employee. ”  
  
Thus, while invoking the pro vision of relaxation, the party seeking it is 
required to make out a case of hardship and also show the special 
circumstances warranting exercise of such power, and in turn, the 
Authority granting such relaxation is required to record reasons for the 
exerc ise of such power. This is a common requirement found under the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  38 
statutes that provide for relaxation of the rules in special cases of 
hardship. See Chief Secretary Punjab v. Abdul Raoof Dasti  (2006 
SCMR 1876).  
23.  In the instant case, as noted above, BDA  vide its letter 
dated 23.10.1993 presented the case for exemptions stating therein, 
inter alia , that since the agreement was conditional and as per terms 
and conditions contained in article 2 of the agreement, BDA was to get 
the consents and approvals fro m the Provincial and/or Federal 
Government within six months of the signing of the agreement 
otherwise the agreement shall absolutely cease; BHP after reviewing 
the Rules, was seeking to identify the consents, approvals and 
assurances from the Government t o progress the Joint Venture by 
means of gazetted notified orders to be incorporated into a deed 
guaranteeing that the notified orders would not be revoked or 
overridden; rule 98 of BMCR, 1970 empower the Government to relax 
the rules on terms and conditio ns; and that the required rules may be 
relaxed for this particular case/project to avoid any complications at 
any later stage. A bare perusal of the contents of BDA’s letter shows 
that neither BHP nor BDA in seeking relaxation of the rules fulfilled the 
requirements stated in rule 98, namely, showing hardship and special 
circumstances , but only contented by stating that “the required rules 
may be relaxed for this project to avoid any complications .” As 
mentioned hereinabove, BDA’s request was first consider ed by the 
PDWP’s meeting wherein it was decided, inter alia, that the Industries 
Department would grant the relaxations and thereafter notification 
dated 20.01.1994 granting the said relaxations was issued, which 
recited that GOB, in exercise of the powers  conferred by rule 98, was 
pleased to grant those relaxations as a special case, again making no CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  39 
mention of hardship of whatever nature, or the existence of any 
special circumstance making out a case for invoking the provision of 
said rule. The competent a uthority also failed to determine the terms 
and conditions to be fixed in granting the relaxations sought for. In 
this view of the matter, in absence of the requirements of rule 98 
being fulfilled in the instant case, all relaxations were granted in 
excess  of authority and were entirely beyond the scope of the 
provisions of the law, and therefore ultra vires the powers granted 
under rule 98 of BMCR 1970  read with section 5 of the Act of 1948, 
and thus void. Shorn of the relaxations so granted, CHEJVA has no  
legal sanctity and consequently remains an agreement entered into 
against the provisions of law, hence not enforceable.  
24.  As all the key provisions of CHEJVA were made subject to 
a reliance on relaxations that were illegal and void ab initio, the 
illegality of the agreement seeps to its root. As such, no operative part 
of the agreement survives to be independently enforceable and the 
principle of severability cannot be applied to save any part thereof. 
The agreement is, therefore, void and unenforceabl e in its entirety 
under the law.   
25.  A perusal of CHEJVA  reveals that BHP and BDA exceeded 
their mandate by going beyond the scope of the actions envisaged in 
Article 2.1 (i) and (ii) of CHEJVA , namely, the parties seeking/receiving 
from the relevant co mpetent authorities in the Federal and/or the 
Provincial Government  within six months of the date of agreement ‘all 
consents and approvals necessary under Pakistani law ’ and ‘all 
assurances as to fiscal parameters for investment in any future mining 
ventur e’. It appears that  BHP/BDA’s representations , rather 
misrepresentations  led the GOB authorities to issue the sought for CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  40 
relaxations, inasmuch as the terms ‘consents’, ‘approvals’  or 
‘assurances as to fiscal parameters’ used in the aforesaid sub -clauses 
of CHEJVA are not synonym ous with the term ‘relaxation’. Any 
consent, approval or assurance is to be issued by the concerned 
authority in accordance with, and subject to the law of the land. This 
position is reassured by Article 16 of CHEJVA, according to wh ich, the 
law applicable to the agreement is the law of Pakistan read with the 
principles of international law. It may be mentioned here that s ub-
clause 24.6.2 of CHEJVA provides that the parties shall be just and 
faithful to one another and will not do or omit to be done anything, 
which prejudices the interests of the Joint Venture. As mentioned 
above, under clause 2.2 of CHEJVA, BHP could have sought only 
‘consents’, ‘approvals’ or ‘assurances’, and not the ‘relaxation’ of any 
rule. Unfortunately , in respe ct of every provision of CHEJVA, which ran 
contrary to the provision of any rule of BMCR 1970, relaxation in the 
name of ‘consent, approval and assurance’ was sought. BHP, 
therefore, could not be said to have been acting justly and faithfully 
from the very  inception of their relationship with BDA as contemplated 
by the parties i n sub -clause 24.6.2 of CHEJVA.  
26.  As mentioned hereinabove, the competent authority issued 
the relaxations in the form of a bulleted list without explaining what 
terms and conditi ons governed the extent of the relaxations as 
required under rule 98 ibid. The letter presents no explanation of any 
nature whatever, what was the hardship and what were the special 
circumstances warranting the grant of relaxations. It is equally silent 
on the terms and conditions being fixed on the grant of such 
relaxations. For example, the word “royalty ” is included as one of the 
13 relaxations while there was a special Article in CHEJVA governing CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  41 
the payment of royalty.  As already pointed out, the relax ations could 
be granted conditional on the parties showing hardship, special 
circumstances and the terms and conditions imposed in lie of 
relaxation. In the instant case, the relaxations granted by the 
Provincial Government to the Joint Venture against the  letter and spirit 
of rule 98 . Such illegal relaxations were then subsequently relied upon 
to countervail the requirements imposed by BMCR 1970. It has been 
held that where appropriate legislation is available, its provisions are 
to be followed by the concerned authorities in the matter of sale, 
mortgage or disposal of property vested in the Government. And 
where the relaxation of rules has led to ignoring provisions of the 
relevant law regulating such a lease, the same could not be approved 
by the courts o f law. See Abdul Haq and others vs. Province of Sindh 
and others  (PLD 2000 Karachi 224).  
27.  Clause 5.2(a) provides that the parties shall seek from the 
Provincial Government the exclusive and unfettered right to undertake 
stage one activities within the  exploration area for an initial period of 
three years and to apply for and be granted therein prospecting licence 
subject to clause 5.3, whereas under clause 5.2(b) the parties have 
the non -exclusive right to conduct stage one activities and subject to 
clauses 5.3 and 5.4 to make application for further prospecting 
licences to explore for minerals within the exploration area. Under 
clause 5.4.1, the parties may, in accordance with clause 5.2 apply for 
prospecting licences to explore for minerals within the  exploration area 
at any time within six years of the commencement date; during the 
initial period the parties’ right to grant of the said prospecting licences 
shall be automatic subject only to clause 5.8, but beyond the initial 
period, the parties’ right  to grant of prospecting licences shall be CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  42 
subject to the normal administrative discretion of the Directorate of 
Mineral Development. Under clause 5.4.2, each of the prospecting 
licencee shall be issued to the Joint Venture for an initial term of two 
years  with the option to extend for up to three years beyond the said 
initial term provided that where the parties have commenced a 
feasibility study, the conclusion of which will not be possible until 
beyond expiry of five year term possible for the relevant p rospecting 
licence, the Directorate of Mineral Development shall grant such 
further extension of time as may be reasonably required to permit 
conclusion of the said study. It further provides that the parties shall 
also seek pursuant to clause 2.2 to have the said possibility of a 
further extension of time recognized by the Provincial Government.     
28.  The aforesaid clauses 5.2, 5.3, 5.4 clearly violate rules 30, 
31 & 32 of BMCR 1970. Under rule 30, no prospecting licence shall be 
granted in the first in stance for a period of less than one and more 
than two years, whereas rule 31 provides that the licensing authority 
may in its discretion grant further renewals of prospecting licence for a 
period not exceeding twelve months at a time to enable the license e to 
complete the prospecting work to the satisfaction of the licensing 
authority provided the licensee had applied to the licensing authority in 
writing one month before the expiry of the initial period of the 
prospecting licence and that total period of the prospecting licence 
shall not exceed three years. The renewal referred to in rule 31 is 
subject to the licensee having carried out his working obligations under 
rule 32, which provides that the licensee shall in respect of the areas 
covered by each lic ence prepare within three months of the grant of 
the licence a scheme of prospecting for the approval of the licensing 
authority, and shall not commence the operations unless the scheme CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  43 
has been so approved. It further provides that the licensee shall in 
respect of the area covered by the licence carry out the prospecting 
work in accordance with the approved prospecting scheme. 
Unfortunately, none of the aforesaid clauses of CHEJVA complied with 
any of the relevant rules then in force.  
29.  It is argued on  behalf of the petitioners that clause 5.6 of 
CHEJVA, which envisages exclusive right of the parties for the duration 
of the licence to have, insofar as the exploration for minerals is 
concerned, exclusive possession of the area, the subject of each 
licenc e for all the purposes of conducting the Joint Venture activities is 
not covered by any provision in BMCR 1970. We have considered the 
issue so raised in the light of provision of Rule 27 of BMCR 1970, which 
confers an exclusive right on the holder of the licence to mine, quarry, 
bore and search for, etc., for any specified mineral lying or being 
within, under or throughout the land specified in the licence. It is clear 
that the rule provides an exclusive right to mine for a specified 
mineral, but does not envisage exclusive possession of the area for 
which PL is granted for all purposes of conducting activities of a Joint 
Venture being given to the holder of the licence. In a nutshell, it is an 
exclusive right for exploration of the specified minerals, but not the 
right to exclusive possession of the area in question.   
30.  Rule 38 provides that on or before the determination of his 
licence, the licensee shall have a right to a mining lease in accordance 
with the terms contained in these rules for mining le ases provided he 
has carried on prospecting operations to the satisfaction of the 
licensing authority in accordance with the working obligations, paid all 
Government dues regularly and paid compensation to the third parties 
as provided in these rules. On t he other hand, clause 5.9 provides that CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  44 
the parties shall pursuant to clause 2.2 seek assurance from the 
Provincial Government, namely, that the Joint Venture shall have the 
right to apply for a Mining Lease at any time during the conduct of 
Stage Three or  Stage Four Activities if in the opinion of the Manager a 
decision to undertake mining development is likely to be made 
pursuant to either sub -clause 8.2.10(d) or sub -clause 11.3.2 and the 
said mining lease shall be renewed at the commencement of any 
minin g venture for the duration of proposed mining operation 
thereunder. A perusal of rule 38 makes it clear that the right to grant 
of mining lease is not an absolute right, inasmuch as it is subject to 
the conditions laid down therein, namely, the terms conta ined in these 
rules for mining leases, carrying out the prospecting operations to the 
satisfaction of the licensing authority in accordance with the working 
obligations, paying all Government dues regularly and compensation to 
the third parties as provided  in the rules, whereas under clause 5.9 the 
licensee is given the right to apply for a mining lease at any time 
during the conduct of Stage Three or Stage Four Activities on the sole 
discretion of the Manager and the renewal thereof without compliance 
with the terms and conditions prescribed in the rules in accordance 
with the provision of rule 38.   
31.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC contended that 10 prospecting 
licences covering an area of 1000 sq km were granted to BHP on 
08.12.1996 in violation of rule 28 of BMCR 1970, which provides 
maximum limit of 10 square miles, i.e., 25.4 sq km per licence, as 
such the area granted was four times more than what was provided for 
under the said rule. On the other hand, learned counsel for BHP 
asserted that it was in the  interest of GOB to grant as wide an area as CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  45 
possible for prospecting to ensure discovery of minerals over a large 
part of the Province.   
32.  Clause 5.3.1 of CHEJVA provides that the parties shall seek 
from the Provincial Government within the exploration  area which 
prospecting licence may, in aggregate, at any time for the duration of 
the agreement cover up to fifty square kilometers therein whereas as 
per clause 5.3.2, where at any time the Joint Venture is active in ten 
prospecting licences having in ag gregate an area of fifty square 
kilometers, it shall not be permitted to apply for additional prospecting 
licences within the exploration area unless it first relinquishes from one 
or more of its existing prospecting licences an area equivalent to the 
size of the proposed prospecting licence. However, clause 5.10 of 
CHEJVA provides that the area shown in the map (Schedule B to 
CHEJVA) may be revised so as to accurately represent the current 
status from time to time of the exploration area including all 
prospecting licences or mining leases in existence from time to time 
including the revision or relinquishment of any prospecting licences or 
mining leases.  This clearly nullifies clause 5.3.1 in the first instance , 
and then negatives  the provision of r ule 28 , which  provides that except 
as otherwise decided by the Government, a prospecting licence shall 
not be granted in respect of any area measuring more than 10 square 
miles and rule 42, which lays down that the lease shall not be granted 
in respect of any area  of more than five square miles save in case 
where special exemption  is granted by the Government. What was 
done in the instant case was that initially an area of 50 sq km was 
granted to the licensee  for exploration , which was illegally extended to 
1000 sq  km pursuant to the request made by BHP -BDA. This part of CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  46 
CHEJVA was also entered into against the letter and spirit of the law, 
which created another dent in the agreement .   
33.  Clause 5.11 provides that pursuant to clause 2.2 and in so 
far as the minin g rules have particular application to this agreement, 
the parties shall seek from the Provincial Government notified orders 
in respect of the matters identified in clause 5.2, sub -clause 5.3.1, 
clauses 5.6, 5.9 and 6.1.  It may be noted that under clause 5 .2 the 
parties are entitled to seek from the Provincial Government exclusive 
and unfettered right to undertake stage one activities within the 
exploration area subject to clause 5.3, sub-clause 5.3.1 whereof 
specifies an area of 50 sq km in the aggregate. Clause 5.6 provides 
that the parties shall seek appropriate additional assurances from the 
Provincial Government  for the exclusive possession of the area and 
that third parties do not impede the Joint Venture activities , etc. Under 
clause 6.1 the parties s hall seek from the Provincial Government the 
grant of a first right of refusal to undertake further exploration for, or 
feasibility study in relation to or to develop and mine any ore body 
containing other minerals discovered by the Joint Venture within th e 
exploration area. Under clause 6.4 where the Provincial Government 
decides to retain to itself rights with respect to other minerals within 
the relevant area, the Joint Venture shall nevertheless be entitled to 
undertake further Joint Venture activities within its existing 
prospecting licences for minerals, even though such Joint Venture 
activities may at times coincide with the Provincial Government 
activities in connection with other minerals provided that such Joint 
Venture activities are undertaken co mpatibly with Provincial 
Government objectives.  Clause 6.5 provides that where in accordance 
with sub -clause 6.3.1 the Provincial Government elects not to pursue CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  47 
in its own right an d interest in other minerals, the Joint Venture may 
exercise its option wit hin 90 days of the Provincial Government’s 
notice pursuant to sub -clause 6.3.1 and, if so exercising the option, it 
shall accordingly apply for the right to specifically explore the other 
minerals within the exploration area. It further provides that where  the 
Joint Venture exercises its option, the Provincial Government shall 
promptly issue further prospecting licences for other minerals and/or 
shall amend existing licences to also enable the conduct of Joint 
Venture activities in relation to other mineral s. Rule 3 provides that 
except with the previous sanction of the Government no licence to 
prospect for any mineral and no lease of mines and minerals shall be 
granted otherwise than in accordance with rules. Rule 53 provides that 
the licensee or lessee sha ll without delay report to the licensing 
authority the discovery on or within any of the lands of mines demised 
by the licence or a lease of any mineral not specified in the licence or 
lease, but he shall not, unless a fresh licence or lease in respect of the 
minerals so discovered is granted to him under these rules, have any 
right to these minerals. The licensee or lessee will, however, enjoy 
preferential right to the grant of a prospecting licence or mining lease 
for such other mineral discovered and rep orted by him subject to the 
discretion of the licensing authority.  Thus, above provisions of CHEJVA 
being contrary to the provisions of rules 3 and 53, BHP -BDA appl ied 
for relaxation of these a long with a host of other rules, though under 
clause 2.2 of CHE JVA, they could have only s ought ‘consents’, 
‘approvals’ or ‘assurances’, and not the ‘relaxation’ of rules.  No 
previous sanction of the Government was sought in terms of rule 3 for 
issuance of  a prospecting licence otherwise than in accordance with CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  48 
BMCR 1 970. It was a mandatory requirement, non -fulfilment whereof 
rendered the whole exercise a nullity in the eyes of law.  
34.  Furthermore, t hese prospecting licences were renewed for 
a period of one year in 1998 and in 1999  and respondent No. 8 was 
extended the facility of prospecting licence in the Reko Diq area for a 
period of 5 years as against 3 years provided under  rule 31, which 
provides that no further extension beyond 3 years will be granted . This 
provision was attempted to be circumvented by issuing a fresh 
prospecting licence (PL -14) on 21.02.2000 for the same area of 
240,620.20 acres for 2 years  wherein the licensee was given the 
option to retain the area beyond one year subject to their giving one 
month’s notice in writing of their intention to do so. This was contrary 
to rule 30 of BMCR 1970, which stipulates grant of PL for a period not 
exceeding one year.  
35.  The BMR 2002 were promulgated vide Gazette notification 
dated 09.03.2002  and t he licences and leases granted prior to the 
notification of  BMR, 2002 and were continuing at that time were 
protected by means of rule 125 of the BMR 2002, which stipulates that 
any licence or lease granted, renewed or saved under any law for the 
time being in force and existing immediately before the coming into 
force of these Rules shall be deemed to have been granted, renewed 
or saved for the  subsisting period in accordance with the provisions of 
these Rules as if these Rules were in force at the time such licence or 
lease was granted, renewed or saved and shal l be treated accordingly. 
It is noteworthy that BHP  did not have any mineral title at the time of 
notification of BMR 2002 as PL -14 had already expired on 21.02.2002 
and was not further renewed. As such, their rights accrued under PL -
14, having already cea sed, were never protected. Since  BHP did not CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  49 
have any mineral title under the said rule, GOB was empowered under 
rule 67 of the BMR 2002 to invite bids to tender for award of 
exploration licences for the same area. However,  GOB did not exercise 
its preroga tive and instead granted exploration licence (EL -5) for the 
Reko Diq area, which was renewed for a further period of 6 years. 
Under CHEJVA, BHP/TCC enjoyed rights for exploration in the Reko Diq 
area between 1994 and 1996; held a prospecting licence for th e same 
area for 5 years and an exploration licence for the same area for 9 
years, meaning thereby that the exploration/prospecting facility was 
extended to BHP/TCC for a total period of 17 years, which is an 
extraordinary and undue favour in itself granted  under CHEJVA.  
36.  As held hereinbefore, CHEJVA itself was a vo id agreement 
from its inception. This aspect had come to light during t he 
correspondence by the two law firms , namely,  M/S Kabraji & 
Talibuddin M/S Shakil Law Firm,  engaged by the parties to vet the 
Addendum , which has already been discussed in detail hereinbefore . 
However, to cure the invalidity of CHEJVA, BHP in the name of 
Addendum unsuccessfully attempted to enter into a new agreement , 
where in place of the original two parties, three part ies were 
attempted to be introduced . CHEJVA having been found and declared 
to be a void agreement in the earlier part of this judgment, there was 
no room left for BHP to build the superstructure on its basis , namely, 
Addendum  No.1 , Option Agreement’ , Minco r Option, Alliance 
Agreement , Novation Agreement , or the subsequent share -purchase 
agreements . Consequently, the transfer s of interest from BHP to 
Mincor NL  to TCC to Atacama  to Barrick Gold  to Antofagasta  to TCCP 
all were illegal transactions entered into  by the concerned parties at 
their sole risk and cost , and are so declared hereby .  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  50 
37.  Clause 18.1 of CHEJVA  provides that the terms and 
conditions of the agreement and all mining information acquired by a 
party by reason of the operation of the agreemen t shall be 
confidential. This clause runs contrary to the provision of rule 39, 
which provides that if so required by the licensing authority , the 
licensee shall, before the return of the deposit made by him, disclose 
confidentially to the licensing author ity all information acquired in the 
course of the operations carried or the geological formation of any 
area not taken up by him under a mining lease. It is noteworthy that 
BHP did not seek relaxation of rule 39 and the aforesaid clause 18.1 
held the field  as it is.  
38.  As per annexure marked ‘A’ to Martin Harris’ letter dated 
16.09.1993, BHP proposed that the Parties must seek Government’s 
confirmation of the royalty @ 2% of the value of the extracted 
minerals, equivalent to the “net smelter return ”. Further, the rate of 
royalty once settled would need to be fixed for the life of any mine by 
a Notified Order addressing rule 65. It may be mentioned that r ule 65 
of BMCR 1970 requires the licensee or lessee to pay royalty at the 
rates to be notified by the G overnment from time to time of all 
minerals extracted by him. It further lays down that i n case of non -
payment of royalty within the prescribed time, the first two months 
shall be treated as grace period whereafter a penalty @ 6% of royalty 
dues shall be c harged in case the payment is made after the expiry of 
the second month next after the due date. Furthermore, in case 
royalty along with penalty is not paid until expiry of the fourth month 
from the due date, the licensee or less ee shall be liable to pay a  
further penalty of upto Rs.50,000/ - as determined by the licensing 
authority and in case it is not paid until the expiry of the six months CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  51 
after the date it first became due, the licence or lease shall be 
cancelled forthwith. From a perusal of the relaxat ion sought and the 
provision of the rule in question , it is clear that the entire procedure to 
be followed in case of non -payment of royalty was done away with  
under CHEJVA . Such a relaxation too could not be sought and granted 
in the name of ‘consent, app roval or assurance’. It was an illegal 
exercise.  
39.  The undue favour s being extended to BHP in the 
transaction further continue d and the already inadequate consideration 
of CHEJVA  (25 : 75  percentage interests ) was being mitigated in many 
untold ways  but the learned counsel for BHP still claimed at the 
rostrum that his client  was to earn its part of the return  and GOB was 
to get its percentage interest just without doing anything . Here, it may 
be mentioned that t he Directorate of Mineral Department vide letter 
dated 19.07.1994 informed BDA that the Licensing Authority had 
accepted the request of BDA/BHP for reservation of gold area in 
relaxation of the limits of the area as fixed under Annexure -IV to 
BMCR 1970 and also approved the plan for a period of th ree years, 
and permitted it to start the prospecting/mining operation for gold 
mineral over an area of 33,47,226 (thirty -three lac forty -seven 
thousand two hundred twenty -six) acres situated in Chagai District on 
the following terms & conditions:  -  
“(i) That within one month of the date of issue of this 
letter, you will deposit as Annual Fee a sum of 
Rs.33,47,226/ - (in advance) on nominal rate of 
Rs.1/ - instead of Rs.5/ - per acre, as you have been 
exempted from the payment of Annual Fee at the 
rate of Rs.4 /- per acre, in relaxation of Rule 33 of 
the Balochistan Mining Concession Rules, 1970.  
(ii) That within one month of the date of issue of this 
letter you will return one copy out of four (4) 
attached plans after affixing your signature and 
rubber stamp t hereon in token.   CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  52 
(iii) That you will submit regularly quarterly progress 
reports.   
(iv) That you will report without avoidable delay to the 
Licensing authority the discovery of any other 
mineral for which you do not hold a Prospecting 
Licence or such mine ral bearing strata of 
archaeological discovery of treasures.  
(v) That you will abide by all the terms and conditions of 
Balochistan Mining Concession Rules, 1970 as 
amended from time to time except as provided 
otherwise. ”  
 
40.  In the aforesaid letter, i t was further mentioned that in 
case of acceptance of the above terms and conditions, if needful was 
not done strictly within the stipulated time, the reservation of the area 
would be treated to have lapsed without any notice and they would be 
required to apply afresh if they still desired to get the prospecting 
licence /mining lease , and such application would be considered de 
novo and decided in accordance with the relevant rules. Surprisingly, 
though B HP failed to comply with the above said terms and cond itions, 
including the payment of annual fee within the stipulated period, but 
instead of treating the reservation to have lapsed, the Mineral 
Department vide letter dated 19.09.1994 pursuant to BDA’s letter 
dated 11.08.1994 granted further period of 20 day s to comply with the 
said terms and conditions  with the condition that in case of failure to 
do the needful in the extended period, letter dated 19.07.1994 would 
stand withdrawn . It appears that the aforesaid terms and conditions 
were not complied with and  the Industries, Commerce and Mineral 
Resources Department, instead of acting upon their letters dated  
19.07.1994 and 19.09.1994, by their letter dated 16.11.1994 waived 
off the annual fee of Rs.3.347 million for gold exploration in an area of 
33,47,226 a cre for a period of three years . The said letter  of the 
Industries Department is reproduced herein below: -  
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  53 
 
“No. S.O (MR)5 -9-94. 4829 -30 
GOVERNMET OF BALOCHISTAN  
INDUSTRIES COMMERCE AND MINERAL  
RESOURCES, DEPARTMENT  
 
DATED QUETTA THE 16th NOV: 1994  
To 
The Director  
Mineral Development  
Quetta  
 
Subject:  RESERVATION OF AREA FOR GOLD 
EXPLORATION  OVER 3,347,22(sic.) ACRES IN 
DISTRICT CHAGAI  
 
  The undersigned is directed to refer to the 
subject cited above and to convey approval of the 
competent authority to th e wa iving of an amount of 
Rs.3.347 million in favour of BDA on account of Annual fee 
etc for the area of 3,347,22(sic.) acres reserved for Gold 
Exploration in District Chagai for a period of three years.  
 
  You are requested to please take further steps 
immediately.  
 
(MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM SUMLANI)  
SECTION OFFICER  
MINERAL RESOURCES  
 
Quite strangely, as in the case of grant of large scale relaxation of the 
rules, the authority here too does not mention the circumstances in 
which it had become inevitable to rela x the provision regarding 
allocation of exploration area. It also fails to mention why it was 
necessary to exempt BHP from paying the annual fee, or other dues. 
Though the Directorate of Mineral Department in the aforesaid letter 
dated 19.07.1994 mentioned  that if applicants BHP -BDA on acceptance 
of the terms and conditions  prescribed in the said letter , did not 
comply with the same within the stipulated time, the reservation of the 
area would be treated to have lapsed without any notice and they 
would be r equired to apply afresh if they still desired to get the 
prospecting licence/mining lease, and such application would be CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  54 
considered de novo and decided in accordance with the relevant rules . 
It appears that neither did BHP -BDA pay the annual fee nor did it  
comply with other conditions so prescribed, and the Department 
suddenly by its aforesaid letter dated 1 6.11.1994 convey s the 
approval of the competent authority to the waiving of annual fee of 
Rs.3.347 million mentioning once again no justification for th e said 
waiver, as was done in granting relaxation of bulk of the provisions of 
BMCR 1970 .  
41.  The undue favours being extended to BHP are further 
established from the contents of the aforesaid letter s. The Directorate 
of Mineral Department, in its letter  dated 19.07.1994 , state s that BHP 
has been exempted from the payment of annual fee @ Rs.5/- per acre  
in relaxation of rule 33 of BMCR 1970, as a result whereof BHP will 
be required only to deposit a sum of Rs.33,47,226/ - on that account at 
the nominal rat e of Rs.1/ - per acre  instead of Rs.5 per acre . Then the 
Industries Department in its letter dated 1 6.11.1994 waives the 
already reduced amount  from Rs.5/ - per acre to Rs.1/ - per acre.  It 
was an extraordinary treatment meted out to BHP  whereby a loss of 
Rs.1,67,36,130/ - per annum was caused to the public exchequer 
without any justification whatsoever having been brought on the 
record.  Thus, i n the face of these facts and figures , it could not be said 
that for the BDA it was a free carried interest whereas in the case of 
BHP it was to be earned by making a huge investment .   
42.  Mr. Raza Kazim, Sr. ASC for the petitioners argued that 
BDA failed to exercise due diligence and properly consider the terms 
offered  to it before entering into the agreement. It grant ed seventy 
five percent of mineral rights to BHP (the only party before it) on the 
latter’s terms and conditions, which is apparent, inter alia, from Para 5 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  55 
of the summary submitted to the Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) 
Balochistan. It allowed assignment  of EL -5 in H -14 area by BHP to 
TCC, a newly established company, having no experience in the field of 
mining. Further, though BHP by virtue of CHEJVA was committed to 
spend an amount of US $ 130 Million for H -4 (Starter) Project (a part 
of deposits of cop per and gold in Reko Diq), whereas it had only spent 
US $ 7.00 million. No substantial work had been carried out ever since 
the grant of PL/EL since 1993 and the respondent -companies were 
only sniffing around Reko Diq, without doing anything towards the 
project. He submitted that for the disposal of the largest single mineral 
resource asset in the Subcontinent, it was in the public interest that 
GOB, as a trustee of the people of Balochistan, had ensured that all 
proposals for the exploitation of the Reko D iq copper and gold mines 
were comprehensively scrutinized and verified by the concerned 
technical experts and professionals of the field of mining. However, 
pre-requisite for the bona fide  exercise of the executive authority of 
GOB under Article 173 of the  Constitution in entering into CHEJVA 
dated 29.07.1993, was its capability and competence, which was 
admittedly non -existent at the relevant time, inasmuch as, GOB did 
not have the experience of the concerned professionals, experts or 
engineers who could h ave verified the offer of BHP to explore, prospect 
and mine for copper and gold at Reko Diq.  
43.  It was argued on behalf of the petitioners that  the 
executive authority of GOB acted in a non -transparent, arbitrary and 
unreasonable manner in the disposal of public property i.e. mineral 
resources in Reko Diq, thereby failing to obtain the best competitive 
price for the said mineral resources. No tenders were floated by 
publishing advertisements in the press and no competitive bids CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  56 
invited/offered, therefore , the whole process of awarding CHEJVA to 
BHP was uncompetitive, non-transparent  and illegal . It is further 
argued that CHEJVA is against public interest inasmuch as the same 
was executed without taking into consideration the protection and 
promotion of th e welfare of the people of Balochistan, therefore, it is 
against public policy on the touchstone of section 23  and various other  
provisions of the Contract Act, 1872 . According to the learned counsel, 
since the facts pertaining to these issues are substant ially 
unfavourable to GOB, it renders CHEJVA together with all its offshoots 
null and void, on the touchstone of the constitutional constraints and 
requirements pertaining to this matter and also the relevant provincial 
laws, e.g.,  GOB Rules of Business, BMCR 1970, BDA Act 1974, etc.) 
and finally on the touchstone of the law laid down by th e Supreme 
Court in the Steel Mills case reported as Watan Party v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2006 SC 697) concerning public  policy, public interest, 
transparency and b ona fides. In response, Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, 
Sr. ASC for BHP argued that  it is apparent form clauses 3.1, 3.2, 3.3 
and 3.5 of CHEJVA that both the object and consideration for the 
agreement are lawful, proper, just and not against any principle of 
public policy.  In the context of public policy, he stated that it was also 
pertinent to underscore that since 1995 the Mineral Policy approved by 
the Federal and all Provincial Governments had been in force and the 
contents thereof were totally consistent and  in accord with the 
provisions and scheme of CHEJVA. Therefore, the question of CHEJVA 
being opposed to public policy did not arise. He further argued that i t 
was nobody’s case that the National Mineral Policy was unlawful or 
opposed to public policy. The reliance by the petitioners on provisions 
of the Contract Act, 1872 was, therefore, not only misconceived, but CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  57 
also wholly untenable.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC for GOB argued 
concurrently with the petitioners that CHEJVA is void in terms of 
section 23 of t he Contract Act, 1872.  He has placed reliance on the 
cases reported as Jalil Asgbar  v. Atlas Industries & Trading 
Corporation   (1984 SCMR 1), Inayat Ali Shah  v. Anwar Hussain  (1995 
CLC 1906), Abdul Razzak  v. Karachi Development Authority  (1991 CLC 
1591) a nd Cudgen Rutile (No. 2) Ltd v. Chalk  [1975 AC (Privy Council) 
520].  
44.  We have scanned the record made available to the Court 
to find out whether at any stage prior to the award of CHEJVA, any 
tender was floated by the BDA , but unfortunately we have no t come 
across any document showing any initiative taken by the BDA or any 
other department of GOB  to publish advertisement in the press and 
invite tenders with a view to providing  opportunity to other investors 
in the field of mining  to come forward and co mpete with others . No 
doubt foreign investment in any modern economy is to be encouraged 
by all means, but all such activities are required to be carried out 
observing due process of law, which alone is a sure guarantee of the 
protection and promotion of t he public interest. Reference may be 
made to the case pertaining to establishment of fast food restaurant in 
F-9 Park, Islamabad, reported as Human Rights Case No. 4668 of 
2006 (PLD 2010 SC 759)  wherein it has been noted  that a good 
number of foreign inves tors are doing trade/business in the country in 
accordance with the law on the subject . In the instant case, it appears 
that BDA entered into negotiations with BHP and took up the issue of 
grant of exploration rights with GOB in a most haphazard manner. In 
this regard, it is noteworthy that o n 13.07.1993, the Chairman BDA 
forwarded a summary for approval of the draft agreement by the Chief CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  58 
Minister whereupon the Additional Chief Secretary observed , inter alia, 
that the o rders of the government require d the draft agreement to be 
vetted by Finance Department, Law Department and Planning and 
Development Department. This was not done, nor was it possible to do 
so before the date fixed for signing of the agreement , i.e., 29.07.1993 . 
The proposed agreement was “conditional ” but that d id not by itself 
provide adequate protection to GOB as conditions sought were specific 
and BDA ought to have provided adequate opportunities to concerned 
departments for proper examination of the case  and it was in neither 
party’s inte rest to enter into an agreement without considering its pros 
and cons just because the agreement provided an escape clause . 
Therefore, instead of agreement, better intent document should be 
signed. In response to the above observations  of the Additional Ch ief 
Secretary , the Chairman BDA, vide note dated 22.07.1993, provided 
certain clarifications  and when the matter again went to  the Additional 
Chief Secretary  remarked as under : -   
(1) Chairman BDA was hand carrying the file to the C.S. Few 
people in the gover nment really know what GOB  is getting 
into in the agreement. Agreed that BHP is a good party, 
mineral exploration in the area is highly desirable but 
GOB has to be mindful of its interest specially the possible 
reaction of the people of the area to a large tract of land 
being reserved for BHP.  
 
(2) The signing of the agreement has been fixed for 29 .07.1993 . 
Chairman BDA may be authorized to go ahead subject to 
the clause that the agreement will be of a provisional 
nature and any reasonable additions/alteration s 
proposed by P lanning  & D evelopment  and Finance 
Departments  in a period of one month from signing of 
the agreement shall be incorporated therein.  
 
When the matter reached the Chief Secretary, he observed that the 
agreement was not moved well in time to t he Planning & Development 
and Finance Departments for its vetting. He further remarked that the 
agreement to be signed on the 29.07.1993 should be termed as CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  59 
“provisional ” so that amendments/modifications, if any, could be made 
at a later stage. The said pr oposal was approved by the Chief Minister 
on 27.07.1993. CHEJVA was signed on 29.07.1993, but thereafter no 
amendments were made therein and it became effective on 
20.01.1994. However, this fact was noticed at the time of entering into 
of Addendum on 04.03 .2000 , inasmuch as clause 3.0  recited that 
there was no further vetting/scrutiny of CHEJVA by the relevant 
departments of GOB. The processing of the matter by GOB in the 
above manner substantiates that public advertisements were not 
resorted to in the inte rest of transparency  and to obtain the best 
competitive price for the dispo sal of public property, i.e., mineral 
resources  in Reko Diq, and thereby denied participation to other 
investors of the field to the detriment of the general public , and 
especially the people of Balochistan . Such a handling of an issue of 
great public importance was against public policy as well because it 
certainly caused injury to the public good and, therefore, provides a 
basis for denying the legality of the transaction in questi on. It is 
noteworthy that s ection 23 of the Contract Act 1872 provides that the 
consideration or object of an agreement is lawful, unless it is forbidden 
by law; or is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the 
provisions of any law; or is fr audulent; or involves or implies injury to 
the person or property of another; or the Court regards it as immoral, 
or opposed to public policy. In each of these cases, the consideration 
or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful , and every agreement 
of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void. In the instant 
case, CHEJVA was entered into in violation of a large number of 
provisions of BMCR 1970. It is, therefore, opposed to public 
policy, which calls for across the board  enforcement and CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  60 
application of the laws of the land. CHEJVA is hit by section 23 of the 
Contract Act, on this score.  
 
45.  Nothing has been brought on the record to show that the 
Finance Department, which is required under GOB Rules of Business, 
1976 to scrutinize such a ve nture by respondent No. 1, had approved 
this project. In absence of non -approval of the JVA by the Finance 
Department, CHEJVA was executed between BDA and BHP. The 
respondents attempted to take undue advantage out of the political 
instability prevailing at  that time, inasmuch as at that time, a 
Caretaker Government was in place. The foreign companies by means 
of CHEJVA, Addendum No.1 and other agreements preyed upon the 
huge gaps in understanding on the part of GOB of large scale mineral 
extraction and were  in a distinct position to manipulate and dominate 
the will of GOB. Under article 3.2.7 of the UNIDROIT Principles of 
International Commercial Contracts under the title of gross disparity, a 
contract which has been conceived by a party seeking to take unfa ir 
advantage of the other party’s dependence, economic distress or its 
improvidence, ignorance, inexperience and lack of bargaining skill 
cannot be enforced.  
 
46.  In Articles 5.2, 5.3, 5.7, 5.11, 7.2, inter alia , the parties 
shared the responsibility to ‘seek’ and apply for relevant government 
licences, leases and permissions etc. as necessary. However, Article 
5.4.2 of CHEJVA provides that e ach of the Prospecting Licences shall 
be issued to the Joint Venture for an initial term of two (2) years with 
the option to extend for up to three (3) years beyond the said initial 
term, provided that where the parties have commenced a Feasibility CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  61 
Study, the conclusion of which will not be possible until beyond efflux 
of the five (5) year term possible for the relevan t Prospecting Licence. 
It further provides that the Directorate of Mineral Development shall 
grant such further extension of time as may be reasonably required to 
permit conclusion of the said Study. The Parties shall also seek 
pursuant to Clause 2.2 to ha ve the said possibility of a further 
extension of time recognized by the Provincial Government . (Emphasis 
added)  
47.  Mr. Raza Kazim, Sr. ASC  for the petitioners referred to the 
judgment of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in Queensland 
Titaniu m Mines v. Chalk  (1975 A.C. 520). Briefly, the facts of the 
Queensland Titanium Mines’ case  were that the appellants were on 
June 27, 1966, holders of an authority to prospect, granted under 
section 23A of the Mining Act 1881 by the Minister of Mines, in r espect 
of an area of approximately 18 square miles, which was renewable for 
a further period of one year from July 1, 1966. On their application for 
renewal the appellants were granted two authorities t o prospect, one 
by the Governor -in-Council under secti on 46 (1) (b) of the Mining Act 
in respect of so much of the area as consisted of reserves , and the 
other by the Minister under section 23A (1) in respect of so much of 
the area as consisted of Crown land and private land. The two 
authorities were for term s of four years from July 1, 1966, and granted 
the appellants the right to prospect the land subject to the authority 
for all minerals other than coal, mineral oil and petroleum and the 
right to the grant of mining leases over any part of the subject lands . 
The appellants carried out extensive prospecting operations  incurring 
considerable expense and discovered large mineral deposits. On 
February 2, 1970, they applied for three special mineral leases in CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  62 
respect of the minerals so discovered in lands within the subject areas, 
but not including any private land. The applications were heard by the 
Mining Warden who recommended that the leases should be granted, 
but the Government refused to grant any. In consolidated actions in 
the Supreme Court of Queensland t he appellants claimed specific 
performance of the contract which they alleged existed to grant them 
leases or, alternatively, damages for wasted expenses and loss of 
future profits. The respondent, representing the Government of 
Queensland, entered demurre rs on the grounds, inter alia, that the 
appellants were not entitled to the grant of any special mineral leases 
and that, if on a true construction of the authorities to prospect, any 
provision purported to entitle the appellants to the grant of a special 
mineral lease or to oblige the Governor in Council to grant any such 
lease, the term was void for that neither the Mining Acts nor any other 
Act permitted the inclusion in an authority to prospect of a term which 
would oblige the Governor in Council to gra nt a special mineral lease. 
The Full Court allowed the demurrers. The Privy Council,  while 
dismissing the appeals,  held that the Crown in the Commonwealth of 
Australia could not contract for the disposal of any interest in Crown 
lands except in accordance with powers conferred by statute and, 
accordingly, where a statute prescribed a mode of exercise of the 
statutor y power that had to be observed.  It, therefore , followed that 
the freedom of the Minister responsible for implementing the statute 
could not be validly fettered by anticipatory action; that since the 
Minister before granting a mineral lease, whether in respect of 
reserves or Crown land, had to make statutory decisions and exercise 
statutory discretions, any attempt to bind himself in advance was 
beyond his statutory powers, and, as no purported agreement could CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  63 
give rise to any contractual obligation enforceable in the courts, the 
statements of claim alleged no contract , which could be enforced and 
the demurrers were , therefore , well founded. Consid ering the similarity 
of the facts and points of law involved in the precedent case, t he 
principles set therein have a persuasive value for the purposes of the 
case in hand. Various recitals in CHEJVA , Addendum , Novation 
Agreement , Mincor Option, Alliance A greement,  all have purported to 
bind the Government and its functionaries in the discharge of their 
statutory duties , which is not permissible. This aspect too is opposed 
to public policy in terms of section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872. 
Accordingly,  all the said instruments are void and not enforceable in 
the courts of law .   
48.  Mr. Raza Kazim argued that BMCR 1970 were repealed and 
new rules known as BMR 2002 were framed by GOB under the 
influence of the respondent companies to make out a way for 
legali zing the illegal acts whereas according to Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi 
BMR 2002 were prepared and revised by the counsel engaged by TCC 
before the Balochistan High Court in Writ Petition No. 892/2006. In 
response, Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC stated that above stanc e of the 
petitioners/GOB was based on the assertion that the law firm RIAA 
represented BHP in negotiations and later the same firm advised GOB 
on the draft and amendments made in the BMR 2002 as well. He 
stated that the firm had only offered its input in t he consultation 
process for making improvements in the BMR 2002. In this behalf, he 
presented a list of clients of the firm downloaded from its website to 
show that its clients did not include BHP. When this fact was brought 
to the attention of the Court b y the petitioners during the hearing of 
these proceedings in January 2011, the data of the year 2011 on the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  64 
website of the firm pertaining to the clients of the firm was got 
checked and it was found that TCC was included in the list of the firm’s 
clients. The website also showed that the firm had provided assistance 
to GOB in the preparation of BMR 2002. However, information 
regarding the drafting and advising of the BMR 2002 by the said law 
firm was removed from the firm’s website during the year 2012. 
Despite a conflict of interest, the role of the concerned law firm in the 
preparation of BMR 20 02 is, therefore, established.   
49.  Learned counsel for GOB stated that the documents 
relating to CHEJVA, Addendum, Novation agreements, relaxations, 
etc., showed  a clear pattern of irregularities. He pointed out that Mr. 
Ata Muhammad Jaffer, Chairman BDA, who also happened to be 
Additional Chief Secretary, was convicted by a Court functioning under 
National Accountability Ordinance, 1999 after being charged for an  
offence of having assets and living beyond his means. In response, 
learned counsel for TCC argued that the petitioners had made a bald 
assertion that elements of corruption and corrupt practices were 
involved in the award of contracts, and failed to produ ce any 
substantial evidence in support of such an assertion. Further, no nexus 
was established or shown to exist between the corrupt practices 
allegedly committed by Mr. Ata Muhammad Jaffer with CHEJVA.   
50.  A perusal of the record shows that the executan t of 
CHEJVA, Mr. Ata Muhammad Jaffer held dual position of Chairman BDA 
and Additional Chief Secretary at the relevant time. The two positions 
are very distinct in the eyes of the law. The first is an office holder in a 
statutory incorporated body while th e latter is an officer of GOB 
authorized to represent the Government. The same person holding 
both offices may have contributed to the impression created by BDA CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  65 
that the Governmental authorities were under an obligation to issue 
the relevant relaxations an d licences. In the former position, he 
forwarded the case to the Provincial Government whereupon in the 
latter position he chaired the meeting wherein decisions regarding 
CHEJVA were taken. It was a clear conflict of interest. The record also 
shows that he  was hand carrying the file, which showed a visible haste 
on his part to execute the agreement. In fact, there was a greater 
burden on the officer not only to be fair in his adherence to the law, 
but also to have disassociated himself from the matter as fa r as his 
position as applicant was concerned. The record also shows that he 
disregarded caution sounded by several departments.  As per the 
Balochistan Civil Servants (Efficiency and Discipline) Rules 1983, living 
beyond one’s means is an act of corruption.  The factum of his 
conviction has not been rebutted by the learned counsel for TCC or 
anyone else.  
51.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC for GOB  argued that neither BHP 
was registered under the Companies Ordinance, 1984 nor did it have 
any place of business in P akistan on the date of execution of CHEJVA 
as required b y the said Ordinance, therefore, BHP was not competent 
to apply for and have a grant of mineral licenses in terms of rule 14 of 
BMCR 1970. BHP’s act of applying for the said licence constituted 
misrep resentation which vitiated CHEJVA within the contempl ation of 
the Contract Act, 1872. Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC for BHP 
stated that BHP had obtained permis sion of the Board of Investment 
and had also filed returns with the Securities & Exchange Com mission 
of Pakistan as a foreign company having a place of business in 
Pakistan as per the Companies Ordinance, 1984. He also pointed out 
that Australia, the country of incorporation of BHP Billiton , the parent CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  66 
of BHP, allows Pakistani companies and Pakist ani nationals to apply for 
and obtain mineral titles.  Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC for TCC argued 
that the foreign companies operating in Pakistan as parties or 
assignees under CHEJVA such as BHP, Mincor, TCCA, etc., were not 
required to be registered or inco rporated in Pakistan at all for carrying 
out their operations. He argued that the parties to CHEJVA could not 
be required to comply with the provisions of the BMCR 1970, which 
were in force at the time, as GOB itself waived and relaxed the same 
in favour o f the foreign investors to facilitate them. They had never 
had the need to comply with the old rules, which should not apply to 
them after express relaxations were granted by GOB. He argued that 
as far as TCC is concerned, it is only bound by the Novation 
Agreement, which effectively extinguished all previous agreements 
under CHEJVA. The learned counsel asserted that the Novation 
Agreement is entirely in conformity with the BMR 2002 and there is no 
question of violation of the said rules. He also took the s tand that  the 
respondents never asked GO B for a relaxation of the rules and it  was 
BDA, an agent of GOB who  had requested for the relaxations without 
their asking, which was subsequently accepted by GOB acting on their 
advice. Therefore, TCC was not under a responsibility to validate the 
legality of the relaxations granted. He argued that i t is a presumption 
of the law of evidence / Qanoon -e-Shahadat  Order, 1984 that all official 
actions are deemed to be correct and legally valid.   
52.  It may be mentioned t hat r ule 14 of the BMCR 1970 
provides that  a licence or lease shall only be granted or assigned to a 
company incorporated in Pakistan.  Article 16 of CHEJVA provides that 
the law applicable to the agreement shall be the law of Pakistan, 
including the princi ples of international law as duly acknowledged and CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  67 
agreed by the parties. In this connection, it is relevant to mention that 
every foreign company operating in Pakistan is required under the law 
to obtain a permission to establish a liaison office (LO) or branch office 
(BO). Companies that are issued such permission to establish an office 
registered with the Board are regulated by the Companies  Ordinance, 
1984. Sections 451 and 452 of Ordinance, 1984 lay down 
requirements for documents to be delivered to th e Registrar of 
Companies by foreign companies and returns to be delivered where 
alterations as under: -  
451. Documents to be delivered to registrar by foreign 
companies: - 
(1)  Every foreign company which, after the 
commencement of this  Ordinance, establis hes a place  of 
business in Pakistan shall, within thirty days of the 
establishment of the place of business, deliver to the 
registrar: -  
(a)  a certified copy of the charter, statute or 
memorandum and articles of the company, or other 
instrument constituti ng or defining the constitution of 
the company, and if the instrument is not written in 
the English or Urdu language, a certified translation 
thereof in the English or Urdu language;  
(b)  the full address of the registered or principal office of 
the compa ny;  
(c)  a list of the directors, chief executive and secretaries 
(if any) of the company;  
(d)  a return showing the full present and former names 
and surnames, father's name or, in the case of a 
married woman or widow, the name of her husband 
or decease d husband, present and former 
nationality, designation and full address in Pakistan 
of the principal officer of the company in Pakistan by 
whatever name called;  
(e)  the full present and former names and surnames, 
father’s name, or, in case of a married w oman or 
widow, the name of her husband or deceased 
husband, present and former nationality, occupation 
and full addresses of some one or more persons 
resident in Pakistan authorised to accept on behalf of 
the company service of process and any notice or 
other document required to be served on the 
company together with his consent to do so; and  
(f)  the full address of that office of the company in 
Pakistan which is to be deemed its principal place of 
business in Pakistan of the company.  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  68 
(2)  The list refe rred to in clause (c) of sub -section (1) 
shall contain the following particulars, that is to say: -  
(a)  with respect to each director : -   
(i)  in the case of an individual, his present and 
former name and surname in full, his usual 
residential address, h is nationality, and if that 
nationality is not the nationality of origin, his 
nationality of origin, and his business 
occupation, if any, and other directorship 
which he holds;  
(ii)   in the case of a body corporate, its corporate 
name and registered or p rincipal office; and 
the full name, address, nationality and 
nationality of origin, if different from that 
nationality, of each of its directors;  
(b)  with respect to the secretary, or where there are 
joint secretaries, with respect to each of them: -  
(i)  in the case of an individual, his present and 
former name and surname, and his usual 
residential address;  
(ii)  in the case of a body corporate, its corporate 
name and registered or principal office:  
Provided that, where all the partners in a firm are 
joint secretaries of the company, the name and 
principal office of the firm may be stated instead of 
the particulars mentioned in clause (b).  
(3)  Every foreign company, other than a company 
mentioned in sub -section (1) shall, if it has not delivered 
to the registrar before the commencement of this 
Ordinance the documents and particulars specified in 
section 277 of the Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), 
shall continue to be subject to the obligation to deliver 
those documents and particulars and be liable to penalties 
in accordance with the provisions of that Act.  
 
452. Return to be delivered to registrar by foreign 
companies whose documents etc., altered: -  
If any alteration is made or occurs in: -  
(a)  the charter, statute or memorandum and articles of 
a foreign company or any such instrument as is 
referred to in section 451;  
(b)  the address of the registered or principal office of the 
company;  
(c)  the directors, chief executive or secretaries or in the 
particulars contained in the list referred to in  section 
451;  
(d)  the principal officer referred to in section 451;  
(e)  the names of addresses or other particulars of the 
persons authorised to accept service of process, 
notices and other documents on behalf of the 
company as referred to in the prece ding section 451; 
or  
(f) the principal place of business of the company in 
Pakistan;  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  69 
the company shall, within thirty days of the alteration, 
deliver to the registrar for registration a return containing 
the prescribed particulars of the alteration and i n the case 
of change in persons authorised to accept service of 
process, notice and other documents on behalf of the 
company, also his consent to do so.  
 
53.  The second party to CHEJVA is BHP, a company 
incorporated in the State of Delaware of the United  States of America. 
For all practical and legal purposes, the second party is an American 
company to be treated as an American entity for all references to its 
nationality vis -à-vis rights and obligations accruing under the law.  It is 
noteworthy that during hearing BHP despite repeated ly being required 
to produce before the Court such certificates of registration from the 
Board of Investment or the Registrar of C ompanies issued in favour of 
BHP failed to do so . Under section 456 of the said Ordinance, i n the 
absence of such registration, a foreign company cannot institute legal 
proceedings without fulfilling requirements of sections 451 and 452 of 
the Companies Ordinance 1984. It loses its rights to bring a suit or 
legal action for any liability arising in i ts favour out of any contract it 
may have entered into in default of such registration. For facility of 
reference, section 456 of the Ordinance is reproduced hereunder: -  
456. Company’s failure to comply with this part not to 
affect its liability under co ntracts, etc. - Any failure by a 
foreign company to comply with any of the requirement or 
section 451 or section 452 shall not affect the validity of 
any contract, dealing or transaction entered into by the 
company or its liability to be sued in respect the reof; but 
the company shall not be entitled to bring any suit, claim 
any set -off, make any counter -claim or institute any legal 
proceeding in respect of any such contract, dealing or 
transaction, until it has complied with the provisions of 
section 451 and  section 452.   
 
 
Section 456 was interpreted by this Court in Hala Spinning Mills Ltd. v 
International Finance Corporation  (2002 SCMR 450) as under: -  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  70 
“12. … … As per requirement of this section any failure by 
a foreign company to comply with any of the r equirements 
of section 451 or section 452 shall not affect the validity of 
any contract, dealing or transaction entered into by the 
company or its liability to be sued in respect thereof but 
the company shall not be entitled to bring any suit, claim 
any se t-off, make any counterclaim or institute any legal 
proceedings in respect of any such contract dealing or 
transaction until it has complied with the provisions of 
section 451 and section 452 of the Ordinance. As far as the 
first part of this provision is concerned , it needs no further 
elaboration . So far its latter portion is concerned on basis 
of it a foreign company cannot institute legal proceedings 
without fulfilling the requirements of sections 451 and 452 
of the Ordinance. ”  
 
54.  Form the material p roduce d before the Court it is evident 
that TCC started its operations in Pakistan through its Branch Office 
registered with the Board of Investment. It also incorporated a local 
subsidiary in Pakistan called TCCP. In December, 2007, TCCP 
approached the La hore High Court for amalgamation of TCC’s Branch 
Office in Pakistan and TCCP, incorporated in Pakistan, which had been 
functioning simultaneously until that time. Subsequently, the 
Islamabad High Court, where the case file was transferred on its 
establishm ent, vide order dated 11.04.2008 approved the 
amalgamation of both the companies as per the scheme of 
arrangement. As such, licences and properties held by Pakistan Branch 
of TCC stood transferred to TCCP.  
55.  Learned counsel for BHP and learned counsel f or TCC took 
different positions  on this issue . Learned counsel for BHP stated that 
BHP was registered in terms of the provisions of the Ordinance, but 
failed to substantiate his plea by produc ing any document. On the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  71 
other hand, learned counsel for TCC too k the position that foreign 
companies were not required to comply with the said provisions  as 
GOB itself had waived and relaxed the same in favour of the foreign 
investors to facilitate them . The grant of relaxation has since been 
held to be ultra vires and illegal, no reliance can be allowed to be 
placed upon a premise , which has been taken away from its inception .   
56.  As regards the reference made by learned counsel for BHP 
to the legal position obtaining in Australia allowing  Pakistani 
companies or Pakistani nationals to apply for and obtain mineral titles , 
it has no bearing on the facts of the present case and cannot be made 
a basis for not complying with the requirements of law . At this stage, 
reference may be made to  rule 15 of BMCR 1970 , which prov ides that 
a licence or lease shall not be granted to any person who is or 
becomes controlled directly or indirectly by a national of or by a 
company incorporated in a country, the laws and customs of which do 
not permit subjects of Pakistan, or companies i ncorporated in Pakistan, 
inter alia, to operate mining concessions. Thus, though this rule 
imposes a restriction on foreign nationals/companies, but it in no way 
allows any foreign national/company who may not otherwise be hit by 
the prohibition contained in the said rule not to abide by the laws of 
the land.    
57.  Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC argued that CHEJVA also violated 
section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908. Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC 
contended that if TCC maintains that CHEJVA transfers interest, then it 
was liable to be registered under section 17 of the Registration Act, 
1908. We have considered this aspect of the case. Section 17(1)(b) of 
the Act provides that an instrument, which purports or operates to 
create, declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whe ther in present or in CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  72 
future any right or interest of the value of one hundred rupees and 
upwards to or in immovable property shall be registered. In the instant 
case, BHP -BDA failed to get CHEJVA  registered under section 17 of the 
Registration Act. Simila rly, subsequent assignment of rights under 
CHEJVA  as purported to be done under the Alliance Agreement was 
also not registered in terms of said section 17. Here, too, the law of 
the land applicable to the agreement as per its own clause was not 
followed.   
58.  Learned counsel for BHP argued that Pakistan is a part of 
the comity of nations and has to consistently comply with and abide by 
its international obligations assumed through treaties, agreements 
covenants, and conventions or otherwise. It is settled  law that 
domestic and municipal laws ought to be interpreted and applied 
harmoniously and consistently with international obligations. It is by 
these very laws (domestic and or municipal) that the state impinges 
upon its own sovereignty so as to fulfil it s global and/or international 
obligations. The phenomena of globalisation poses a question begging 
an answer as to whether such municipal laws can be struck down by 
courts as imping e upon or compromis e State Sovereignty , e.g. like the 
constitutional effect s of laws enacted the European Union on the 
sovereignty of individual States. Pakistan has given effect to the New 
York Convention of 1958 through the Act XVII of 2011 and 
consequently formally incorporated the same into municipal laws. The 
vires of this s tatute have not even been impugned in the present 
proceedings. Pakistan has also given effect to the ICSID Convention 
through Act IX of 2011 and consequently formally incorporated the 
same as part of its municipal law. The vires of this statute are also no t 
under challenge. However, any award rendered in the on -going CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  73 
arbitration proceedings may be brought before the Courts of Pakistan 
for enforcement , thereby providing an opportunity for judicial review 
of the same on available legal grounds. Thus, for inst ance, under Act 
IX of 2011 an award by an ICSID Tribunal may be questioned or 
challenged on the same grounds for the purposes of execution as a 
Judgment of the High Court. Similarly, under the Act XVII of 2011 
enforcement of an award can be refused on all of the grounds set out 
in Article V of 1958 New York Convention which includes grounds of 
public policy. In this behalf , a reference to sections 13  and 14 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 may be useful. Learned counsel stated 
that j udicial restraint is , therefore, called for given the specific facts 
and circumstances of the matter  in line with the order dated 
12.03.2012 wherein this Court did not restrain the on -going arbitration 
proceedings.  
59.  Learned counsel for BHP further submitted that without 
prejudice or otherwise affect the position adopted or advanced by any 
of the parties to the arbitration proceedings as BHP itself is not a party 
to the arbitration proceedings the ICC arbitration arises pursuant to 
the arbitration agreement contained in th e CHEJVA, but under settled 
principles of law an arbitration agreement or even an arbitration clause 
as a part and parcel of a contractual agreement, is severable/  
separable/autonomous from the main agreement (CHEJVA) and would 
under these principles survi ve even if the CHEJVA is struck down. The 
underlying cause of action in the ICC arbitration appears primarily to 
be premised on an alleged breach of contractual obligations. In this 
regard, arbitration clause is treated as an independent agreement, 
freely entered into by the parties, and thus enforceable for 
determination of a dispute under the agreement. This will include even CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  74 
the validity of the main agreement. The ICSID arbitration arises from 
the Australia -Pakistan Investment Treaty (BIT). It is premise d on 
alleged breach of treaty obligations by the State of Pakistan (which 
includes, under settled principles of international law, its constituent 
sub-divisions such as GoB) pursuant to Articles 3, 5 and 7 of the BIT. 
Under settled principles of internatio nal law:  (i) every internationally 
wrongful act of a State entails the international responsibility of that 
State; (ii) there is an internationally wrongful act of a State when 
conduct consisting of an action or omission is attributable to the State 
under international law and constitutes a breach of an international 
obligation of the State; (iii) the characterization of an act of a State as 
internationally wrongful is governed by international law such 
characterization is not affected by the characterizati on of the same act 
as lawful by internal law; (iv) the conduct of any State organ shall be 
considered an act of that State under international law whether the 
organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any other functions, 
whatever position it hol ds in the organization of the State and 
whatever its character as an organ of the central Government or of a 
territorial unit of the State and an organ includes any person or entity 
which has that status in accordance with the internal law of the State.  
60.  Learned counsel further argued that the above principles 
have been adopted and applied by domestic courts including English 
courts. One recent example is a decision of the Privy Council wherein 
the same principles were noted as being part of customary 
international law. An ICSID Tribunal has previously held that Article 25 
of the ICSID Convention does not prohibit the treatment of a 
constituent sub -division of a Contracting State from being treated as 
part of that State even if that constituent sub -division has not been CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  75 
notified thereunder to ICSID. Article 6(9) of the Rules of Arbitration of 
the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC Rules) provides that 
unless otherwise agreed, the arbitral tribunal shall not cease to have 
jurisdiction by reason of any allegation that the contract is non -
existent or null and void, provided that the arbitral tribunal upholds 
the validity of the arbitration agreement. And, t he arbitral tribunal 
shall continue to have jurisdiction to determine the parties ’ respective 
rights  and to decide their claims and pleas even though the contract 
itself may be non -existent or null and void. And, Article 41 of the 
ICSID Convention (incorporated into domestic law by the Act IX of 
2011), the ICSID arbitral tribunal shall be a judge of its own 
competence.  Thus , judicial restraint is appropriate and just  and the 
Court ought not to be called upon by a party to the arbitration 
proceedings to collaterally attempt to thwart the proceedings in which 
it has participated, submitted and appointed its  own arbitrator. This is 
tantamount to abuse of the process of this Court. There is no 
fundamental right which entitles any person to seek such interference 
under Article 18 4(3) of the Constitution. There is no issue or allegation 
of public law involved or  even raised in this matter. Consequently, 
even the principles laid down in the majority Judgment (note) of this 
Court in the case of Hub Power Company Ltd. v. Pakistan WAPDA  (PLD 
2000 SC 841) are not applicable at all. According to learned counsel,  
the ph enomena of ceding sovereignty through globalization and 
international obligations is also to be taken into account in the larger 
context of the matter before this Court. In implementation of 
treaty/convention obligations the municipal law makes itself 
subservient to international law. Many sovereign and independent 
states, for the sake of political , economic and  social stability and CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  76 
national security voluntarily surrendered a part of their sovereignty to 
become members of the collectively secure and stable bodies , which  
process is going  on.  
61.  In response, l earned counsel for GOB argued that CHEJVA 
is a “surrender document ” as it attempts to curtail the statutory 
independence and constitutional obligations of a licensing authority, 
inasmuch as the respond ent/foreign companies were permitted by 
GOB to acquire rights in Reko Diq for exploration of copper and gold 
mines upon their own terms and conditions enabling them to maximize 
their profits inasmuch as once the mining began, the profit would be 
calculated  on the end product of gold and copper extracted and 
produced.  Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC argued that  if GOB itself had become a 
party to CHEJVA , it would then be bound by all the decisions taken by 
the Operating Committee of the Joint Venture, where decisions wo uld 
be taken on the basis of voting strength, determined by percentage 
interest in the Joint Venture. This meant that all powers relating to 
prospecting and mining operations would then be vesting in BHP and 
GOB, which is the Licensing Authority for Mines,  would be performing 
its functions subject to direction by BHP. All this was tantamount to 
subordinating sovereign rights of the Province of Balochistan to a 
foreign company for the latter’s monetary interests, which position 
cannot be countenanced.   
62.  It may be mentioned that Part III  of BMCR 1970  provides 
for the issuance of a mining lease and the statutory procedure for 
making applications for the same. In the absence of the application of 
BMCR 1970, CHEJVA attempted to exercise the statutory right o f 
creating rules governing its operations , which is a right reserved for 
competent authority under section 2 of the Act of 1948. Article 11 of CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  77 
CHEJVA provides for its own framework for the transfer of interests 
under the contract for mining development  far away from the statutory 
framework provided in BMCR 1970 . It utterly disregards all the rules 
provided therein and attempts to create an ad -hoc system of awarding 
the parties mining leases automatically. It declares that Prospecting 
Licences issued by the Provincial Government shall be ‘converted into’ 
Mining Licences. This goes much beyond the scope of an exemption 
and is tantamount to usurpation of executive and legislative 
prerogatives. No exemption or relaxation of rules can grant a foreign 
company the power to create ad-hoc rules to apply to a specific 
contract with regard to licences issued by a statutory body. Article 
11.8.2 provides that where the Joint Venture or, pursuant to sub -
clause 11.3.2, a Participating Party elects to develop a mine, then, 
subject only to compliance with routine Government requirements, it 
shall be entitled to convert the relevant Prospecting Licence(s) into 
Mining Licences so as to give a secure title over the required Mining 
Area.  Article 11 not only renders the rules redu ndant, but also creates 
the possibility of continuing ‘Mining Development’ without Government 
approval and even to the exclusion of BDA under sub -clauses 11.3.3 
and 11.4.1 -2. This also disregards the terms and conditions of the 
Prospecting Licences issued to BHP by the Directorate of Mineral 
Development, Balochistan, which, inter alia, provided that the licence 
would not confer upon BHP any right to renewal of the prospecting 
licence or grant of a mining lease over the area or any part thereof 
unless the pr ospecting or work obligations as required under the 
licence have been carried out to the satisfaction of the Directorate of 
the Mineral Development. Besides, CHEJVA  provides for the inclusion 
of other parties in the future as a mining consortium without re course CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  78 
to government licensing or authorization. Such permission to extend 
rights to parties not conceivable at the time of granting exemptions  to 
the exclusion of both the present parties of the contract amounts to an 
attempt to disregard all relevant law  for an undefined period of time. 
The same disregard for the law s of the host country and its law 
making institutions is expressed under Article 17 , inasmuch as it 
provides that in case of change in legislation, which is applicable to the 
Joint Venture , then if the change or the new provision is more 
favourable  to the Joint Venture or one of the Parties than the relevant 
laws, acts , rules or regulations in effect on the date this Agreement 
was signed, the Joint Venture and the Party concerned shall promptl y 
apply to receive the benefits of such change or new provision . 
However, if, on account of the change or new provision , the economic 
benefits to any Party or the Joint Venture existing , or to arise under 
CHEJVA , are materially and adversely affected, dire ctly or indirectly, 
then CHEJVA  shall continue to be implemented in accordance with its 
original terms. Clearly, t his clause of CHEJVA  too, gives an overriding 
effect to CHEJVA  over the legislative process and thereby attempts to 
make subservient the laws of a sovereign country , which cannot be 
approved .  
63.  Learned counsel for TCC argued that the Mining Lease 
against Exploration Licence 5 (EL -5) applied for by TCCP in 2011 was 
illegally refused by the Government’s licensing authority in violation of 
rule 48 of BMR 2002, which made TCC eligible for such a lease as well 
as section 10 of the Protection of Economic Reforms Act 1976.  He 
stated that TCC had completed the exploration work including drilling 
within the extended period wherein substantial discover ies o f gold, 
copper, etc., were made and had also completed the Feasibility Study CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  79 
and submitted it to GOB, containing a study to ascertain the 
commercial feasibility of the mining of the resource, treatment of ore 
obtained in mining operation, expected opt imum return, life of the 
mine, mineable reserves and grade and the results of geological and 
geophysical investigations etc.  After the above discovery by TCC, the 
present litigation attracted general focus and also publicity.  TCC 
asserted its right under C HEJVA and BMR 2002 to be considered for 
and be granted the mining lease with or without the joint venture 
partner . He also averred that GOB, who had supported the legality of 
CHEJVA before the High Court, came up to take a different stand 
before this Court . In response, learned counsel for GOB has submitted 
that there is no question of retraction of pleadings on the part of GOB. 
However, law permits to modify position if there are developments 
subsequent to the filing of the case or new facts come to light.  In this 
regard reliance is placed on  Mst. Ghulam Bibi v. Sarsa Khan  (PLD 1985 
SC 345 ), Mst. Mumtaz Begum  v. Province of Sindh  (2004 CLC 697)  
and Dilshad Ali  v. Ahmed Khan  (2007 CLC 441).  The developments in 
this regard included the approval of Dr. Samar M ubarakmand’s project 
by ECNEC in December 2010 and accordingly CMA 252/2011 was filed 
apprizing the Court of this development and requesting a decision on 
merits. On 8th February, 2011 this Court directed the production of 
entire record relating to CHEJVA.  The said record was retrieved and 
filed through several applications. It made shocking disclosures of 
extensive irregularities and corruption. The Government examined the 
same and decided not to defend the said acts and accordingly it 
decided to render fu ll assistance to this Court from the record that was 
filed. Further, this Court has always encouraged that the Government 
officials must perform their functions in accordance with law and give CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  80 
no weight/consideration to any unlawful order let alone protect  the 
irregularities of their predecessors. See Zahid Akhtar  v. Government of 
Punjab  (PLD 1995 SC 530), Iqbal Hussain  v. Province of Sindh  (2008 
SCMR 105), Human Rights Cases Nos.4668 of 2006, 1111 of 2007 and 
15283 -G of 2010  (PLD 2010 SC 759) .  
64.   Mr. A bdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC for BHP argued that 
GOB through its agent BDA executed CHEJVA under its broader and 
overriding executive authority in terms of Article 142(c) read with 
Article 137 and Article 173 of the Constitution read with rule 3 of 
BMCR 19 70, which was later reaffirmed by Addendum No. 1 and 
Novation Agreement dated 01.04. 2006. Therefore, the process should 
be given full faith and credit throughout Pakistan as per the mandate 
of Article 150 of the Constitution. Learned  counsel for TCC argued  that 
the Addendum signed on 04.03.2000 between GOB, BDA and BHP was 
significant as GOB directly became a party to CHEJVA for the first 
time. He argued that the Addendum established and confirmed BDA as 
an agent of GOB and was created to clarify the positi ons of the parties 
especially the relationship between GOB and BDA.   
65.  Learned counsel further argued that the substance of the 
order dated 25.05.2011 passed in the instant case created a legitimate 
expectation that the CHEJVA was a legal and a valid in strument and 
TCC, at the very least, had the lawful right to apply for, and seek, the 
grant of mining lease because had this Court been, prima  facie, of the 
view that the CHEJVA was void ab initio, it would not have vacated the 
injunction and asked GOB to consider and decide the 
request/application for grant of mining lease. He submitted that it was 
also pertinent to note that GOB too did not object to the vacation of 
the injunction and it was implicit in the vacation of the injunction that CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  81 
a lawful right v ested in TCC as a Joint Venture Partner of GOB under 
CHEJVA to apply for the mining lease in accordance with BMR 2002 
and it was for GOB to decide the same, which it did. TCC acted in good 
faith and there is not an iota of evidence of any impropriety or 
illegality against it on record. BHP has to its detriment relied and acted 
upon the representations in CHEJVA, relaxation notification, 
prospecting license, exploration license and National Mineral Policy as 
well as several affirmations of CHEJVA and mineral  titles issued from 
time to time by or on behalf of GOB.  
66.  Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC argued that BDA was a party to 
CHEJVA and GOB was only added as a third party in its  own right 
through the Addendum and that  the Governor, as the Chief Executive 
of the Province at the time was well within his right to appoint BDA as 
his agent, which represented GOB for signing the Addendum.  He 
clarified that an addendum only adds something by the parties by way 
of rights and obligations.  
67.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC  for GOB argued that CHEJVA 
suffered from uncertainty as regards the identification of parties,  
inasmuch as the first page of CHEJVA mentions “Governor of 
Balochistan ” whereas in clause 1.1 the “Parties ” to CHEJVA are 
identified as BHP and BDA only. This c onfusion makes CHEJVA void 
under section 29 of the Contract Act, 1872, which is also recognized in 
legal opinion dated 3rd September 1999 by Kabraji. Mr. Sufi further 
argued that based on the record it can be stated that the Addendum is 
void under section 20 of the Contract Act as the second party executed 
it under a mistake of fact  that BDA is an agent of GOB under CHEJVA. 
According to him, in absence of any agency document duly executed 
by GOB in favour of BDA, agency of BDA has been wrongly presumed . CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  82 
The record shows that the summary for the then Governor was 
prepared, but he did not sign it. Later, photocopy of the same 
summary was presented to next Governor , which did not fulfil the 
requirement of rule 7 of the GOB Rules of Business, 1976 . Learned 
couns el has further argued that the legal position is that the BDA Act, 
1974 does not authorize the Chairman, BDA to act as an agent of GOB 
on his own accord. Rather BDA’s Chairman has to perform all the acts 
in accordance with the provisions of law and cannot go out of the 
Statute. He has placed reliance on Gadoon Textile Mills  v. WAPDA  
(1997 SCMR 641). He further submitted that it is essential for 
ratification that the Agent is not acting for himself whereas BDA was 
acting for itself. [see Pehlwan  v. Haji Muh ammad Murad  (2005 SCMR 
1405), Imperial Bank of Canada v. Mary Victoria Begley  (AIR 1936 PC 
193), Prasanna Deb Raikat v. Darjeeling Himalayan  (AIR 1936 Cal. 
37), Government of India v. Jamunadhar Rungta  (AIR 1960 Pat. 19)]. 
He argued that the Lahore High Co urt while interpreting section 196 of 
the Contract Act in the case reported as Muhammad Zakria v. Bashir 
Ahmad  (2001 CLC 595 ) has laid down that before ratifying an 
unauthorized act of an agent, the principal must be proved to have the 
knowledge of the act ion he is approving so that he can exercise the 
option of ratifying or disowning. He also argued that once the contract 
is void under sections 20 , 23 or 29 of the Contract Act , no question of 
ratification arises  because  under section 196 of the Contract Ac t, only 
such acts can be ratified , which are done by one person on behalf of 
another. There being no previous relationship of agency between GOB 
and BDA, question of ratification d id not arise.  
68.  Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, learned Advocate General 
Balochis tan, stated that CHEJVA was neither placed before any CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  83 
Government Department for vetting, nor was any opinion of the Law 
Department sought. He stated that BDA, which was a party to the joint 
venture, was not a Government entity and, in any case, did not 
represent GOB. He argued that contracts on behalf of the Federal or 
Provincial Governments are signed in the name of the President or 
Governor of the Province, as the case may be, in terms of Article 
173(3) red with Article 139 of the Constitution. He argued that in the 
instant case, the contract purportedly signed on behalf of the Governor 
was not signed in accordance with GOB Rules of Business, 1976 by an 
officer duly authoriz ed to do so thereunder. He pointed out that 
neither approval of the agreement was s ought from the Provincial 
Cabinet nor was any advice sent to the Governor as required under 
rule 20 read with rule 40 ibid. In this behalf, he cited Schedule VIII 
containing matters to be sent to the Chief Minister for approval under 
rule 39 ibid.  
69.  It may be noted that under Article 173(3) of the 
Constitution, all contracts made on behalf of the Federation or of a 
Province shall be expressed to be made in the name of the President 
or, as the case may be, the Governor of the Province, and all such 
contracts and all assurances of property made in the exercise of that 
authority shall be executed on behalf of the President or Governor by 
such persons and in such manner as he may direct or authorize, 
whereas under Article 139(2), the Provincial Government sh all, by 
rules, specify the manner in which orders and other instruments made 
and executed in the name of Governor shall be authenticated. Under 
rule 7(2) of the GOB Rules of Business, 1976 framed by GOB in 
pursuance of Article 139(2) ibid, all executive ac tions of Government 
shall be expressed in the name of the Governor; unless an officer has CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  84 
been specifically empowered to sign an order or instrument, it shall be 
signed by the Secretary, the Additional Secretary, the Joint Secretary, 
the Deputy Secretary o r the Section Officer to the Government in the 
department concerned and such signature shall be deemed to be the 
proper authentication of such order or instrument; and that 
instructions for the making of contracts on behalf of the Governor and 
the executio n of such contracts and all assurances of property shall be 
issued by the Law Department. Now, it is to be seen whether CHEJVA 
was entered following the above parameters. The title page of CHEJVA 
recites that the Agreement for Chagai Hills Exploration Join t Venture is 
made between the Balochistan Development Authority and HBP 
Minerals International, Exploration Inc., whereas its opening page 
describes that the Agreement is between “the Governor of Balochistan 
through the Chairman, Balochistan Development Au thority, a statutory 
corporation of Balochistan Province ” and “BHP Minerals International 
Exploration Inc., a corporation of the State of Delaware, USA ”. The 
Agreement was signed on the one hand by the Chairman BDA and on 
the other by the representative of  BHP. Relying on these recitals, the 
learned counsel for BHP took the position that GOB was a party to 
CHEJVA for all practical purposes, which it had executed through its 
agent BDA. In this behalf, it is noteworthy that as per the definition 
clause of CHE JVA, “Parties ” means BHP and BDA. Clause 2.1 of 
CHEJVA provides, inter alia, that the Agreement shall be conditional 
upon the Parties receiving from the Federal Government and/or the 
Provincial Government within six months of the date of the Agreement, 
or such other period as the parties may agree, all consents and 
approvals necessary under Pakistani law. This amply makes it clear 
that both GOB and the Federal Government were entities outside the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  85 
ambit of “Parties ” from where the “Parties ” to CHEJVA were to  seek 
the necessary consents and approvals. However, by execution of the 
Addendum, which was signed on 04.03.2000, some 7 years after the 
signing of CHEJVA, whereby CHEJVA was sought to be amended, a 
completely new turn was taken in many respects. The open ing page of 
the Addendum recites that the Addendum is made between the 
Governor of Balochistan, for and on behalf of the Province of 
Balochistan, referred to as “GOB”, and the Balochistan Development 
Authority, a statutory corporation created by and existi ng under the 
BDA Act, 1974, and BHP Minerals. Thus, in the Addendum, as against 
the original bipartite agreement, a tripartite agreement was executed, 
and GOB is purported to be made a party. Such an assumption 
constituted a mistake of fact as rightly asse rted by the learned counsel 
for GOB. Further, the last page of the Addendum shows that it was 
signed by the Chairman BDA on two counts, firstly on behalf of the 
Governor of Balochistan, and secondly on behalf of BDA, and then by 
the representative of BHP. In this behalf, it must be mentioned here 
that merely because Governor of Balochistan was mentioned in the 
title of CHEJVA would not mean that GOB had become a party to the 
agreement. It is clear that CHEJVA was made between BDA and BHP 
alone for all pract ical purposes, and not between GOB through BDA 
and BHP. Therefore, recitals in the Addendum, by way of preamble, 
that GOB through Chairman BDA and BHP intended to enter into a 
Joint Venture Agreement and it was desirable to clarify the roles of 
GOB and BDA  thereunder; that GOB intended to appoint BDA as its 
agent in connection with CHEJVA, or GOB affirmed that BDA had been 
exercising rights and discharging obligations under the Agreement as if 
it were a joint venturer rather than the agent of GOB, or GOB cl arified CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  86 
the role of BDA under CHEJVA as agent of GOB and the scope of its 
authority to act on behalf of GOB in connection with CHEJVA, or GOB 
ratified all past actions, matters and things done by BDA in connection 
with CHEJVA all were devices to indirectly  bring GOB into the pale of 
CHEJVA, which object could only be achieved by following the course 
provided under the law. All these clarifications and ratifications were 
based on a mistake of fact within the contemplation of section 20 of 
the Contract Act, 1 872, i.e., GOB was a party to CHEJVA and BDA was 
agent of GOB. Such a mistake of fact on the part of BHP made the 
contract void and unenforceable.  
70.  The question as to whether GOB was a party to CHEJVA 
remained under consideration of the parties to CHE JVA for quite some 
time, and was examined in detail by the legal experts engaged by each 
side to advise them on the Addendum. M/S Kabraji & Talibuddin, in 
advising BHP on the preparation of the final draft of the Addendum 
pursuant to the issues raised by t he Law Department of GOB, in their 
letter dated 03.09.1999 stated, inter alia, that there was confusion as 
to who were the “Parties ” to the JVA, which had arisen due to the fact 
that the GOB was stated at the head of the Agreement to be a party to 
the JVA “through the BDA ”, but JVA was, at the foot of the document, 
expressed to be executed on behalf of BDA (not GOB through BDA), 
but without any indication that the Agreement was being signed in a 
representative capacity as an agent “on behalf of the Governor  of 
Balochistan ”. It was further stated that the question as to who were 
the parties to the JVA became even more unclear by virtue of the fact 
that the term “Parties ” in the JVA is defined as “BHP and BDA ” and it 
was abundantly clear on reading the agreeme nt that it was in fact the 
BDA, and not the GOB who was the other party to it and entitled to the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  87 
rights and subject to the obligations respectively conferred on or 
assumed by BDA under the agreement. The opinion termed it as a 
fundamental uncertainty as t o the parties to the contract, which could 
render it void and advised that the agreement be novated to the BDA, 
i.e. by a contract between GOB, BDA and BHP. The opinion recognized 
that the fact of Chairman BDA signing the JVA on behalf of GOB would 
not by itself confer an agency on the BDA in relation to the contractual 
obligations and rights of the principal under the contract, i.e. GOB.  As 
regards clause 2.4 of the Addendum aimed at ratifying and adopting 
by GOB the acts performed by BDA pursuant to assu mption of 
obligations under the JVA, it was opined that it would not operate or 
purport to operate as a “protection clause ” for all BHP’s “wrong 
actions ” and that there was nothing about absolving BHP for any 
supposed liability for any wrongdoing. The opin ion, in the final 
conclusion, advised that GOB must be expressly made and remain a 
party to the Addendum because if that was not done, then all terms 
and conditions therein would be unenforceable by or against GOB. 
Similarly, M/S Shakil Law Firm, in its op inion regarding the draft 
Addendum tendered by it to BDA vide its letter dated 10.11.1999 
stated, inter alia, as under: -  
“In our opinion, any addendum to the JVA can only be 
executed amongst the Parties, who are signatory to the 
JVA. As far as GOB is con cerned, the same is not party to 
JVA, therefore, they cannot be included in addendum.  
 
Observations of the Law Department that all contracts on 
behalf of the Provincial Government under article 173 of 
the Constitution are to be executed in the name of the  
Governor of the Province, may be relevant in respect of 
the contracts which are intended to be executed by the 
Government, whereas the JVA has been expressly 
executed between BDA and BHP. ”  
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  88 
This opinion, however, was disregarded and the Addendum dated 
04.03.2000 was signed in the name of “the Governor, on behalf of the 
province ”, BDA and BHP. While we agree with Mr. Khalid Anwar that 
BDA was a party to CHEJVA, but would not uphold his proposition that 
by means of Addendum GOB could be added as a third par ty in its own 
right. Inclusion of GOB as a new party to the contract required an 
affirming signature under the hand of a duly authoriz ed representative 
or agent of GOB in terms of Rule 7 of GOB Rules of Business, 1976. 
This not having been done, the signat ure of Chairman BDA on the 
Addendum in the circumstances of the case, did not fulfil the 
requirement of rule 7 ibid. Hence, the argument of learned counsel for 
TCC that the Governor was well within his right to appoint BDA as his 
agent fails and is, theref ore, repelled.  
71.  It may be noted that in the above context, an undated 
authorization letter on a plain paper was got signed from the then 
Governor of Balochistan [Justice (Retired) Amir -ul-Mulk Mengal], 
purporting to authorize Chairman BDA to sign the Addendum on behalf 
of the Governor. For facility of reference, said letter is reproduced 
hereinbelow: -  
AUTHORIZATION LETTER  
I, Justice (Retd) Amir -ul-Mulk Mengal, Governor 
Balochistan hereby authorize Chairman, Balochistan 
Development Authority to sign A ddendum No.1 to the Joint 
Venture Agreement dated July 29, 1993 between 
Government of Balochistan through Chairman, Balochistan 
Development Authority and BHP Minerals International 
Exploration Inc. for the Exploration of Copper, Gold and 
Associated Mineral s in Chagai (Balochistan) on behalf of 
the Government of Balochistan.  
      Sd/- 
(Justice Retd. Amir -ul-Mulk Mengal)  
Governor Balochistan  
 
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  89 
Although prior to this authorization, former Governor Syed Fazal Agha 
had not signed the document placed before him for the purpose of 
executing authorization, prima facie , for the reason that before 
12.10.1999, GOB through the Chief Minister had decided to constitute 
a two -member committee to examine the said document. There are 
serious question marks on the manner in which the then Governor of 
Balochistan granted authorization by executing an undated document. 
However, from certain documents it could be presumed that the same 
was executed on 24.12.1999 Thus, by means of the Addendum, in the 
name of ratification in term s of section 196 of the Contract Act, 1872, 
instead of making amendments in CHEJVA, its entire complexion was 
changed. This authorization by the Governor to sign the agreement as 
an agent in favour of BDA was through a note by the Governor titled 
‘Authoriz ation Letter’ which is not printed on the Governor’s 
letterhead, carries no date, notification number, nor is it addressed to 
any office or authority or even stamped. Neither is there any 
supporting documentation, nor does the letter provide a reference to  a 
decision of the Cabinet on the matter. The issue of approval of the 
Option Agreement and Alliance Agreement was brought to Cabinet 
three times but it did not approve it. In the circumstances, the 
approval obtained from the Governor on an undated plain p aper was 
improper and untenable in the eyes of law.   
72.  Learned counsel for GOB argued that CHEJVA also suffer ed 
from uncertainty about the area, which  is to be viewed as subject 
matter of CHEJVA . In response, Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC for TCC 
stated  that it was in the interest of GOB to grant as wide an area as 
possible for prospecting to ensure discovery of minerals over a large 
part of the Province. It may be noted that according to clause 5.3.1 of CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  90 
CHEJVA, the aggregate prospecting area shall not be m ore than 50 sq 
km. However, by virtue of c lause 5.10 , the map covering an area of 
13000 sq km , annexed with CHEJVA  as “Schedule B ”, may be revised 
so as to accurately represent the current status of the area from time 
to time . It clearly establishes that t he area is not final and constitutes 
uncertainty within the ambit of section 29 of the Contract Act. See 
Sheikh Shahabuddin v. Vilayat Ali  (AIR 1926 Nagpur 435 at 439) 
wherein the Court declared a contract pertaining to a mining area to 
be void as it did n ot identify the deposit clearly as constituting a 
mistake of fact in terms of section 20 of the Contract Act. Also see 
Abdul Khaliq v. Sabir Ahmed  (PLD 1961 BJ 79), Rauf Ahmed Ghori  v. 
Managing Director, Cholistan Development Authority, Bahawalpur  
(1998 CL C 1464) and Ahmed Ali Khan  v. City District Government, 
Karachi  (2009 MLD 704).  
73.  The Option Agreement and Alliance Agreement are also 
premised on a mistake of fact that BDA was an agent of GOB under 
CHEJVA, therefore, the same are too void under secti on 20 of the 
Contract Act. At no stage of the proceedings, was any document 
creating relationship of principal and agent between GOB and BDA was 
produced or referred to by the private respondents nor did we come 
across any such document while scanning the record of the case 
during hearing or in the course of writing of judgment. Moreover, 
admittedly, BDA and GOB were not parties to the Option Agreement 
and Alliance Agreement, therefore, the learned counsel for GOB was 
right in arguing that the same were not  binding upon BDA and GOB. 
The legal position is that the BDA Act, 1974 does not authorize BDA to 
act as an agent of GOB, rather the Act requires BDA to seek approval CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  91 
of the GOB in certain matters while performing its functions 
enumerated in the Act.  
74.  It is pertinent at this stage to discuss BDA’s capacity to 
enter into an agreement of the nature of CHEJVA in light of the 
provisions of BDA Act, 1974 under which it is incorporated . Section 
3(2) of BDA Act, 1974 provides that the Authority shall be a bod y 
corporate having perpetual succession and common seal. It is 
empowered to acquire and hold property, both movable and 
immovable, subject to the provisions of BDA Act, 1974. It can sue or 
be sued by the said name. Under section 17(6), the Authority may 
participate in joint ventures with the private sector in regard to 
matters specified in clauses (a) and (b) of sub -section (1) of section 
16 whereas aforesaid clauses (a) and (b) of section 16(1) enumerate 
the functions of the Authority, namely, preparation and execution of 
comprehensive development programmes including projects and 
schemes relating to land and water development, power, agriculture, 
industry and activities ancillary thereto, for the economic uplift of 
relatively under -developed areas to be no tified by Government, and 
planning, promoting, organizing and implementing projects for mineral 
exploitation and development including establishment of mineral -
based industries, etc. BDA’s separate legal entity is reinforced by 
BHP’s learned counsel’s own argument, though made without 
prejudice, that BDA itself retained statutory functions and powers to 
enter into joint ventures for development of mineral based industries 
with the private sector in terms of  section 17(6) read with section 
16(1)(b)(i) of the  BDA Act, 1974 .  
75.   A perusal of the above provision shows that BDA possesses 
its own legal personality, distinct and separate from GOB. BDA is not CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  92 
even listed as an attached department under any of the Departments 
of GOB in the GOB Rules of Business, 1 976. However, BDA in entering 
into the Addendum remained in a state of confusion as to whether 
CHEJVA was, or any subsequent agreement on the subject  had,  to be 
entered into by it independently of any other department of GOB. All 
that BDA through its Board  of Directors was required to do was to seek 
approval of GOB for the project of mineral exploration in terms of 
section 4 of BDA Act, 1974 and enter into a Joint Venture Agreement 
in terms of section 17 read with section 16 of the Act. All subsequent 
agree ments/instruments in connection with CHEJVA would have 
followed the same position. This confusion on the part of BDA as well 
as GOB hierarchy unfortunately led to a fundamental uncertainty and 
ambiguity in CHEJVA, which rendered the contract void ab initio  on this 
score as well.  In this view of the matter, the very premise of the 
Addendum as well as the Novation Agreement that BDA was an agent 
of GOB constitutes a “mistake of fact ” within the ambit of section 20 of 
the Contract Act.  
76.  The learned counse l for the petitioners argued that GOB, 
whilst determining as to whether the terms and conditions of CHEJVA 
constituted the best possible deals in the public interest, had failed to 
address the following issues, in the disposal of the copper and gold 
wealth  of Reko Diq: -  
(i) Whether any steps were taken by GOB to fully inform itself 
of the nature of gold and copper mining business in Reko 
Diq and the global business norms prevailing in the 21st 
century for large scale gold and copper mining and the 
terms o f agreement between National Governments and 
foreign corporations?  
 
(ii) Whether competitive offers from major/successful mining 
companies operating in other countries were obtained for 
comparison and negotiation and whether any tenders 
floated internatio nally for the extraction of gold from the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  93 
Reko Diq mines, which were proven by the year 2000 
when Respondent No. 4 bought the share of Respondent 
No. 8 under CHEJVA for US$60 million?   
 
(iii) Whether GOB made the decision on the basis of 
consideration of the relevant facts brought on record 
having regard to rationality and competence, technical and 
financial considerations?  
 
77.  In response, M/S Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC for BHP 
and Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC for TCC stated that CHEJVA provided 
additional  benefits to GOB beyond those that were available under 
BMCR 1970, inasmuch as GOB was given 25% “free carried interest ” 
up to discovery and related licenses also vested in GOB. Further, GOB 
would not bear the cost of exploration - the highest risk stage o f the 
project – 100% of the cost of exploration being borne by the foreign 
investors BHP/TCC. Subsequently, GOB would also be entitled to get 
25% share in mining lease. According to the learned counsel, GOB 
would not bear the cost of exploration, which is the highest risk stage 
of the project and that 100% of the cost of exploration would be borne 
by the foreign investors BHP/TCC. As a consequence of the agreement, 
52% of the free cash flow of the project would be received by the 
Federal Government and GOB and only 48% by the private party. 
Learned counsel claimed that there were approximately 20 Exploration 
Licenses in Chagai District other than EL -5 none of which conferred 
such rights in favour of GOB. According to the learned counsel, under 
all those ELs,  100% interest was in favour of the holder and the same 
would be the case if and when a mining lease is granted. EL -5 is only 
0.8% of all Exploration Licenses in the District and 0.2% of the 
District. Mr. Pirzada further argued that CHEJVA was approved by the 
entire chain of GOB authorities, i.e., Chief Minister, Governor and the 
concerned Departments. He also argued that under BMCR 1970, a PL CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  94 
was to be issued on “first come first serve basis ” and the holder would 
have 100% interest therein. CHEJVA provided  for Stage One Activities 
(Exploration); Stage Two Activities (Pre -feasibility); Stage Three 
Activities (Feasibility); and Stage Four Activities (Feasibility). Under 
Clause 3.2 of CHEJVA, BHP had to “earn” its 75% share. Under Clause 
8.1 of CHEJVA GOB was not to contribute for exploration, pre -
feasibility and feasibility stage. Under Clause 12.4.1 even when Mining 
Venture started financing for GOB to be obtained by BHP. All of these 
provisions showed that an advantage and benefit well beyond that 
even envis aged by BMCR 1970 was achieved by GOB under CHEJVA. 
Learned counsel asserted that it was a beneficial agreement and after 
the discovery made in pursuance of CHEJVA, District Chagai had been 
put on the world mining map. As regards petitioners’ claim that th e 
existence of copper and gold deposits in Balochistan was evidenced 
long ago in maps published by the Geological Survey of Pakistan 
(GSP), Mr. Pirzada stated that such a mention in the GSP map only 
signifie s probability of mineral presence due to its loca tion on the 
Tethiyan copper belt that extends from Turkey into Iran and 
Afghanistan all the way to Balochistan, and does not in itself equate to 
the identification of specific reserves, which can only be ascertained 
through the process of prospecting for m ineable resources, which is an 
expensive process requiring investment in millions of dollars. On this 
point, Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC stated that though it has been known 
since Mughal times that the Province of Balochistan is rich in natural 
resources inc luding great deposits of precious metals such as copper, 
but it was because of CHEJVA that these precious natural resources of 
Balochistan worth billions of dollars in the form of mineral wealth were 
finally discovered. According to him, without the assist ance of CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  95 
companies like BHP and TCC, with international mining experience, 
this would have been impossible and the whereabouts and extent of 
the metal reserves of Balochistan would have remained unknown. He 
further argued that GOB was awarded 25% share in C HEJVA without 
having to spend a penny which was a very rare arrangement in the 
mining industry. The word ‘void’ in the context of the Contract Act 
merely means ‘unenforceable’. He asserted that no one has challenged 
the validity or binding nature of CHEJVA  in any manner whatsoever. 
He averred that TCCP was created to obtain EL -5 under BMR 2002 and 
that none of the terms of the mining lease was violated. If any such 
terms were violated, GOB ought to have sought a ‘show cause’ first.  
78.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Suf i, ASC for GOB stated that vide 
application dated 24.04.1994, BDA requested that an area of 
3,347,226 acres as per the attached plan may be reserved for 
exploration of gold and associated minerals in Chagai District for the 
joint venture. Vide letter dated  19.07.1994, the Directorate of Mineral 
Development, Government of Balochistan, in pursuance of decision of 
Mines Committee (not on record) and GOB’s notification dated 
20.01.1994, accepted the aforesaid application for reservation of gold 
area in relaxati on of the limits of the area as fixed under Annexure IV 
of BMCR 1970 (Annexure IV is not on record) for a period of three 
years with effect from date of issue of the said letter and permitted the 
applicant to start “prospecting/mining operation ” for gold m inerals 
over the aforesaid area of 3,347,226 acres. This permission letter also 
mentions that the applicant will deposit an annual fee in the sum of 
Rs. 3,347,226 at nominal rate of Rs. 1 per acre instead of Rs. 5 per 
acre as the applicant was exempted fro m payment of the prescribed 
annual fee in relaxation of rule 33 of BMCR 1970. This reservation of CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  96 
3,347,226 acres for exploration is the most serious violation of BMCR 
1970. There is no provision in BMCR 1970 for reservation of an area 
for exploration purp oses. The terms “exploration ” or “exploration area ” 
and “reservation of area for exploration ” do not exist in BMCR 1970. 
The said reservation of a huge tract of land does not fall under 
relaxation of rules but amounts to amendment of the BMCR 1970, 
which a mendment was never made. The mention of grant of 
exploration area does not fall within the ambit of relaxation, as 
provided under rule 98 of the BMCR 1970. The grant of reservation 
area was, therefore, illegal and created a complete monopoly of the 
Joint V enture over the gold reserves in the gold belt located in 
Balochistan.  
79.  Learned counsel also submitted that there is no provision 
for grant of mineral title to a Joint Venture in BMR 2002. Rule 9 
stipulates that GOB, at the request of a person proposi ng to carry on 
mineral operations, may enter into a mineral agreement in case of 
substantial foreign investment. For this purpose, rule 9(3) provides 
that a mineral agreement may make provision for the formation of 
joint ventures under sub -clause (3)(c). However, CHEJVA is neither a 
mineral agreement nor has any mineral agreement under rule 9 been 
executed between GOB and TCC. It appears that a  request to this 
effect was made by TCC in the year 2007 to respondent No. 3 
Government of Pakistan  (GOP)  for a min eral agreement to be executed 
amongst GOB, GOP and TCC , but the same was not granted. At any 
rate, t here was no mineral agreement in the field whereunder a 
mineral title would be granted to a joint venture. Hence, the 
exploration licence granted to the Joint Venture  and extended up to CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  97 
2011 was violati ve of BMR 2002. The Joint Venture was also not 
entitled to claim a mining lease under the BMR 2002.  
80.  We have considered the argument of the learned counsel 
for the petitioners that consideration of CHEJVA was inadequate, 
therefore, the same was liable to be declared void ab initio on that 
score as well. In this regard, it may be noted that Article 3.1 of 
CHEJVA provides that the object of the contractual Joint Venture to 
explore for mineral deposits in the exploration area and to conduct 
feasibility studies so as to evaluate the economic viability of the 
mineral deposits therein whereas the consideration of CHEJVA is stated 
in Article 3.2, which provides that BHP shall be entitled to 75% 
percentage interest on completion of stages one and two activities and 
commissioning of feasibility study. The 75% percentage interest in the 
Joint Venture to be received by BHP is restated and reinforced in 
Article 3.3 and further reiterated in Article 3.4. Much emphasis was  
laid by the learned counsel for BHP that BHP or subsequently its 
assignee had to “earn” its share by undertaking and completing the 
aforesaid activities/processes whereas GOB would be receiving 25% 
“free carried interest up to discovery ” and thus this con sideration of 
CHEJVA was lawful, proper, just and not against any principle of public 
policy. BHP/TCC in a presentation to the Court highlighted that a 
prospecting licence enables the holder to prospect on some lands 
which are subject to the mineral resour ces. The learned counsel  
explained that mineral exploration is the process of finding ore 
(commercially viable concentrations of minerals) to mine , which is a 
much more intensive, organized and professional form of mineral 
prospecting and, though it freque ntly uses the services of prospecting, 
the process of mineral exploration on the whole is much more CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  98 
involved. Mineral exploration methods vary at different stages of the 
process depending on size of the area being explored, as well as the 
density and type of information sought. Then, area selection is a 
crucial step in professional mineral exploration. Selection of the best, 
most prospective, area in a mineral field, geological region or terrain 
will assist in making it not only possible to find ore deposit s, but to 
find them easily, cheaply and quickly. Area selection is based on 
applying the theories behind ore genesis, the knowledge of known ore 
occurrences and the method of their formation, to known geological 
regions via the study of geological maps, to  determine potential areas 
where the particular class of ore deposit being sought may exist. 
Oftentimes new styles of deposits may be found which reveal 
opportunities to find ‘look -alike’ deposit styles in rocks and terrains 
previously thought barren, whic h may result in a process of pegging of 
leases in similar geological settings based on this new model or 
methodology. This process applies the disciplines of basin modeling, 
structural geology, geochronology, petrology and a host of geophysical 
and geochem ical disciplines to make predictions and draw parallels 
between the known ore deposits and their physical form and the 
unknown potential of finding a ‘look alike’ within the area selected. 
Area selection is also influenced by the commodity being sought; 
exploring for gold occurs in a different manner and within different 
rocks and areas to exploration for oil or natural gas or iron ore. Areas 
which are prospective for gold may not be prospective for other metals 
and commodities. Similarly, companies of diff erent sizes (in terms of 
market capitalization and financial strength) may look for different 
sized deposits, or deposits of a minimum size, depending on their will 
and ability to finance construction. He stated that o ften the major CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  99 
mining houses will not look for deposits of less than a certain size class 
because small deposits will not meet their criteria for an internal rate 
of return. This practice may result in larger mining companies 
relinquishing control of smaller ore bodies they find, or may preclu de 
them from entering a terrain which is characterized by deposits of a 
particular type or style. Often a company or consortium wishing to 
enter mineral exploration may conduct market research to determine, 
if a resource in a particular commodity is found,  whether or not the 
resource will be worth mining based on projected commodity prices 
and demand growth. The learned counsel stated that t his process may 
also inform upon the area selection process as noted above, where 
areas with small -sized deposit style s will be ruled out based on likely 
economic returns should a deposit be found. This occurs because often 
smaller deposits are more expensive to run, and hence, carry greater 
risks of closure if commodity prices fall significantly. The ultimate 
result of a n area selection process is the pegging or notification of 
exploration licenses, known as tenements. Similarly, companies of 
different sizes (in terms of market capitalization and financial strength) 
may look for different sized deposits, or deposits of a minimum size, 
depending on their will and ability to finance construction.  
81.  Now if one were to argue, as has been done by the learned 
counsel for BHP, that since a prospecting/exploration licencee has to 
undertake all the above noted processes of pros pecting/exploration at 
its own expense, the l icencee must get the lion’s share in the 
undertaking and the lessor, for not having to spend much in the 
process, even though it is the owner of the mineral wealth, must be 
placed at a disadvantageous position a s regards its percentage 
interest. Admittedly, in the entire afore -noted process, both the lessor CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  100 
and lessee do not get any return until the activity reaches the final 
stage, i.e., extraction of the mineral in question, its smelting and 
thereafter its mark eting. Therefore, to say that BDA will be getting 
25% interest from the inception of the agreement does not reflect the 
correct position. The percentage interest of BDA will remain the same 
25% and BDA will get it only after the project reaches the above 
stages. As per the usual business practices, especially in a joint 
venture, the share percentage of the parties in the ultimate interest 
(free cash flow) are determined on the basis of the investments made 
by the respective parties. If one party has assets worth Rs.100/ - and 
the other party invests Rs.100/ - for making it marketable, both parties 
get 50:50 share in the net return. In another situation, if one party 
has assets worth Rs.300/ - and the other invests Rs.100/ - for making it 
marketable, then both pa rties get 75:25 share in the return. In yet 
another scenario, where one has assets worth Rs.1000/ - and the other 
party invests Rs.100/ - to make it marketable, the share percentage of 
the two will be 10:1. In all these situations, the percentage interest of  
each party is proportionate to the input percentage by the respective 
party.  
82.  To substantiate his contention, the learned counsel for the 
petitioners placed reliance upon letter dated 28.04.1992 of the 
National Centre for Technology Transfer, Ministr y of Science and 
Technology, Government of Pakistan addressed to the Chairman BDA 
with reference to his request for the views and comments of the 
Federal Government on CHEJVA. Having examined the document, the 
National Centre opined that the term “equity s hare” in a joint venture 
company is improperly used and since it was a contractual joint 
venture where the parties will share profits and liabilities according to CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  101 
their percentage interest in the venture, therefore, those terms be 
avoided. The Centre furth er stated that if BHP was insisting to recoup 
the expenditures incurred during exploration and feasibility study 
phase, then BDA ought to be given the right to enhance its percentage 
interest up to at least 50% on the commercial production of the 
mineral.  
83.  In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioners also drew 
our attention to a project of the Qara -Zaghan Gold Mines, an Afghan 
Company, backed by investors from USA, Britain and Turkey through 
JP Morgan Investment Bank, which had obtained mining r ights in open 
bidding for the said project on the following terms and conditions: -  
(i) 26% royalty from the gross production of the gold 
extracted to be sold in the London market;  
 
(ii) No infrastructure would be provided by the Afghanistan 
Govt; and th at all immovable property would become the 
property of the Govt;  
 
(iii) The company would pay surface rents for the use of the 
land;  
 
(iv) The Contract is based upon EITI (Extractive Industry 
Transparency Initiative) where the contract does not 
contain a  confidentiality clause.  
 
On the contrary, even though learned counsel for BHP time and again 
described GOB’s 25% as “free carried interest up to discovery ”, but 
the fact of the matter is that consideration of CHEJVA cannot be 
termed 25%. In so doing, the  learned counsel overlooks clause 12.4 of 
CHEJVA, which provides that the costs of activities and operations 
within a mining area shall be paid for by the participating parties in 
proportion to their respective percentage interests provided always 
that the  BDA shall be entitled to elect not to contribute to the cost of 
such development with effect from the conclusion of the then current CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  102 
programme and budget and require that BHP contribute such costs on 
behalf of BDA until such time as minerals are produced from the 
mining area. It further provides that upon minerals or other minerals 
being produced from the mining area, BHP shall be entitled to recover 
from BDA (i) all of those costs (principal sums) which BHP contributed 
on behalf of BDA to the mining devel opment and (ii) compounding 
interest accruing on the principal sums at LIBOR plus 2%. Further, 
under clause 12.5 of CHEJVA, BDA covenanted and agreed with BHP to 
repay the debt by means of fully allocated fifty percent of BDA’s 
entitlement to gross revenue s derived from the mining venture. Clause 
12.6 places a floating charge against BDA’s property and interest in 
the mining venture.  
84.  Furthermore, Article 3.2 of CHEJVA provides that BHP shall 
be entitled to 75% percentage interest in the Joint Venture subject to 
clause 7.2. Under paragraph (a), BDA is required to provide 
support/services to BHP  in terms of appropriate administrative support 
as required for the obtaining of all leases, licences, claims, permits or 
other authorities of any kind whatsoever  being necessary for the 
conduct of Joint Venture activities . Under paragraph (b), BDA is 
responsible for providing interpret ation and liaison services as may be 
reasonably required by the Manager. Under paragraph (c), BDA has to 
provide services of the ki nd referred to in sub -clause 5.7.2. Under 
paragraph (d), BDA is responsible for providing all mining information 
and any other relevant information in its possession prior to the 
commencement date per taining to the exploration area. Under 
paragraph (d), BD A is to provide accommodation of a reasonable 
standard for persons involved in the conduct of the Joint Venture 
activities in such places within or near the exploration area where CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  103 
accommodation is readily available . Under paragraph (e), BDA is 
responsible to provide suitable security arrangements for persons 
engaged upon Joint Venture activities within the exploration area or 
whilst such persons are in the course of travelling to or from the 
exploration area and Quetta as may be arising out of discussions 
between the Manager, BDA and the Provincial Government, from time 
to time. The liability of BDA to bear the aforesaid expenses is further 
clarified in clause 7.3, which states that in the event that the 
Operating Committee decides to undertake a feasibility  study, BHP 
shall fund such study provided always that the BDA shall continue to 
provide at its own expense the services referred to in clause 7.2. In 
terms of sub -clause 5.7.2 as referred to clause 7.2, BDA is also liable 
for negotiating all necessary lan d access agreements in connection 
with such further prospecting licences. Further, the BDA shall be 
responsible for liaising with relevant provincial Government and local 
government authorities and with affected local landholders to ensure 
that good relati ons are maintained between the Joint Venture and 
other persons during the conduct of Joint Venture activities. The 
extent of liability of BDA to bear expenses goes on. Clause 9.3 titled 
“contribution by the BDA ” is yet another interest example in this 
respect. On the one hand, it provides that with the exception of those 
costs to be borne by the BDA in conjunction with its obligations under 
clause 7.2, the BDA shall not be obliged to contribute to any Joint 
Venture expenditure required in association with t he exploration 
programme, and on the other, it provides that upon completion by 
BHP of the exploration programme, the BDA shall become obliged to 
contribute to all further Joint Venture expenditure in proportion to its 
percentage interest. Clause 10.8.2 pr ovides that the expenditure CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  104 
incurred in the case of accident or any other emergency relating to the 
Joint Venture activities shall be outlaid on behalf of the parties in 
proportion to their respective percentage interests. Clause 10.10.4 
provides that any party may, at its own expense conduct or have 
conducted for it a confirmatory audit of the Joint Venture’s financial 
books, reports and records. Clause 12.4 on the one hand provides that 
the costs of activities and operations within a mining area shall be paid 
for by the participating parties in proportion to their respective 
percentage interests in the mining venture provided always that the 
BDA shall be entitled to elect not to contribute to the cost of such 
development with effect from the conclusion of the then current 
programme and budget and require that BHP contribute such costs on 
behalf of the BDA until such time as minerals are produced from the 
mining area, and on the other, provides that upon minerals or other 
minerals being produced from the min ing area, BHP shall be entitled to 
recover from the BDA (i) all of those costs (principal sums) which BHP 
contributed on behalf of the BDA to the mining development and (ii) 
compounding interest accruing on the principal sums at LIBOR plus 
two percent (2%)  such principal sums and interest thereon hereinafter 
called the ‘debt’. Under clause 12.5, BDA has to repay the debt by 
means of fully allocating fifty percent of the BDA’s entitlement to gross 
revenues derived from the mining venture. From the above prov isions 
of CHEJVA, it is clear that BDA is liable to bear a host of expenditures 
in connection with the Joint Venture activities, and it cannot be said 
that GOB is entitled to 25% “free carried interest up to discovery ” as 
asserted by the learned counsel fo r BHP. The learned counsel for BHP, 
in asserting that BDA’s 25% percentage interest was free carried 
interest, never set off the above contributions/expenditures to be CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  105 
made by BDA. It is thus established that CHEJVA was entered into for 
an inadequate consi deration as regards the percentage interest of 
BDA.   
85.  As noted hereinabove, the Addendum purported to clarify 
the role of GOB in the original CHEJVA and to confirm BDA’s agency for 
GOB, something which did not exist in CHEJVA. It also purported to 
make alterations in CHEJVA with retrospective effect, that too, in the 
name of interpreting terms, which were not present in the original 
contract. The very first component of a principal granting ratification is 
the confirmation that the purported agent was in fact acting in excess 
of authority and was never an agent of the principal. This is a 
contradiction in terms because an attempt was being made to clarify 
certain things, and in the light of such clarification, to ratify what was 
done by BDA in its separ ate capacity, as having been done by it as 
agent of GOB. It is already established that relationship of principal 
and agent never existed between the two, therefore, the question of 
ratification would not arise and the ratification sought to be made in 
the Addendum was an exercise in futility. One of the established 
essentials of ratification in law is that the purported agent must have 
been acting in the name of the purported principal, always having 
been representing himself as a lawful agent of the same (Sanaullah v. 
Muhammad Rafiq 2003 CLC 138). In the instant case, BDA never 
purported to act as agent of GOB, rather it was doing certain acts and 
processing matters concerning CHEJVA as a Joint Venture partner, 
e.g., in the matter of seeking relaxation, BD A never posed itself as 
agent of GOB, rather it dealt with the matter in its separate capacity 
and pursued it with the concerned departments of GOB as a Joint 
Venture partner. It is well settled that a cts done by a person in his CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  106 
own name and in his separat e legal capacity are not capable of 
subsequent ratification by another person. See (Muhammad Zakaria v. 
Basher Ahmad  2001 CLC 595)  and Imperial Bank of Canada v. Mary 
Victoria Begley  (AIR 1936 PC 193). Moreover, GOB in the instant case 
was at all times aware of the actions of BDA as being performed by the 
latter in its own name and authority.  The principle of ratification as 
envisaged in section 196 of the Contract Act is not applicable. As such, 
the ratification purported to be made in the Addendum  is of n o 
consequence.    
86.  Learned counsel for TCC argued that the allegations made 
about CHEJVA and the relaxations of BMCR 1970 were directed against 
BHP and not against TCC, which was not even in existence when the 
relaxations of the rules took place on 20. 01.1994. And, in any case, 
the invalidity of CHEJVA under the law should have no effect on the 
validity of the Novation Agreement dated 01.04.2006 as it was made 
under the BMR 2002 and not subject to the validity of CHEJVA. He 
asserted that TCC’s legal ent itlement flows from the Novation 
Agreement under which BHP completely left the scene with no further 
legal rights or obligations. He stated that even if CHEJVA was invalid, 
the Novation Agreement was validly signed and the parties to it are 
only bound by i ts terms and not those of CHEJVA or any other 
instruments signed before it. The Novation Agreement actually stood 
acted upon by GOB after assignment of EL -5 in pursuance thereof, 
wherein discovery has been made by TCC. The parties having already 
entered in to Novation Agreement in supersession of the original 
agreement (CHEJVA), the Court has now to consider the effect of an 
agreement which is subsequently altered, so as to change the parties 
to the agreement or to change its terms and conditions, or both, a nd CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  107 
decide as to whether the original agreement is still legally valid or 
relevant or has it been extinguished in the eyes of law? According to 
him, agreement would not cease to exist even if it is void, but would 
simply be unenforceable and BHP would be en titled to sue BDA under 
it. He clarified that the effect of novation of contract is not to transfer 
a right or liability under the original contract, but to extinguish the 
contract altogether. He quoted from ‘Chitty on Contracts’ and relied 
upon various ju dgments of the Superior Courts to argue that the effect 
of a novation agreement is to extinguish the previous contract and to 
replace it with the terms of the new agreement in its entirety through 
the mutual consent of the parties. Further, GOB ha ving independently 
confirmed its legal duty and obligation to TCC , the latter would have 
all the legal rights and entitlements set out in the Novation 
Agreement. He argued that the commercial relationship between GOB 
and TCC was created after the Novation Agreement , therefore, th is 
Court should not rule upon the legality of CHEJVA, which is subject 
matter of the proceedings before international forums. He stated that 
in the light of the Court order dated 25.05.2011 passed in the instant 
case, theoretically there wer e two possible options, viz., GOB could 
have granted the mining lease, or they could have rejected it.   
87.  Section 62 of the Contract Act 1872, which deals with 
novation, rescission and alteration of contract, provides that if the 
parties to a contract a gree to substitute a new contract for it, or to 
rescind or alter it, the original contract need not be performed. EL -5 
and other rights under the Alliance Agreement were all rights that 
depended on the existence of CHEJVA for their existence. A necessary 
element for the execution of a valid novation of contract is the validity 
of the original agreement that is to be substituted. Where an CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  108 
agreement is void, all subsequent alterations, variations or novations 
based upon such agreement will also be invalid. Wh en a contract is 
unlawful or illegal as being prohibited by a specific provision of the 
statute, it could not be enforced, although the parties might have 
entered into a novation of the contract on the basis of such unlawful or 
illegal consideration. See Haji Habib v. Bhikamchand Jankilal Shop  
(AIR 1954 Nag 306) . Further, a collateral illegal contract or an earlier 
illegal contract, in spite of a novation would, still remain illegal and a 
court of law would decline to grant any relief to any one of the part ies 
even in respect of such a collateral contract, or an earlier illegal 
contract , which is the basis of the suit contract and on which a cause 
of action may be founded. See Hussain Kasam Dada v. V. C. 
Association  (AIR 1954 Mad 528) and Peddi Virayya v. De ppalapudi 
Subba Rao  (AIR 1959 Andh Pra 647) . Furthermore, i n Ratanlal son of 
Pannalalji v. Firm Mangilal Mathuralal  (AIR 1963 MP 323) it has been 
held that a court of law  should decline to enforce even a perfectly 
innocent and legal contract where it arise s out of a collateral illegal 
contract or an immoral contract or any legal contract which has for its 
basis an earlier illegal or immoral contract, in spite of the fact that the 
parties may have entered into a novation. And, if there is a direct 
connection  between a fresh contract after novation and the earlier 
illegal contract or the earlier collateral contract, the novated contract 
would still continue to be illegal or immoral and the court w ould refuse 
to enforce the same  in view of the provisions of section 23 of the 
Contract Act. It was further held that in the case of an illegal contract, 
both parties being in the position of guilty persons , the court should 
refuse assistance to any one of them on the basis of an illegal contract 
or on the basis of a n ovated legal contract, which has for its basis an CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  109 
earlier or a collateral illegal contract. CHEJVA having been held to be 
void for reasons  stated above, the entire super structure built upon it 
also falls to the ground. In this regard, re ference may be made  to the 
cases of Yousaf Ali  v. Muhammad Aslam Zia  (PLD 1958 SC 104),  
Ashrafi (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Abdul Majeed Bawam  (1991 MLD 1101), Nazir 
Ahmad  v. Muhammad Saleem  (2002 YLR 1531),  Talib Hussain  v. 
Member, Board of Revenue  (2003 SCMR 549) and Moulana Atta -ur-
Rehman  v. Al-Hajj Sardar Umar Farooq  (PLD 2008 SC 663).   
88.  As noted hereinabove, i f GOB had decided to enter into an 
agreement, the agreement would be executed through its concerned 
department and the same would be signed by the Secretary, 
Additional Secr etary, etc., of the concerned department as per the 
mandate of rule 7 of the GOB Rules of Business, and not through BDA, 
which is a statutory corporation with a separate and distinct entity 
under the relevant statute from a department of the Provincial 
Government. Accordingly, GOB could not have validly appointed BDA 
or its Chairman to act as GOB’s agent either at the time of execution 
of CHEJVA or at any time thereafter. It was, therefore, not permissible 
to rely on the so -called affirmation or ratificatio n made in Addendum 
as was sought to be done by the learned counsel for BHP. Having 
examined this aspect of the matter in some detail, we find that GOB 
was not a party to CHEJVA, therefore, GOB could not be said to have 
entered into an agreement with any co mpany or a prospective licensee 
of the nature referred to in CHEJVA or the Addendum. Accordingly, it is 
held that CHEJVA suffered from uncertainty as to parties to the 
agreement and was void ab initio, as rightly contended by the learned 
counsel for GOB.   CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  110 
89.  Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC stated that release of 8 out of 
10 Prospecting Licences (PLs) reflects the waning interest of BHP , 
which no longer wished to pursue mining activities in the area and 
wanted to pull out and recover as much of its investment as  possible. 
According to him, for that reason BHP signed the ‘Option Agreement’ 
with Mincor for a nominal fee of US$ 100.   
90.  It may be mentioned that r ule 12(1) of the BMCR 1970 
provides that a licence shall not be assigned, alienated or sublet in any 
form by the licensee. Under sub -rule (2), a lease shall not be assigned 
or alienated in any form without the previous consent in writing of the 
licensing authority. Under sub -rule (3), a mining lease shall not be 
sublet by the lessee to any party in any way whereas under sub -rule 
(4), the licensee or lessee may, under intimation to the licensing 
authority, assign, sublet or charge the lease or licence to or in favour 
of Industrial Development Bank of Pakistan or its assignee or bank or 
a financial institution  approved by the licensing authority. It may be 
mentioned that clause 14.1 of CHEJVA provides that no party shall be 
entitled to assign the whole or any part of its percentage interest to a 
third party without the prior consent of the non -assigning party, which 
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The mild restriction placed 
on the transferring party in the said clause is done away with in the 
case of BHP in clause 14.2 ibid, which provides that notwithstanding 
clause 14.1, BHP shall be entitled to a ssign its interest or any part 
thereof to a related corporation without the consent of the non -
assigning party. Thus, above Article of CHEJVA being contrary to the 
provisions of rule 12  referred to above , BHP and BDA applied for 
relaxation of this rule too . BHP then by means of Addendum,  got 
inserted four more clauses, namely, clauses 14.3, 14.4, 14.5 and 14.6 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  111 
in clause 14 of CHEJVA. Clause 14.3.1 provides that if a party desires 
to transfer all or any part of its percentage interest, the other parties 
shall have a pre -emptive right to acquire such interest. Under clause 
14.3.2, a party intending to transfer its interest shall notify the other 
parties of its intention and the other parties within 90 days from such 
notice shall notify the transferring party w hether it elects to acquire 
the offered interest, thus the applicability of clause 14.1 was excluded. 
By clause 14.3.3, the transferring party, after expiration of the 
aforesaid period of 90 days, is empowered to consummate the transfer 
of the whole of the  offered interest to a third party within a period of 
180 days. Whatever little limitations were placed on the transferring 
party in clause 14.3 were then done away with by clause 14.4, which 
states that clause 14.3 shall not apply to a transfer to an affi liate, 
incorporation of a party, corporate merger, consolidation, 
amalgamation or reorganization of a party, grant of a security interest, 
any percentage interest by mortgage, deed of trust or distribution of 
any proceeds of sale of minerals from a mining venture pursuant to 
article 12. It is thus clear that the little scope of consent originally 
reserved for BDA in clause 14.1 of CHEJVA was done away with firstly 
in clause 14.2 itself, and subsequently by the clauses inserted by 
means of Addendum No.1. All  these provisions in CHEJVA and further 
reinforced by means of Addendum advanced and safeguarded the 
interests of just one party, namely, BHP and/or its assignee because 
obviously no question of assignment/ transfer of BDA’s interest in 
favour of any third party would ever arise. Be that as it may, in the 
instant case, CHEJVA  itself has been declared to be void in terms of 
various provisions of the Contract Act, 1872, including sections 20, 23, 
etc., and consequently unenforceable. No transfer or assignment of an CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  112 
interest under a void agreement can be made by any of the parties to 
such agreement under any principle of law. This appears to be 
violative of the principle contained in s ection 7 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882 , which  provides that only such person is competent 
to transfer property who is competent to contract and entitled to 
transferable property or authorized to dispose of transferable property .  
91.  It may be noted that t his Court on 03.02.2011 passed a 
restraint order in the following ter ms: -  
“In view of importance of the case, ………… we consider it 
appropriate at this stage to know the reaction of the 
respondents through their learned Advocates as to 
whether it would not be appropriate that the Government 
of Balochistan through its compet ent authority may 
postpone its decision of granting mining lease or otherwise 
to the Companies/claimants of holders of EL -5 to wait for 
the result/outcome of these proceedings.  
2.  Mr. Khalid Anwar, Senior Advocate Supreme Court 
has stated that as far as the parties interested in obtaining 
the mining lease are concerned, they have only to submit 
an application to the Government of Balochistan before 
19.02.2011 and then it is for the Government of 
Balochistan through its competent authority to take the 
decision to consider the request or whatever position may 
be, therefore, he and other learned Advocates associated 
with him, Messrs Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Fakhruddin G. 
Ibrahim and Barrister Sajid Zahid have no objection if 
order is passed to the effect that th e Government of 
Balochistan may postpone decision on the application(s) 
submitted for mining lease till the decision/outcome of the 
instant proceedings without prejudice to their legal rights. 
Dr. Salahuddin Mengal, learned Advocate -General, 
Balochistan ha s stated that the Government of Balochistan 
has instructed him to make the statement that so far it has 
not received any application for grant of mining lease from 
any of the companies. However, it would not dispose of the 
application, if submitted until t he decision  of this Court 
subject to all just exceptions. Similar stand has been taken 
by Ch. Mazhar Ali, learned Deputy Attorney General, who 
is representing the Government of Pakistan.  
3. ……………………… in view of the statement so made by the 
learned counsel for the parties, it is declared that no 
decision shall be taken by the Government of Balochistan 
in respect of the grant of the mining lease on the 
application submitted by any of the parties without 
prejudice to their legal rights till the decision of the  instant 
proceedings ”.  
 CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  113 
92.  TCC, vide lease application form “F” dated 08.02.2011, 
formally applied to GOB under Rules 10 and 47 of the BMR 2002 for 
the grant of the mining lease , making a claim over 99 sq km  
comprising 14 copper and gold reserves, but n o order was passed by 
the authorities/GOB on the said application because of the pendency of 
the present petitions and the restraining order dated 03.02.2011. TCC 
asserted before the Court that it was entitled to obtain a decision from 
GOB on its applicati on for the grant of mining lease. GOB while 
persisting with its privilege to the detailed scrutiny of Feasibility Study , 
reiterated its competence under BMR 2002 to decide upon TCC's 
application. The petitioners , however, contested the claim . By means 
of C.M.A. No. 112 of 2011, GOB through Secretary Mines and Minerals 
Development Department made the following prayer: -   
“Since the feasibility study report has been submitted by 
respondent No.4 for consideration, the review of which is 
under process by the r espondent No.1, and since the 
mineral agreement is yet to be signed between respondent 
Nos.1 and 4 wherein, details and modalities will be decided 
strictly in accordance with the spirit of BMR 2002 and 
incorporated in the mineral agreement to be executed, 
therefore , the instant petition for leave to appeal filed by 
the petitioners may kindly be disposed of. ” 
 
 
93.  After considering the matter in detail, and in the light of 
the arguments raised by the learned counsel, this Court vide order 
dated 25.05.2011,  recall ed the restraining order dated 03.02.2011 and 
direct ed the competent authority in the Government of Balochistan to 
decide TCC’s application for the grant of mining lease transparently 
and fairly in accordance with the law and the rules. Relevant par as 
from the said order are reproduced as under:  -   
“13. We are in agreement with the learned counsel for the 
parties and are of the opinion that at this stage it will not 
be proper for us to inquire into the Feasibility Study Report 
or to rule upon the en titlement of TCC to the mining lease. CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  114 
The reason is that under the governing law and 2002 
Rules, this matter falls exclusively within the domain of the 
Government of Balochistan and the Government is also 
seized of the Feasibility Report as well as the app lication of 
TCC. All the parties have expressly admitted that the 
Government of Balochistan being the competent authority 
in this matter, should in due discharge of its obligation, 
make a decision on TCC's application impartially, 
objectively and in accord ance with law and thus accept its 
legal responsibility thereof. In this view of the matter, it 
will not be proper for us to pre -empt the decision of the 
Government of Balochistan by entering into the merits of 
the case at this juncture.  
 
14. As such accept ing the consensus of all the learned 
counsel and for t he reasons above recorded,  the 
restraining order dated 03.02.2011 is recalled. The 
competent authority in the Government of Balochistan 
shall proceed to expeditiously decide TCC's application for 
the gr ant of mining lease transparently and fairly in 
accordance with the law and the rules. In so doing the 
Government of Balochistan shall not be influenced in any 
manner whatsoever by the pendency of these proceedings 
or by the orders therein passed by this C ourt. Upon 
decision of the matter by the Government of Balochistan, 
the learned Advocate General of the Province shall inform 
the Registrar of this Court forthwith. The petitions shall 
remain pending on the file of this Court until the decision 
of the appl ication by the competent authority. ”  
 
94.  After the passing of the above order, GOB considered the 
application of the TCC in the light of the Feasibility Report and the 
relevant laws/rules  and required TCC to file reply within a period of 30 
days on the following observations : -   
(1) That from the record, it appears that the Balochistan 
Development Authority had signed a Chagai Hills 
Exploration Joint Venture Agreement with BHP, thereafter 
M/S Tethyan Copper Company Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd for 
exploration, evalu ation of Gold, Copper and associated 
minerals during the period of licences existing for 
exploration and prospecting of the area. The record 
reflects that neither any company was registered and 
incorporated under the Companies Act 1984 with the 
registrar o f Firms nor in any other law;   
(2) That the company did not make proper feasibility or 
exploration of the discovered deposits and achieve the 
targets required under the rules.   
(3) That the second renewal application submitted by the 
applicant had given declaratio n that the applicant will 
submit the complete feasibility of the entire 
lease/exploration area. The applicant has utterly failed to CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  115 
submit the said feasibility report meaning thereby that 
they have failed to conduct and complete exploration in 
the explorat ion licence/granted area.   
(4) That on account of non -exploration and failure to explore 
the area during the last 17 years, the Government of 
Balochistan and the local inhabitants of the area have been 
deprived of the fruitful results.  
(5) That the present applic ation has been filed on behalf of 
TCC  and not on behalf of co -sharer, who was alleged to be 
co-associate in the working project under rule 48  of BMR 
2002. Since the applicant alone was not allottee of 
exploration licence, thus legally applicant is not com petent 
to make application for the grant of mining lease.  
(6) That the Mines Committee has noted the fact that the 
application was received on 18.02.2011 and the licence 
had expired on 19.02.2011 , Later on, request was made to 
the Secretary, Mines & Mineral D epartment, Government 
of Balochistan on 03.03.2011 for participating in the 
mining lease. This fact was not made part of it. In such 
circumstances, the application is incomplete and is in 
violation of rule 48 of BMR 2002.  
(7) The relevant portion o f the feasi bility study submitted by 
the expert committee was also examined by the Mines 
Committee, which made the following observation: -  
(i) That the Company has failed to comment or dilate 
upon rest of discovery of deposits except H -14 and 
H-15;  
(ii) The proposed de velopment, operation and scheme of 
the mines in programme of the mining operation for 
the 11 other potential resources is missing/omitted 
to be considered in feasibility report;  
(iii) That considering the information given by the 
company in all respects in the l ight of BMR 2002 the 
Company has further failed to identify all the 
resources and achievements of all the targets within 
stipulated time.  
(iv) Misrepresentation for obtaining exploration licences 
EL-6, EL -8, EL -26 and EL -27 wherein there is no 
share of partner.  Despite being a world class 
Exploration/Mining Company so called partner has 
failed to submit the technical, financial, economical 
viability report of the entire resources of EL -5 
enjoying with special relaxations in all respects 
allegedly granted by GOB for the last 17 years.  
(v) There is a default and violation committed under rule 
29(2)(c)(iii) of BMR 2002 as well as failure to provide 
the required information as contemplated under rule 
47 of the BMR 2002.  
(8) That the submission of the application relating to H-4, H-8, 
H-13, H -35 and H -79, etc., is in violation of rule  48 of BMR 
2002.  
(9) That feasibility report is silent about the processing, 
smelting and refining of the metals/minerals to be 
extracted from the mining area.  
(10) That in view of aforementioned reasons, the Committee CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  116 
found that the application submitted by the applicant is not 
satisfactory. It is also not in the interest of Government 
and people of Balochistan to grant the lease on a 
document which is incomplete and sketchy. ”  
 
95.  On 19.10.2011, TCCP su bmitted interim response to the 
above observations and sought further time for arrangement of 
meeting. The relevant portions from TCCP’s reply are reproduced 
hereinbelow: -  
Response to para -1 of the Notice:  
 
TCCP was registered and incorporated under the 
Companies Ordinance, 1984 on 30.11.2000, with 
registration number       K -08158 of 2000 -2001. Evidence 
of its registration and incorporation is included at appendix 
6. Details of such incorporation were also provided in 
TCCP’s Mining Lease Application and have long been 
known to GOB.   
 
The reference to BHP is irrelevant because TCCP, not BHP, 
submitted the Mining Lease Application. Furthermore, 
pursuant to clause 2(a) of the 2006 Novation Agreement, 
GOB agreed that TCC shall replace BHP as a party to 
CHEJVA  and all references to BHP in CHEJVA must be read 
and construed as if they were references to TCC.   
 
Response to para -2 of the Notice  
 
This objection is vague because it does not explain what 
was “improper ” in TCC’s feasibility or exploration work or 
how T CC failed to achieve “targets required under the 
rules. ” The extensive exploration work which was carried 
out was conducted professionally and to international 
standards, and the Feasibility study and other technical 
reports submitted in support of the app lication satisfied or 
acceded to all requirements in CHEJVA and the BMR 2002. 
… …  
 
A perusal of the conditions imposed by the Licensing 
Authority at the time of grant and subsequent renewals of 
EL-5 as well as its assignment to TCC in 2006 shows that 
the only requirement therein regarding the conduct of 
exploration operations was that TCC shall carry out the 
explorations in accordance with “good exploration 
practices. ” … …  
 
Nothing in the BMR 2002 or CHEJVA requires TCC to 
undertake a feasibility study of  every mineral occurrence in 
the Exploration Area. This is consistent with industry 
practice. Ore is often found in clustered deposits, meaning 
that distributions of ore may be found in and around a CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  117 
particular mining site. The economic viability of the 
dispersed ore clusters will vary over time depending on 
market conditions. It may be more or less profitable to 
mine different clusters. It is, therefore, normal industry 
practice to create a “base case ” for mining operation by 
conducting a feasibility study in respect of a particular site 
that is profitable according to prevailing economic 
conditions at the relevant time. Such a feasibility study 
then supports an application for a mining lease for the area 
in and around the immediately viable ore site. Mining  
leases are granted on this basis because, among other 
things:  
… … …  
 
Response to Para -3 of the Notice  
 
This objection has no factual basis. The second EL -5 
renewal application did not state that TCC would submit a 
feasibility study of the entire lease ar ea. Neither CHEJVA 
nor the BMR 2002 imposes any such requirement, and TCC 
had never undertaken to do so. Indeed, the 2007 EL -5 
Quarterly Report appended to the second EL -5 renewal 
application (at appendix 4) made it clear that the focus of 
exploration acti vities was and would continue to be H -14 
and H -15 that is the main prize of the Western Porphyries 
and that such activity had utilized all TCC resources 
available in the Reko Diq area. Given that this focus in 
TCC’s exploration work has made explicit five years ago, 
and formed part of the basis for the EL -5 renewal, it is 
wrong for the Licensing Authority to suggest that TCC 
agreed to submit a feasibility study in respect of the entire 
lease area. … …  
 
Furthermore, any suggestion that the feasibility study  
should have assessed in detail each potential mineral 
occurrence in the proposed mining lease area is contrary 
to the BMR 2002 and normal industry practice. … …  
 
Response to para -4 of the Notice  
This objection is misconceived for the following reasons: - 
 
(a) The above mentioned objection is misconceived 
because it is not based on any provision of BMR 
2002. It is not a “routine ” requirement under 
CHEJVA and it is unclear on what basis the Licensing 
Authority is bale to raise this objection.  
 … … …  
 
(d) In 2008, EL -5 was extended for the second time. At 
the time of extension the Licensing Authority did not 
raise any concern about the length of time it has 
taken to explore the relevant area. Indeed, the grant 
of the extension was provided in accordance wit h the 
BMR 2002 and evidences the fact that the proposed CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  118 
exploration timetable was satisfactory to the 
Licensing Authority.  
 … …  
Response to para -5 of the Notice  
 
The BMR 2002 do not require that both parties to a joint 
venture should make a Mining Lease Application. The only 
requirement, to the extent it is relevant, is Rule 47(1), 
which provides that “an application for the grant of a 
mining lease may be made only by a body corporate 
formed by or under a law for the time being in force in 
Pakistan ”. As m entioned above, TCCP fulfils this 
requirement. There is nothing in the BM Rules which 
requires it to make a joint application with GOB under 
CHEJVA. In the circumstances, this objection is wholly 
misconceived.  
 
In addition to the above matters. GOB’s absen ce from the 
Mining Lease Application was the result of its own election 
and TCC cannot be held responsible for such absence nor 
can the Government’s own choice not to participate and 
jointly file the Mining Lease application would serve as a 
ground for den ying the Mining Lease to which TCC is 
entitled. … …  
 
It will be appreciated from the above matters that GOB 
had the opportunity to submit a joint Mining Lease 
application, but it refused to do so. In the circumstances, it 
would be wrong, unreasonable and u nfair for the Licensing 
Authority now to rely on that refusal to deprive TCC of a 
mining lease.  
 
Response to para -6 of the Notice  
 
In addition to the matters set out in response to paragraph 
5 of the notice, we comment as follows:  
(a) The Mining Lease App lication was not received by the 
Licensing Authority on 18.02.2011. The Mining Lease 
Application was received by the office of the 
Licensing Authority on 15.02.2011 at 11:45 
(evidence of delivery is enclosed at appendix 1.3).  
(b) More significantly, it is incorrect to suggest that TCC 
was requesting GOB’s participation in the Mining 
Lease Application only after the filing of the Mining 
Lese Application. TCC consistently urged GOB to file 
the Mining Lease Application jointly with TCCP (see, 
for example, TCC’ s letter to GOB dated 8 February 
2011 at appendix 1.2 and the meeting between GOB 
and TCC on 12 -14.02.2011 cited above). It was only 
when GOB refused to engage that TCCP filed the 
Mining Lease Application on its own.  
 
Response to para -7 of the Notice  
 
The objections at 7(i) -(iii) above relate to the same issue, CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  119 
namely the focus of the feasibility study on H -14 & H -15 
and the alleged failure to consider the other mining 
opportunities within the exploration area. As noted above 
in Para 3.18, neither CHEJVA no r the BMR 2002 require the 
feasibility study to consider the entire lease exploration 
area and each and every mineral occurrence contained 
therein. There is therefore, no basis for, and it is outside 
of, the Licensing Authority’s powers, to insist that the  
feasibility of the entire exploration area be assessed.  
 
As regards the objection at 7(iv) above, EL -6, EL -26 and 
EL-27 are wholly irrelevant for the determination of the 
Mining Lease Application, which is limited to the area 
covered by EL -5. For the avo idance of doubt, however, 
TCC denies completely making any misrepresentations 
with regard to those licences.  
 
The objections at Paragraph 7(v) of the Notice are 
groundless. TCC has fully complied with the requirements 
set forth in Rule 47 of BMR 2002 regar ding the contents of 
the Mining Lease Application and the supporting 
documents, including the feasibility study (see also Para 
3.25), nor has TCC violated Rule 29(2)(c)(iii) of BMR 2002. 
The second renewal of EL 5 demonstrates that the 
Licensing Authority was indeed satisfied that an extension 
of the term of that exploration licence was necessary for 
the completion of the feasibility study.  
 
Response to para -8 of the Notice  
 
In the absence of clarification concerning which BMR 2002 
have been breached (and the alleged manner of such 
breach) TCC is unable to understand this objection.  
 
In this regard Rule 45 of BMR 2002 grants the holder of a 
mining lease a right to “carry on in the mining area, in 
conjunction with mining operations… exploration 
operations i n relation to any such minerals or group of 
minerals ”. Similarly, Rule 56 of BMR 2002 obliges the 
holder of a mining lease to submit to the Licensing 
Authority periodic summaries of exploration operations 
carried out in the mining area. Clearly, the BMR 20 02 
provide that the order of a mining lease can undertake 
further expansion work in the mining lease area. An 
interpretation that feasibility study is required on each 
mineral occurrence in the mining lease area for the grant 
of a mining lease would make t he provisions of Rules 45 
and 56 totally redundant, which cannot be the case.  
 
Response to para -9 of the Notice  
 
This objection is misconceived. The Mining Lease 
Application is an application for a mining lease, not a 
smelting or refining licence. As such , the BMR 2002 do not 
require that TCC include such proposals in its Mining Lease CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  120 
Application. We note the failure of the Notice to cite a 
relevant BM Rule in this regard.  
 
TCC is entitled to a mining lease under CHEJVA subject to 
compliance with routine requirements. The requirement to 
include proposals in respect of smelting or refining is not, 
however, a routine requirement and it is improper to 
require such proposals from TCC. This is especially so 
given the recognition of CHEJVA by the BMR 2002.  
 
The requirement in respect of smelting is also contrary to 
the original agreement between the parties, which 
envisaged that TCC would export its minerals. For 
example, Schedule C to CHEJVA expressly recognizes that 
any contract for mining venture (i.e. a Proj ect Agreement) 
should address the obtaining of all export licences which 
(TCC) may require for exporting its entitlement to 
concentrates derived by the Mining Venture. Given this 
provision, it is clear that CHEJVA (and the parties at the 
relevant time) ant icipated that TCC would export its mined 
minerals. It would, therefore, be contrary to CHEJVA to 
prevent such exports, and instead, require TCC to establish 
smelting and refining.  
 
Response to Para 10 of the Notice   
 
This objection misrepresents the requi rement of the BMR 
2002, which direct the Licensing Authority to determine 
only whether granting the lease is in the interest of the 
development of the mineral resources of Balochistan. The 
objection also ignores the Government’s view expressed 
years ago by  including CHEJVA and forcefully reasserted 
before the High Court – that the project significantly 
advances mineral development in the province. Having 
already foreseen these considerable benefits, the 
Government cannot now change its view as to the projec t’s 
positive impact.  
 
Moreover, the project is also decidedly in the interests of 
the people of the region. It will generate jobs for multiple 
generations of local workers, promote the development of 
the local infrastructure, and spur the continued 
develo pment of the mining sector in Balochistan. Under 
the joint venture arrangements, and taking into account 
taxes and royalty conditions, 52% of the cash flows of the 
project will go to the Governments of Pakistan and 
Balochistan and a total of US$ 450 millio n will be spent 
during the life of the project directly on development 
prospects for the local and provincial communities.  
 
Other substantial contributions by TCC in the areas of 
health, education and community support were presented 
for the Government’s c onsideration in numerous operating 
Committee meetings including at the presentation of 
25.08.2010.  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  121 
 
96.  The Mines Committee, in its special meeting held on 
14.11.2011, observed that seeking of fu rther time by TCC  for 
arrangement of meeting was contrary to  rules and not permissible, as 
such, it independently considered the matter in pursuance of its 
reasons stated in the notice and the interim response thereto and 
declined to grant the mining lease to TCC. Relevant portions from the 
decision/minutes of minu tes are reproduced hereinbelow: -  
The Mines Committed observed that TCCP has stated that 
the “Government in its capacity as Licensing Authority 
cannot exercise any form of administrative discretion ” 
which is not correct. Administrative discretion of Direc tor 
General Mines & Minerals has been defined in Rule 2 (J & 
Z) and Rule 11 of BMR 2002, whereby the Authority has 
been delegated to the DG, the power of Licensing Authority 
in taking administrative assistance from Mines Committee 
constituted under Rule 3 of BMR 2002. TCCP has already 
accepted the terms and conditions of this office 
assignment letter dated 08.04.2006 through an 
undertaking whereby it was clearly mentioned that: -  
 
“The Exploration Licence assigned to M/S Tethyan 
Copper Company Limited shall  be terminated if they 
violate any of the terms and conditions as laid down 
above and in BM Rules, 2002 ”.  
 
Record reveals that initially CHEJVA was signed between 
BDA and BHP on 29.07.1993. BHP and BDA were not 
registered firms, neither under the Companie s Ordinance 
nor under the Registration Act. The Joint Venture 
Agreement dated 29.07.1993 has also not been 
incorporated under the Company Ordinance or under any 
other law required under rule 14 of BMCR 1970.  
 
TCCP applied for mining lease area containing t hirteen 
main mineralization clusters i.e. H -4, H-8, H-13, H -15, H -
79, etc. The present feasibility study submitted by TCCP 
covers only H -14 & H -15 deposits.  
 
The feasibility study discussed the business case, technical 
and finical information, technical ec onomic viability, 
funding arrangement, capital and operating estimate and 
executing schedule of H -14 & H -15 covering 4.5 sq.kms. 
although the application for mining lease area cover 99.47 
sq.kms. having other economic deposits, which are not 
included in th e mines development for the reasons that 
these deposits have not been fully explored during last 
three terms of exploration licence.  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  122 
 
The subject feasibility study of H14, H15 means to prepare 
a report which can justify securing mining lease from 
Competent  Authority. TCCP has failed to provide the 
feasibility study of H4 starter project, although TCCP was 
approached through this office letters 
No.DC(MM)/EL(5)4728, dated 18 -07-2007 & No. 
EL(5)6122 -23, dated 12.09.2006 for development supply 
of H4 feasibility  report. The stated exploration work was 
also the component of exploration licence.  
 
The matter came to conclusion from the above quoted rule 
and justification that TCCP utterly failed to achieve the 
exploration targets and to submit the full feasibility report 
of the discovered deposits i.e. H -4, H-8, H-13, H -35, H -79, 
etc. 
 
The members discussed the Rule 48 of BMR 2002 and 
decided that the applicant singly is not legally competent 
under the said rule as per record of DC(MM), which reveals 
that the said e xploration licence was granted in favour of 
Balochistan Development Authority and TCCP.  
 
The members observed that the submitted feasibility study 
confined only to two deposits i.e. H -14 & H -15. Other ore 
bodies in the vicinity like H -4, H-8, H-13, H -35, H-79, etc., 
are yet to be explored. These deposits were already 
discovered prior to grant of 2nd renewal.  
 
Members took the view that non -submission of full 
feasibility study of EL -5 entire area (discovered deposits 
i.e. H -4, H-8, H-13, H -35 & H -79, etc.)  make the TCCP 
defaulter under Rule 29(2)(c)(iii) of BMR 2002.  
 
The members rejected the stance of TCCP for not 
establishing the smelting and refining unit within the 
Province and decided that establishment of smelting and 
refining units within Balochistan  Province will be 
encouraged and preferred.  
 
The members were of the view that mining lease 
application of TCCP has already been processed/disposed 
of on merit under Rules 11, 29(2)(c)(iii), 47, 48, 52, etc. 
of BMR 2002 and their progress. BM Rules, 2002 w hich 
have been enforced w.e.f. 08.03.2002, attract the interest 
of the invertors on such matters as transparency, criteria 
for dealing with application and the grant of licences and 
leases, expeditious decision making process, independent 
resolution mechan ism, etc.  
 
Keeping in view the above facts consulting the official 
records/BMR 2002, notice dated 21.09.2011 and interim 
reply dated 19.10.2011 received from TCCP, the members 
came to the conclusion that the Mining Lease application 
dated 15.02.2011 along with supporting documents CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  123 
(including Feasibility Study Report) submitted by TCCP 
does not fulfil the requirements of Rules 47, 48 of BMR 
2002. It was unanimously decided by the Mines Committee 
to reject the application dated 15.02.2011 and refuse the 
grant  of Mining Lease in favour of TCCP.  
 
97.  Thus, th e application for grant of Mining Lease was 
dismissed by the Mines Committee constituted under BMR 2002 in its 
special meeting held on 14.11.2011 and t he decision communicated to 
TCC vide letter dated 15.11 .2011. TCC  challenged the said decision by 
filing an administrative appeal before the Secretary, Department of 
Mines & Minerals, Government of Balochistan, as provided under the 
BMR 2002, which too was dismissed. However, both these or ders were 
not challen ged by TCC , before the High Court of Balochistan under 
Article 199 of the Constitution . As such, the same attained finality.   
98.  Mr. Ahmer Bilal Sufi, ASC for GOB stated that thereafter  
TCC filed claim both before ICC & ICSID and the Government of 
Pakistan was defending the same while objecting to jurisdiction , which 
were still pending . The jurisdiction of ICC was invoked in pursuance of 
CHEJVA as an international private contract, whereby the claimant 
primarily sought specific performance of CHEJVA and asked for grant 
of mining lease in the Reko Diq area of 99 km (as mentioned in the 
lease application) comprising 14 deposits. In the alternative, damages 
of an unspecified amount were claimed, to be established on merits. 
The said arbitration proceeding wa s filed against GOB. The nominee of 
ICC Committee in Pakistan, namely, Mr. Aziz A. Munshi and the 
nominee of GOB (Mr. Shahid Hamid) were objected to. GOB also raised 
objection on the nominee of the claimants, namely, William Rowley 
QC, which was upheld. Th e Arbitration Tribunal of ICC was constituted 
comprising the following members: -  
(a) Rt. Hon. Lord Collins, (Chairman);  CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  124 
(b) Dr. Michael Moser; and  
(c) Prof. David A.R Williams.  
 
In order to meet the deadline from ICC, GOB filed the respondent’s 
answer and counter cl aim to the claimant’s request for arbitration.   
99.   Before the ICSID, the TCC made the claim under Bilateral 
Investment Treaty between Pakistan and Australia. As opposed to ICC 
contract based claim, it was a treaty based claim. The claim was again 
for specific performance of CHEJVA and the grant of mining lease of an 
area of 99 sq km. The claimant also moved an application for 
provisional measures for a status quo order. In the said application, it 
was requested to freeze the work of GOB in 99 sq  km incl uding H -4. 
The prayer made therein reads as under: -  
“166. For the foregoing reasons, TCCA respectfully 
requests the Tribunal to issue an Interim Award ordering 
provisional measures. The Specific measures TCCA seeks 
are that, during the pendency of this d ispute, Pakistan be 
ordered:  
a. to refrain from, and take all steps necessary to 
ensure that Balochistan refrain from, taking further 
steps to develop the Reko Diq Mining Area, or any 
part thereof, by itself or with third parties;   
 
b. to refrain from, and take all steps necessary to 
ensure that Balochistan refrain from, selling, leasing 
transferring, authorizing or otherwise disposing of 
the Reko Diq Mining Area, or its interest in the Joint 
Venture, or any part thereof to any third party;  
 
c. to refrain from, and take all steps necessary to 
ensure that Balochistan refrain from, breaching the 
confidentiality provisions of TCC’s Feasibility Study 
by sharing or disclosing any portion of its contents 
with any unauthorized person or entities;  
 
d. to refrain from, and take all steps necessary to 
ensure that Balochistan refrain from, taking any 
steps that infringe TCC’s exclusive surface rights 
under the Surface Rights Lease;  
 
e. to issue, and take all steps necessary to ensure that 
Balochistan issue any authorization required t o allow CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  125 
TCC’s expatriate staff to work in Pakistan and to 
travel to and access the Reko Diq site, including 
work visas, security clearances and No -Objection 
Certificates; and  
 
f. to refrain from, and take all steps necessary to 
ensure that Balochistan refrai n from, taking any 
steps that would unsettle the status quo, aggravate 
the dispute or render ineffective any ultimate relief 
granted by this Tribunal. ” 
 
GOB contested the said application for provisional measures by filing 
objections on jurisdiction of ICC . The date of hearing for provisional 
measures was 04.12.2012 in London. The Government of Pakistan 
contested the said claim by filing detailed reply. In its reply, the 
Government stated that the team headed by Dr. Samar Mubarakmand 
was working on H -4 area , which was 12 km away from H -14 and H -15 
for which the TCCA had filed feasibility. Objections on jurisdiction were 
also taken in the said reply.  
100.  This Court vide order dated 07.12.2012 directed GOP as 
well as GOB to request the ICC and ICSID Tribuna ls not to take further 
steps. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Resources, Government 
of Pakistan, vide letter dated 23.12.2012, apprised the Secretary 
General of ICSID that this Court vide order dated 07.12.2012 had 
directed to request the ICC and ICS ID not to take any further step and 
prayed that the period for nomination of Arbitrator may be extended, 
so that the matter may be disposed of by this Court. However, the 
ICSID Tribunal, vide letter dated 24.12.2012, informed that it was 
unable to stop the  proceedings and established the Tribunal 
comprising the following: -  
(a) Dr. Klaus M. Sachs, (Chairman);  
(b) Dr. Stanimir Alexandrov; and  
(c) Rt. Hon. Lord Hoffmann.  
 
101.  Prior to that Pakistan’s objections against TCC’s nominee CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  126 
Mr. John Beechey succeeded and h e stepped down. On 06.11.2012, 
the hearing took place in London, when Dr. Samar Mubarakmand also 
entered appearance as a witness and stated that GOB was planning to 
work in H -4 Area. The details and its activity timelines were also 
provided by him in his t estimony before the ICSID and ICC Tribunals. 
After hearing the submissions of both the parties, the Tribunal 
reserved its judgment.  
102.  The Government of Pakistan also took up the matter with 
Australian Government under Article 2 of the Bilateral Invest ment 
Treaty (BIT) to have consultations to deny TCCA the benefits of the 
BIT. In this regard, correspondence was done with the Australian 
Government. However, the Australian Government in exercise of its 
sovereign rights has not agreed with the proposal of  GOP.  
103.  The case of GOB before international forums was that 
although it was not working on H -14 and H -15 areas for the time 
being, Dr. Samar’s project at H -4 could not be stopped through 
provisional measures and it must be allowed to progress since i t was 
the need of GOB to bring economic prosperity and contribute towards 
improving the law and order situation in the Province.  
104.  The ICSID Tribunal rendered draft Procedural Order No. 1 
dated 13.11.2012, which allowed Pakistan to file its detailed M emo on 
jurisdiction by 18.01.2013 and also gave other timelines for various 
filings by the parties throughout the year 2013. Further, the ICSID 
Tribunal vide unanimous decision dated 14.12.2012 dismissed the 
request of TCCA for provisional measures and all owed GOB and Dr. 
Samar Mubarakmand to carry out mining and smelting of H -4 area. 
The plea of TCCA regarding urgency and irreparable loss was also 
declined. However, GOB was asked to keep on informing the Tribunal CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  127 
about every development at the mining site.  Relevant portion of the 
decision of the Tribunal is reproduced hereinbelow: -  
“151.  In conclusion, the Tribunal finds that, at 
present, there is insufficient evidence on record to show 
that provisional measures are necessary to avoid 
irreparable harm. H owever, the Tribunal notes that the H4 
Work Plan is fairly general and does not provide any details 
about the work specifically envisaged by Respondent with 
respect to deposit H4. The Tribunal therefore requests 
Respondent to inform the Tribunal and Claima nt, on a 
regular basis, about its specific plans and activities with 
respect to deposit H4.  
 
152.  In the remaining parts (c) to (f) of the 
Request, Claimant further requests the Tribunal to order 
Respondent or Balochistan to refrain from breaching the 
confidentiality provisions of TCC’s Feasibility Study, 
infringing TCC’s exclusive surface rights under the Surface 
Rights Lease, and unsettling the status quo, aggravating 
the dispute or rendering ineffective any ultimate relief 
granted by the Tribunal. Fina lly, Claimant requests the 
Tribunal to order that Respondent or Balochistan issue any 
authorizations necessary for TCC’s expatriate staff to work 
in Pakistan and travel to and access the Reko Diq site.  
 
153.  In its pleadings, Claimant has based these 
requests on the same arguments of urgency and necessity 
without however developing them further during the 
Hearing. The Tribunal is of the view that in regard to these 
requests Claimant failed to meet its burden of showing 
urgency and necessity. This leads th e Tribunal to dismiss 
these parts of the Request.   
 
IV. Decision  
 
154.  The Tribunal therefore decides as follows:  
 
(1) Respondent shall immediately inform the Tribunal 
and Claimant of any change of its present intention 
(i) to implement the H4 Work Plan, (i i) not to expand 
its mining activities to H14 and/or H15 or to any 
other deposit within Licence EL -5 and (iii) not to give 
any rights in this regard to any third party.  
(2) Respondent shall further inform the Tribunal and 
Claimant, on a regular basis, about i ts specific plans 
and activities with respect to deposit H4.  
(3) The Tribunal remains seized of the matter and shall 
consider future applications by Claimant if the 
situation materially changes, in particular in case 
Respondent (i) materially deviates from th e H4 Work 
Plan, (ii) expands its mining activities to deposits 
H14 and/or H15 or to any other deposit within CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  128 
Licence EL -5 or (iii) gives any rights in this regard to 
any third party.  
(4) Otherwise, the Request is dismissed.  
(5) The Tribunal will decide on the co sts related to the 
Request at a later stage of the arbitral proceedings. ”  
 
 
105.  Section 4 of the Recognition and Enforcement (Arbitration 
Agreements and Foreign Arbitral Awards) Act 2011  provides that a  
party to an arbitration agreement against whom leg al proceeding s 
have been brought in respect of a matter , which is covered by the 
arbitration agreement , may, upon notice to the other party to the 
proceedings, apply to the court in which the proceedings have been 
brought to stay the proceedings in so far as they concern that matter.  
And, o n an application so moved,  the court shall refer the parties to 
arbitration, unless it finds that the arbitration agreement is null and 
void, inoperative or incapable of being performed.  However, TCC in the 
instant case f irst obtained interim orders , but then  rushed to ICC and 
ICSID without first exhausting the legal remedies  available to them 
under the law of Pakistan , which is the applicable law of the 
agreement . TCC did not file any application expressing reservation or  
review of the order  passed by the appellate authority . TCC appeare d to 
be fully satisfied with it , but in Paras 73, 74 and 75 of their interim 
relief application before ICC they pretend ed as if sufficient time was 
not given to them. In such circumstances,  GOB, vide Respondent’s 
Objections dated 27.01.2012 questioned before the International 
Forum the locus standi  of TCC to invoke international arbitration.   
106.  The law of Pakistan being the law applicable to the 
agreement , the Court s of Pakistan are the appropriate forum to decide 
the legality of CHEJVA. Learned counsel for GOB stated t hat in this 
regard, GOB and the Government of Pakistan have respectively put CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  129 
both the ICC and ICSID on notice vide respondent’s Answer to the 
Claimant’s Request for Arbitra tion and Counterclaim dated 16.11.2012 
that matter of CHEJVA is pending before the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in the following words: -  
“2. Matters relating to the enforceability, validity and vires 
of CHEJVA, the addendum of 2000 and the novation of 
2006 (“the joint venture contract ”) are pending before the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in CPLA 796/2007, CP 68/2010, 
CP 69/2010, CP 1/2011 and CP 4/2011. The Claimant, its 
Pakistani subsidiary and its parent companies are before 
the Supreme Court of Pakistan and before were present 
before the Balochistan High Court. In excess of 50 
applications have been filed and are pending before the 
Supreme Court. It is plain that only the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan has the jurisdiction to decide on the validity of the 
joint ve nture contract and no tribunal has the authority or 
power to usurp such jurisdiction. Therefore, this Tribunal 
should suspend any further proceedings in this arbitration 
until such time the Supreme Court of Pakistan determines 
the validity, legality and vi res of CHEJVA.   
 
3. During the Course of the Supreme Court proceedings 
allegations of corruption have been raised. It is the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan which is the appropriate forum 
for determining whether corruption is a factor in the 
matter before it and  then take appropriate decisions. In 
this regard, Article 34 of the UN Convention on Corruption 
allows the Supreme Court, in part being the sub -set of the 
State to continue with pending legal proceedings. ” 
 
 
Even otherwise in addition to section 4 of the N ew York Convention Act 
referred to above, article 2(3) of the New York Convention , which  is 
incorporated in Pakistan’s domestic law as an act of Parliament in 
2011, states that the court of a contracting state, when seized of an 
action in a matter in respe ct of which the parties have made an 
agreement within the meaning of this article shall, at the request of 
one of the parties, refer the parties to arbitration, unless it finds that 
the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of bei ng 
performed . Moreover , Article 34 of the UN Con vention Against 
Corruption 2003  provides that with due regard to the right of third CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  130 
parties, acquired in good faith, each state party shall take measures, 
in accordance with the fundamental principles of its domest ic law, to 
address consequences of corruption. And, i n this context, states 
parties may consider corruption relevant factor in legal proceedings to 
annul or rescind a contract, withdraw a concession or other similar 
instrument or take any other remedi al action. This indeed furnishes 
additional basis under international law to this Court to decide upon 
CHEJVA and related documents.  
107.  Learned counsel for GOB has submitted that regarding BIT, 
it is submitted that the same was entered into by the Federal 
Government without consultations from Balochistan or any other 
Province . This should not have been the case as all investments 
effectively are made or parked in one of the territories of provinces.  
The Provincial Government has no idea of the assurances gi ven by the 
Federal Government through BITs. The provinces are kept in the dark. 
This is unfair situation particularly now when after 18th amendment, 
BITs should not be entered into unless all provinces are consulted. In 
fact, the dominant view of internati onal lawyers is against execution of 
BITs by the developing states like Pakistan. An open letter of 50 
lawyers against BITs is placed on record at page 1 in CM 4920/ 2012 
in CPLA 796/2007. The BITs provide for compensation in cases of 
direct expropriation and indirect expropriation and the meaning of 
indirect expropriation is constantly expanding to include even delay in 
decision of the court, change in legislation and adverse decision of 
domestic court. Thus , in this sense BITs are contrary to independence  
of Judiciary. These aspects are not being examined by the Federal 
Government while ratifying the BIT.  The consequence is what we are 
witnessing; identical claim is made before ICSID along with the one in CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  131 
ICC. This issue is required to be considered by the Federal 
Government before signing any further BITs in haste and carefully 
evaluate the national interests and consequences and provinces must 
be consulted first as well.  
108.  Article 3(1) of the BIT provides that each party shall 
encourage and promote investments in its territory by investors of the 
other party and shall, in accordance with its laws and investment 
policies applicable from t ime to time, admit investments. It is thus 
clear that t he present BIT requires that investment be made in 
accordanc e with law of Pakistan. If an investment is made contrary to 
law of Pakistan, it will be an illegal investment that cannot be 
protected under the BIT.  Land of any state is its most precious 
commodity.  It cannot be parted with arbitrarily and without due 
process or proper authorization. Minerals in land are nature’s 
endowment for the people of Pakistan. They are in nature of public 
trust. Title in minerals can be given away only in accordance with law 
and not through any other means. The mineral rules act a s guardians 
of the said public trust. Adherence to them ensures that minerals are 
exploited and given away in national interest. It is the position of GOB 
that foreign investment is welcome, but investor must comply with 
laws of Pakistan as required under article 5 of the Constitution.   
109.  Learned counsel submitted that Pakistan is liable before 
the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes 
(ICSID) because of the Provisions of the Agreement between Australia 
and Pakistan on the Promotio n and Protection of Investments, dated 
07.02.1998 (Australia -Pakistan Treaty). Pakistan is not liable before 
ICSID in the capacity of a party to the contract but rather because it 
has agreed to place itself before ICSID in any arbitration proceedings CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  132 
again st an Australian Investor through its treaty commitments.  He 
argued that this constitutes ‘consent’ as defined under Article 25 of the 
ICSID Convention. He presented two Acts of Parliament of 2011 before 
the court that enable the execution of awards in Pak istan made by 
ICSID and the ICC Court of Arbitration. These are the Arbitration 
(International Investment Disputes) Act, 2011 and the Recognition and 
Enforcement (Arbitration Agreements and Foreign Arbitral Awards) 
Act, 2011. He quoted sections 3 & 4 from the former and sections 6 
from the later, which provide for enforcement of the awards through 
the High Courts.   
110.  Pakistan is governed by a written Constitution. Under 
Article 1 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
[hereinafter re ferred to as “the Constitution ”], Pakistan is a Federal 
Republic known as the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and comprises four 
federating units, namely, the Provinces of Balochistan, Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa, the Punjab and Sindh, the Islamabad Capital Territory,  
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and such States and territories 
as are or may be included in Pakistan, whether by accession or 
otherwise. As per Article 7 of the Constitution, “the State ” means the 
Federal Government, Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament),  a Provincial 
Government, a Provincial Assembly, and such local or other authorities 
in Pakistan as are by law empowered to impose any tax or cess. 
Pakistan is a sovereign State. The concept of sovereignty means 
supreme authority in a political community. A sovereign State is often 
described as one that is free and independent. In its internal affairs it 
has undivided jurisdiction over all persons and property within its 
territory. It claims the right to regulate its economic life without regard 
for its nei ghbors and to increase armaments without limit. No other CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  133 
nation may rightfully interfere in its domestic affairs. In its external 
relations, it claims the right to enforce its own conception of rights and 
to declare war. In political theory, the ultimate a uthority of the State 
in the decision -making process and in the maintenance of order is 
called the sovereignty. Its supreme and independent power is 
exercised in the domestic and foreign policy. As per dictionary 
meaning, sovereignty is supreme and unrestr icted power, as of a 
State; the position, dominion, or authority of a sovereign; and an 
independent State. Sovereignty is manifested above all in the way a 
State functions, but it is most apparent in the system of State rights, 
including sovereign rights. It is precisely the State’s powers that 
ensure the State’s authority and thus its sovereignty. Only State 
power can authoritatively influence and, when necessary, exercise 
coercion on all a spects of life in human society.  State power is in effect 
universal  and sovereign in nature. A State’s domestic sovereignty is 
closely linked with its independence from foreign powers. Thus, it is a 
settled principle of international law that where a  contract is entered  
into with a foreign national or a foreign company, i t is governed by the 
municipal laws of the country where the contract is executed subject 
to any special provision to the contrary incorporated in the contract.  In 
the instant case, as per CHEJVA  itself, the law of Pakistan is the law 
applicable to the agr eement. The validity of CHEJVA  was challenged by 
the private citizens on various grounds , including the illegal ities 
committed in granting large scale relaxations to BHP.  The proceeding s 
were started before the High Court of Balochistan in the year 2006 an d 
were continued in petition for leave to appeal before this Court , which 
were subsequently joined by direct petitions filed under Article  184(3) 
of the Constitution  of Pakistan. More importantly, the proceedings CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  134 
before the High Court, and subsequently bef ore this Court were not 
initiated by any of the parties to CHEJVA , but by private citizens. Until 
the recent development of decision of the Mining Committee refusing 
the application submitted by TCC for grant of mining lease , there was 
no dispute between t he parties  and for the same reason, none of the 
parties had ever invoked the jurisdiction of ICSID or any other 
international forum. Initially, this Court had passed a restraint order 
requiring GOB not to decide the application for grant of mining lease , 
which was subsequently vacated . However, if the restraint order was 
not withdrawn, GOB would not have been in a position to give any 
decision on the application for grant of mining lease, and consequently 
TCC or any other affected person would not be in a p osition to 
approach ICSID or any other international forum. In this view of the 
matter, there is no force in the assertion of the learned counsel for the 
private respondents  that GOB had any grudge against BHP or TCC and 
that they were unable to make out a  case of bias or grudge against 
GOB.   
111.  Learned counsel for GOB stated that the conduct of TCC is 
hardly respectful towards this Court because th e Court provided three 
specific interim reliefs to TCC by allowing their application to be filed, 
by order ing the decision on the application and again by ordering 
decision of the appellate authority; yet they disregarded the 
benevolence of this Court and did not bother to approach this Court 
and instead approached international forums. According to the learne d 
counsel, b y invoking the jurisdiction of ICC and ICSID while this Court 
was fully seized of matters relating to CHEJVA and other matters, TCC 
attempted to prejudice the determination of legality of CHEJVA and 
other agreements by openly arguing that these  proceedings have CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  135 
become infructuous. In this regard reference has been made to Javid 
Dastgir Mirza  v. State  (1977 SCMR 267), Naveed Nawazish Malik  v. 
Ghulam Rasool Bhatti  (1997 SCMR 193), In Re: Suo Motu Criminal 
Original No. 1 of 2001  (PLD 2002 SC 399)  and Johra Saeed  v. 
University of Health Sciences  (2007 MLD 447).   
112.  We find force in the submission of l earned counsel for GOB 
that the respondent company has been changing positions and has not 
been forthcoming b efore this Court . For example , it was described as 
TCCA before the Balochistan High Court (as described in the impugned 
judgment at page 27 of CPSLA No. 796/2007, Part I). Thus , in the 
appeal, it is TCCA that would continue to be present before this Court. 
However, later it was stated that it is not TCCA , but TCCP that is 
before this Court without making any application for the change of 
parties. This Court accordingly issued notices to TCCA. Whereas before 
the ICC and ICSID, in common para 2 of the respective claims, it 
referred to itself join tly as “TCC” as including TCCA and TCCP wherever 
the context so permits . Such an evasive style of TCC could hardly 
mislead the Court or the International Tribunals. Learned counsel for 
TCC has not been able to substantiate his plea that GOB had any 
grudge against BHP or TCC and that they were unable to make out a 
case of bias or grudge against GOB.  
113.  Mr. Abdul Hafeez Pirzada, Sr. ASC for BHP has submitted 
that in view, and as a consequence, of the order dated 25.05.2011 
passed by this Court in the inst ant case and the fact that the 
application for a Mining Lease has been rejected in the administrative 
appeal, the CPLA has become infructuous. He argued that the 
substance of the order dated 25.05.2011 in the CPLA created a 
legitimate expectation that the CHEJVA was legal and valid and that CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  136 
TCC, at the very least, had the lawful right to apply for and seek grant 
of a Mining Lease. If this Court had been of the view that, prima  facie,  
the CHEJVA was void ab initio , it would not have vacated the 
injunction, w hich was not objected to by GOB. It was, therefore, 
implicit in the vacation of the injunction that a lawful right vested in 
TCC qua the Joint Venture Partner of GOB under CHEJVA to apply for 
the Mining Lease pursuant to BMR 2002 and for GOB to decide the 
same, which it had. He further argued that the language of the order 
dated 25.05.2012 wherein it has been held that “the petitions shall 
remain pending on the file of this Court until the decision of the 
application by the competent authority ” read with th e prayer in CMA 
112/11 of GOB reproduced in the said order clearly indicated that the 
CPLA stood disposed of and the judgment of the Balochistan High 
Court impugned in the CPLA had become final and also immune from 
any other or further proceedings includin g those under Articles 184(3) 
and 185 of the Constitution automatically, upon issuance of the order 
dated 14.11.2011 of the licensing authority under BMR 2002 in terms 
of which the application for the Mining Lease was rejected. According 
to him, the CPLA c eased to exist having abated as a lis before this 
Court on 14.11.2011. He also argued that the petitioners and now 
GOB, contrary to all known principles of propriety and the law of 
pleadings, principles of equitable estoppel in pais  as well as issue 
(colla teral) estoppel, and the equitable maxim of approbation and 
reprobation were seeking to revive the CPLA and setting aside of the 
CHEJVA. This was being done with an ulterior motive by the petitioners 
and GOB and was tantamount to abuse of the process of th is Court.   
114.  He argued that the only remedy available against the 
judgment of the Balochistan High Court lay under Article 185 of the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  137 
Constitution by way of petition for leave to appeal and the jurisdiction 
of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Co nstitution to interfere 
directly, indirectly or collaterally with a judgment of a Court of record, 
established by and invested with jurisdiction under the Constitution 
was barred and the judgment of the Balochistan High Court could not 
be set aside or vari ed by a declaratory or any other order under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution. He also submitted that it was evident from 
a reading of the prayer clause of each of the Constitution Petitions that 
these too had become infructuous as the dominant thrust of  these 
Constitution Petitions was that the Mining Lease ought not to be 
granted to TCC. This object already stood achieved in view of the 
order dated 14.11.2011 passed by the licensing authority and 
upheld on 03.03.2012 in the Administrative Appeal. Thus, there was 
no fundamental right entitling any citizen (or outsider with no 
privity of contract with parties to a contract) to directly or indirectly 
seek disruption of or interference with on -going international 
arbitration proceedings which is the true mot ive of the petitioners and 
GOB given that the avowed and overt object of the Constitution 
Petitions stood achieved already.  
115.  Mr. Khalid Anwar, Sr. ASC argued that if TCC were  granted 
the mining lease, the instant petition would still be maintainable 
because this Court could then declare that everything including 
relaxation was illegal and strike it down, for which this Court had 
jurisdiction. However, if they had refused to grant it, there would be 
no complaint against them to be agitated before this Court unless this 
Court had given the findings that the international arbitration clause of 
CHEJVA was illegal and unconstitutional; ICSID and ICC Arbitration 
should not have taken place; and the verdict, if any, given by the CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  138 
Arbitrators would be null and void. He requested the Court not to give 
such a finding and suggested that proper course for the Court would 
be to stay its hands off and wait for the outcome of those proceedings 
being carried out under the laws of Pakistan, namely, the Arbitration 
(Inter national Investment Disputes) Act, 2011, the Recognition and 
Enforcement (Arbitration Agreements and Foreign Arbitral Awards) 
Act, 2011, and the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution of Pakistan 
under which the International Arbitration Treaties are binding upon the 
Government of Pakistan. According to the learned counsel, that would 
be the best, clearest, fairest and most transparent approach, which 
would restore the confidence of foreign investors in Pakistan as a safe 
environment for their investments and there would be no conceivable 
allegations that the agreement was struck down after the discovery 
had been made. He urged that Pakistan should stand up for its 
commitments under the bilateral treaty read with ICSID clause, which 
the State of Pakistan has ac cepted voluntarily and freely, and that this 
Court should not put its prestige on the line.   
116.  We have given anxious consideration to the arguments of 
the learned counsel. The Constitution Petitions were filed by the 
petitioners in the instant case and  entertained by this Court by way of 
public interest litigation considering the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of the instant case where despite the fact that grave 
illegalities and irregularities were committed in the execution of 
CHEJVA and other instr uments, but GOB failed to defend the petition 
filed before the Balochistan High Court under Article 199 of the 
Constitution and protect the interests of the people of Balochistan. The 
petitioners genuinely apprehended that the CPLA filed against the 
judgme nt of the Balochistan High Court before this Court might also CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  139 
not meet the same fate. The petitions under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution have raised questions of public importance with reference 
to enforcement of Fundamental Rights. Learned counsel for  GOB 
rightly argued that there is no question of retraction of pleadings on 
the part of GOB inasmuch as the law permits parties to modify position 
if there are developments subsequent to the filing of the case or new 
facts come to light. The developments i n this regard included the 
approval of Dr. Samar Mubarakmand’s project by ECNEC in December 
2010 and accordingly CMA 252/2011 was filed apprizing the Court of 
this development and requesting a decision on merits.  The objection 
raised by the learned counsel  for TCC is , therefore,  not tenable . On 
08.02.2011, this Court directed the production of entire record relating 
to CHEJVA. The said record was retrieved and filed through several 
applications. It made shocking disclosures of extensive irregularities 
and c orruption. The Government examined the same and decided not 
to defend the said acts and accordingly it decided to render full 
assistance to this Court from the record that was filed. Further, this 
Court has always emphasized that the government functionari es must 
perform their functions in accordance with law. In this regard, 
reference may be made to the cases reported as Ghulam Bib  v. Sarsa 
Khan (PLD 1985 SC 345), Zahid Akhtar  v. Government of Punjab  (PLD 
1995 SC 530), Iqbal Hussain  v. Province of Sindh  (2008 SCMR 105), 
Human Rights Cases Nos.4668 of 2006, 1111 of 2007 and 15283 -G of 
2010 (PLD 2010 SC 759), Mst. Mumtaz Begum  v. Province of Sindh  
(2004 CLC 697)  and Dilshad Ali  v. Ahmed Khan  (2007 CLC 441). It is 
may be mention ed that this Court has wide powe rs in terms of Article 
184(3) of the Constitution to oversee the acts/actions of the other 
organs of the State , namely , Executive and Legislature. It is also well CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  140 
settled that under the principle of trichotomy of powers, the Judiciary 
plays a crucial role of interpreting and applying the law and 
adjudicating upon disputes arising among governments or between 
State and citizens or citizens inter se . The Judiciary is entrusted with 
the responsibility for enforcement of Fundamental Rights, which calls 
for an i ndependent and vigilant system of judicial administration so 
that all acts and actions leading to infringement of Fundamental Rights 
are nullified and the rule of law upheld in the society. The discharge of 
constitutional duty by the State functionaries in  deviation to the spirit 
of the Constitution can be anvil to the Constitution and is 
challengeable on diverse grounds including mala fide and colourable 
exercise of the power in bad faith for ulterior motive. It is difficult to 
confer validity and immunity  to the mala fide act or action from judicial 
scrutiny in exercise of power of judicial review which is inherent in the 
superior courts. Reference in this behalf can be made to the cases of 
Miss Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 SC 416), 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473), 
Wasey Zafar v. Government of Pakistan  (PLD 1994 SC 621), Sabir 
Shah v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1994 SC 738), Al-Jehad Trust v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 324), Asad Ali v. Federa tion of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 161), Benazir Bhutto v. President of Pakistan  
(PLD 1998 SC 388), Wukala Mahaz Barai Tahafaz Dastoor v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 1263), Farooq Ahmad Khan 
Leghari v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1999 SC 57), Liaqat Hus sain v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1999 SC 504), Khan Asfandyar Wali v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2001 SC 607), In the matter of Reference 
No.2 of 2005 By the President of Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 873), Javed 
Jabbar v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2003 SC 9 55), Iqbal Haider v. CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  141 
Capital Development Authority  (PLD 2006 SC 394), Muhammad 
Mubeen -us-Salam v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2006 SC 602), 
Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2006 SC 697), Pakistan 
Muslim League (N) v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2007 SC 642), Sindh 
High Court Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 
879), Chief Justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v. 
President of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 61), Mobashir Hassan v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265), Bank of  Punjab v. Haris 
Steel Industries (Pvt) Ltd.  (PLD 2010 SC 1109), Shahid Orakzai v. 
Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 365), Munir Hussain Bhatti v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 407), Federation of Pakistan v. Munir Hussain 
Bhatti  (PLD 2011 SC 752), Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2011 SC 997).   
117.  As regards the power and jurisdiction of the municipal 
courts to nullify any action of the Government where it is established 
that the decision -making authority has exceeded its powers; 
committed an erro r of law or breach of the rules of natural justice; 
reached a decision which no reasonable forum would have reached; or 
abused its powers , reference may usefully be made to the case of 
Bhanu Constructions Company v. A.P. State Electricity Board  [1997 (6) 
ALT 328] wherein it has been held that: -  
“9. Law: Public Field :  
 
When it comes to public field, the fundamental rights 
granted by Part IV of the Constitution of India makes an 
obvious distinction. In the words of the Supreme Court in 
Shrilekha Vidyarthi v. State of U.P. , (1993) 1 SCC 212  
 
“The requirement of Article 14 being the duty to act 
fairly, justly and reasonably, there is nothing which 
militates against the concept of requiring the State 
always to so act, even in contractual matters. There 
is a ba sic difference between the acts of the State 
which must invariably be in public interest and those CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  142 
of a private individual, engaged in similar activities, 
being primarily for personal gain, which may or may 
not promote public interest. Viewed in this manne r, 
in which we find no conceptual difficulty or 
anachronism, we find no reason why the 
requirement of Article 14 should not extend even in 
the sphere of contractual matters for regulating the 
conduct of the State activity. ” 
 
In the case of Food Corporation  of India v. Kamdhenu 
Cattle Feed Industries , (1993) 1 SCC 77, the Supreme 
Court observed as follows: - 
 
“There is no unfettered powers in public law; a public 
authority possesses powers only to use them for 
public good. This imposes duty to act fairly. The  
Court held that despite the term in the tender notice 
enabling the rejection of any tender without 
assigning any reason, such rejection must be for 
valid reason because every public body is under duty 
to act fairly. ” 
 
10. Law: International Contracts of t he Government:  
The case of the petitioner is that because of his right not to 
be rejected arbitrarily and his legitimate expectation to be 
treated fairly, Section 3.2 of the Loan Agreement giving 
unfettered discretion to the Fund to withhold concurrence 
for any tender is unconstitutional. The agreement is 
governed by the general terms and conditions which 
provide that it shall be governed by the laws and 
regulations of the Japan. “One of the clearest rejections of 
any renvoi doctrine is to be found in the f ield of contract, it 
being thought that no sane businessman or his lawyers 
would choose the application of renvoi. Lord Diplock 
rejected the application of the doctrine in contract thus:  
 
“One final comment upon what under English conflict 
rules is meant b y the 'proper law' of a contract may 
be appropriate. It is the substantive law of the 
country which the parties have chosen as that by 
which their mutual legally enforceable rights are to 
be ascertained, but excluding any renvoi, whether of 
remission or tr ansmission, that the Courts of that 
country might themselves apply if the matter were 
litigated before them. For example, if a contract 
made in England were expressed to be governed by 
French law, the English Court would apply French 
substantive law to it notwithstanding that a French 
Court applying its own conflict rules might accept a 
renvoi to English law as the lex loci contractus if the 
matter were litigated before it. Conversely, assuming 
that under English conflict rules English law is the 
proper law  of the contract the fact that the Courts of 
a country which under English conflict rules would be 
regarded as having jurisdiction over a dispute arising CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  143 
under the contract (in casu Kuwait) would under its 
own conflict rules have recourse to English law as  
determinative of the rights and obligations of the 
parties, would not make the proper law of the 
contract any the less English law because it was the 
law that a Kuwaiti Court also would apply. ”( See 
Cheshire & North's Private International Law 1984 
AC 50)  
 
Therefore, it is a moot question whether the validity of the 
said provision in the agreement can be tested with 
reference to the Constitution of India. Inasmuch as the 
project is executed in India by a public body, we may still 
examine this question.  
 
11. Basically, the curb on arbitrary power by reason of 
legitimate expectation of a citizen is not an absolute and 
substantive right. The Supreme Court has held in Union of 
India v. Hindustan Development Corporation , that such a 
legitimate expectation cannot  be equated to such a 
substantive right. Even if it were so, there can be a 
reasonable restriction of such a right in public interest. As 
we have seen above, the same provision in the agreement 
if it were in a private contract will be quite valid and it is  
attacked as unconstitutional only because it interferes with 
the right of the petitioner to have his tender considered.  
 
12. In Tata Cellular v. Union of India , (1994) 6 SCC 651, 
the Supreme Court spelt out the parameters of judicial 
review in the followi ng words:  
 
“The duty of the Court is to confine itself to the 
question of legality. Its concern should be:  
 
1.  Whether a decision -making authority exceeded 
its powers,  
2.  Committed an error of law,  
3.  Committed a breach of the rules of natural 
justice,  
4.  Reached a decision which no reasonable 
tribunal would have reached or,  
5.  Abused its powers.  
Therefore, it is not for the Court to determine 
whether a particular policy or particular decision 
taken in the fulfilment of that policy is fair. It is only 
concerned with the manner in which those decisions 
have been taken. The extent of the duty to act fairly 
will vary from case to case.  
Shortly, put, the grounds upon which an 
administrative action is subject to control by judicial 
review can be classified a s under:  
(i)  Illegality: This means the decision -maker must 
understand correctly the law that regulates his 
decision -making power and must give effect to 
it; CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  144 
(ii) Irrationality, namely, Wednesbury 
unreasonableness,  
(iii)  Procedural impropriety.  
The above  are only the broad grounds but it does not 
rule out addition of further grounds in course of 
time.” 
 
In the case of Asia Foundation & Construction Ltd., the 
Court applied these principles and came to the conclusion 
that such judicial review is intended to  prevent 
arbitrariness or favouritism and it is exercised in the larger 
public interest or if it is brought to the notice of the Court 
that in the matter of award of a contract power has been 
exercised for any collateral purpose.  
 
In that case, it was note d as follows: - 
 
“It is well known that it is difficult for the country to 
go ahead with such high cost projects unless the 
financial institutions like the World Bank or the Asian 
Development Bank grant loan or subsidy, as the case 
may be. When such financi al institutions grant such 
huge loans they always insist that any project for 
which loan has been sanctioned must be carried out 
in accordance with the specification and within the 
scheduled time and the procedure for granting the 
award must be duly adhere d to. In the aforesaid 
premises on getting the evaluation bids of the 
appellant and Respondent 1 together with the 
consultant's opinion after the so - called corrections 
made the conclusion of the Bank to the effect “the 
lowest evaluated substantially respo nsive bidder is 
consequently AFCONS ” cannot be said to be either 
arbitrary or capricious or illegal requiring Court's 
interference in the matter of an award of contract. ” 
 
Thus, it is clear that this Court has the jurisdiction to adjudge the 
validity of CH EJVA on the above ground s, including  non-transparency, 
violation of law/rules , curtailment of the fundamental rights of the 
general public , etc.  
118.  In this regard, it is pertinent to mention that a  number of 
tribunals have held that, where an investmen t is made in violation of 
the general principles of law, which include violations of certain host 
country laws, such as where an investment results from the 
commission of crimes , e.g., fraud or bribery, the tribunal possesses 
both the ability and the oblig ation to prevent the investor from CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  145 
benefiting from the rights under the relevant bilateral investment 
treaty. The ICSID Tribunal in World Duty Free v. Kenya  [(ICSID Case 
No ARB/00/7), Award, 25 September 2006] rejected the claimant ’s 
attempts to characteri ze the payment made to the then president of 
Kenya as something other than a bribe to secure a contract, and also 
laid out the legal consequences of that bribe – that the tribunal could 
not uphold claims based on contracts of corruption because to do so 
would be a violation of international public policy. In that case, the 
claimant did not dispute Kenya's assertion that a payment had been 
made to the then president nor did claimant dispute the manner in 
which Kenya described the payment as having been made.   The 
tribunal rejected the claimant's argument that the payments made on 
behalf of the claimant to the then president of Kenya were “a personal 
donation for public purposes ” that were “sanctioned by customary 
practices and ... regarded a matter of protoco l by the Kenyan people ”. 
The tribunal held that the payments were a bribe because they “were 
made not only in order to obtain an audience with President Moi (as 
submitted by the Claimant), but above all to obtain during that 
audience the agreement of the P resident on the contemplated 
investment. ” In the course of its reasoning, the tribunal explained that 
where a payment is received corruptly by a state official – i.e. where it 
is a covert bribe – receipt of the payment is not legally imputable to 
the state  itself and that, “if it were otherwise, the payment would not 
be a bribe. ” After satisfying itself as to the objective existence of a 
transnational public policy rule against bribery conducted by 
identifying the rule “through international conventions, co mparative 
law and arbitral awards, ” the tribunal looked away from norms of 
international law to the law applicable to the dispute – English and CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  146 
Kenyan – and found nothing that would justify bribe taking but instead 
plenty to proscribe it. The tribunal also  asserted that, even in contexts 
where “corruption is widespread either within the purchasing country 
or in the particular sector of activity... all arbitral tribunals [have] 
concluded that such facts do not alter in any way the legal 
consequences dictated  by the prohibition of corruption... [regardless of 
the fact that] in some countries or sectors of activities, corruption is a 
common practice without which the award of a contract is difficult  -- or 
even impossible ”... and that the tribunal “agree[d] with  such a 
conclusion. ” Interestingly, and of particular relevance for our case, is 
the fact that the claimant was the successor in title to the contract and 
was not even in existence as a juridical person when the payment was 
made and “ha[d] no knowledge, ac tual or constructive, of any 
payment which could be characterized as improper and unlawful. ” 
Nevertheless, as noted above, the tribunal refused to uphold the 
claims based on the corrupt contract.  
119.  In Tokios Tokelės v. Ukraine  [(ICSID Case No ARB/02/18 ), 
Decision on Jurisdiction and Dissent, 29 April 2004] it was observed 
that the requirement “that investments be made in compliance with 
the laws and regulations of the host state is a common requirement in 
modern [bilateral investment treaties], ” while n oting that “the purpose 
of such provisions … is ‘ to prevent the Bilateral Treaty from protecting 
investments that should not be protected, particularl y because they 
would be illegal’ .” 
120.  In Inceysa v. El Salvador  [(ICSID Case No ARB/03/26), 
Award, 2 Au gust 2006] it was held that a contract made in violation of 
host country law does not benefit from the protections of the relevant 
bilateral investment treaties or the rights granted by them, including CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  147 
the right to arbitration. In that case, the illegal ac t was fraud 
committed by the investor in obtaining a contract with the host state. 
The tribunal found that such an outcome was mandated by the 
principle of good faith, as well as by the fact that granting treaty rights 
or protections in such cases would vi olate both the principle of nemo 
auditur propiam turpitudinem allegans and international public policy. 
The tribunal also found that the claimant’s failure to act in good faith – 
by making fraudulent misrepresentations in obtaining its contract with 
El Sal vador – meant that “... it did not make it in accordance with 
Salvadoran law ” and that this rendered the tribunal “... incompetence 
to hear [the investor's] complaint, since its investment cannot benefit 
from the protection of the [treaty]. ” With respect t o emo auditur 
propiam turpitudinem allegans, the Inceysa tribunal held that: “... [a] 
foreign investor cannot seek to benefit from an investment effectuated 
by means of one or several illegal acts and, consequently, enjoy the 
protection granted by the host  State, such as access to international 
arbitration to resolve disputes, because it is evident that its act had a 
fraudulent origin and, as provided by the legal maxim, “nobody can 
benefit from his own fraud. ” It was found further that investments 
made in violation of host state law were contrary to international 
public policy, which it defined as “... consist[ing] of a series of 
fundamental principles that constitute the very essence of the State, 
and its essential function is to preserve the values of the  international 
legal system against actions contrary to it. That bilateral investment 
treaties commonly contained a provision requiring investments to be 
made “in accordance with law ” was a “clear manifestation ” of the 
signatories’ commitment to this inter national public policy and of their 
intent to exclude from the treaty's protection investments made in CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  148 
violation of the internal laws of each of signatory.  The tribunal further 
found that the language “in accordance with law ” in bilateral 
investment treat ies “...follow[ed] international public policies designed 
to sanction illegal acts and their resulting effects ” and that “it is 
uncontroversial that respect for the law is a matter of public policy … 
in any civilized country … and that a meta -positive prov ision [exists] 
prohibit[ing] attributing effects to an act done illegally, ” a provision 
that prevented the tribunal from hearing the dispute. The tribunal 
concluded its discussion of international public policy by holding that 
“it is not possible to recogn ize the existence of rights arising from 
illegal acts, because it would violate the respect for the law which ... is 
a principle of international public policy. ”  
121.  While dismissing the case on other jurisdictional grounds, 
the tribunal in TSA Spectrum  de Argentina SA v. Argentina  [(ICSID 
Case No ARB/05/5), Award, 19 December 2008] noted that, had these 
other grounds not been available, it would have reserved the issue of 
corruption in the granting to the claimant of a concession (contract for 
the priva tization of the management and control of the Argentine radio 
spectrum) for the merits of the case and would not have decided them 
at the jurisdictional stage. Such reservation followed from the fact that 
investigations into bribery and misuse of public of fice in connection 
with the granting of the concession were, at the time of the decision, 
ongoing in Argentina, with the alleged bribery still being investigated 
and two indictments, but no judgments, having issued from the 
misuse of public office investig ations.  
122.   Above are the reasons in support of the short order 
passed by this Court , by which the titled CPLA was converted into 
appeal , and the appeal as well as the Constitution Petitions under CP 796/07 etc.  
 (Reko Diq)  149 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution were allowed with co sts throughout 
whereas the Miscellaneous Applications were disposed of. In 
consequence, t he Chagai Hills Exploration Joint Venture Agreement 
dated 23.07.1993 was held to have been executed contrary to the 
provisions of the Mineral Development Act, 1948, th e Mining 
Concession Rules, 1970 framed thereunder, the Contract Act, 1872, 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, etc., which was even otherwise not 
valid, therefore, the same was declared to be illegal, void and non est. 
In pursuance of the above declaration , Addendum No. 1 dated 
04.03.2000, Option Agreement dated 28.04.2000, Alliance Agreement 
dated 03.04.2002 and Novation Agreement dated 01.04.2006, which 
were based upon, and emanate d from, CHEJVA were also held to be 
illegal and void. It was further held t hat a ll those instruments d id not 
confer any right on BHP, MINCOR, TCC, TCCP, Antofagasta or Barrick 
Gold in respect of the matters covered therein. It was lastly held that 
EL-5 was tantamount to exploration contrary to rules and regulations 
as the claim o f TCCP was based on CHEJVA, which document itself ha d 
been held to be non est. Therefore, before exploration it was 
incumbent upon it to have sought rect ification of its legal status.   
 
 
 
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
 
 
 
GULZAR AHMED, J  
 
 
 
SH. AZMAT SAE ED, J 
 
 
Islamabad, 7 January, 2013  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  

10.05.2013 



 7.1.2013 

 www.supremecourt.gov.pk 


 07.01.2013  CJ 


 (BDA)  29.07.1993  .3
 BDA Act,1974  3(2) 1974 
"the Chagai Hills Exploration Joint Ventrure Agreement"    /
BHP Minerals Intermediate Exploration Inc. (BHP),  (CHEJVA)
 Delaware  USA 

 AddendumNo.I  04.03.2000  .4BDA  "GOB" 
CHEJVA ,  BHP Minerals  Act,1974
CHEJVA  BDA  BDA
 BDA's  CHEJVA 
GOB  GOB  GOB's
 1.1 
 2  ,  ,
 CHEJVA (ii)2.1(i) 
 225,7,8,9,11,12,14,15  3.2
 Mincor Resources BHP28.04.2000  .5
 2.1 
Exploit  Mincor 
 GOB  BHP 
 100  2.2.1 
 BHP  Minor,BHP BHP  Mincor
Tethyan  Specialized Micor  BHP 2.24 
BHP  Copper company (TCC)
Option  TCC Mincor 
 Mincor  Mincoroption  3 Agrement
 Clawback 3.3  BHP 
 Clawback 
 Mincor 
 Mincoroption  MincorTCC24.10.2000 .6 TCCP  BMR 2002 03.09.2002  19.04.2002
Explorution Licence (EL)  973.75. km 
US$60million BHPTCC  EL-5  09.09.2002 
 Antofagasta  50% TCCAtacama  Clowback
Atacoma  Antofagasta 2006  50%
 TCC  TCC  complxr Pvt, Ltd,
 TCC AUD 220 million  Atacoma  Antofagasta 

 BHP  1-4-2009 7
 BDA  TCC
 CHEJVA BHPBDA 
BHPTCC  CHEJVA 
BHP  BHPTCC 
 75%25%TCC  CHEJVA
 TCC ,EL-5  75% BHP  
 TCC8
 TCCP2007  TCCP 
 11.04.2008 

 892/06  20069
 BHP   validity of Act of Relaxation CHEJVA 
1992-93CHJV 

 75  4 54



CHEJVA  26.6.2007  10
 BDA  BMCR1970
 184(3)  CP.796/2007 
 BHP/TCC 



 16 CHEJVA  17

 CHEVJA
 CHEVJA BHP 
16.9.1993  BHP 
 BDA  BHP
BHP   20.10.1993  BDA  BHP18
... ... ... ...   30.10.1993  PDWP  19
BHP  30.01.1994  20
-  13
 ''

 1994 20

 Rule 98Minning Consession Rules 1970 No:S.O (MR)5-9/94.254.60.
 BHP 

1.    Garnt of Exploration Areas
1.    Area available for prospecting Licence.
2.    Application for prospecting Licence.
3.    Satisfaction of Conditions attaching to prospecting Licenc es.
4.     Exclusive right.
5.    Other Minerals.
6.    Government rights pre-emption acquisition merger, and taki ng control in
national emergency.
7.     Assignment.
8.     Application for Mining Licence.
9.    Royalty.
10     Penalties compensation and cancellation.11.    Employment and training.
12.    Mining Lease.
 BHP  BHP .21

 TCC  BHP 

 Rule 3BMCR 1970  CHEJVA  BHP 
Act XXIV of   BMCR 1970 
 BMCR 1970  5 1948
5  Act 1948   Act 1948 




  
 2Act 1948 
  2Act 1948 
 Rule 3  BMCR 1970
  BDA-BHP 
 2  BDA-BHP  Rule 3
 BMCR 1970   CHEJVA 
 98  Rule 98BMCR 

 BMCR 1970   Rule 98 
 (hardship) 

  Vs 
 2006 SCMR 1876
 23.10.1993  DBA  23
 BDA  2 
 BHP  / 

 98 BMSR 1970  Notified Order 
 BDA 
 98  BDA BHR 
 hardship 
 PDWP  BDA 
 20.01.1994 notification  relacation 
 98 GOB 
 hardship 
 98 
98 BMCR 1970  /
CHEJVA  5 Act 1948 

 CHEJVA 24


 BDA BHP  / CHEJVA 25

 / 
 BHR/BDA's 
CHEJVA 
 "" 
 16 CHEJVA 
CHEJVA 
 24.6.2
 BHP 2.2CHEJVA 
BMCR  CHEJVA 
BDA  1970
  BHP 
 24.6.2  CHEJVA 
 26
  Rule 8 
 13'' '' 
 CHEJVA 
Rule 
 BMCR 1970  8


 Abdul Haq and others Vs. Province of Sindh and others 
 (PLD 2000 Karachi 224). 32Rules No.30, 31 BMCR 1970   5.2, 5.3, 5.4  28
 Prospecting Licence  Rule 30 
Prospecting Licence  Rule 31

 Prospecting Licnece 
 Rule 32   Rule 31 


 Prospecting Scheme 
 CHEJVA
  5.6 CHEJVA  29

 Rule 27BMCR 1970  BMCR 1970
 Mine, Querry, Bore 

 PL

 Minning Lease  Rule 3830
 Rules  Minning Lease
 5.9 
  Stage four Stage three   Minning Lease 
 Rule 38  50  5.3.1CHEVJA 32
 5.3.2 
 50  10

B- CHEVJVA  5.10CHEJVA 

 5.3.1 
 42   10 
 5 
  50   
 CHEJVA  1000  BHP-BDA 

 2.2  5.11 33
5.6 5.3.1  5.2 
  5.2  6.1 5.9 
 50  5.3 
   5.6 
 6.1 

 6.4 


 6.3.1  6.5 
 90  6.3.1


 3  /

 53




 533  CHEJVA 
 2.2CHEJVA  BHP-DBA

 BMCR-1970  3

8  19991998   34
(31)  5 3 
 (PL-14) 
 2  (240620.20)  21.02.2000 

 (PL)  1970 BMCR 30) 

BMR,  09.03.2002 2002 BMR 35
(BMR 2002) 125  2002
 (BHP) 
(21.02.2002) PL-14   BMR-2002 
 (PL-14) 
 BMR-2002 67 
 (EL-5)  (GOB) 
  TCC/BHP,CHEJVA 
 5  19961994 
17 (TCC/BHP)  9
 (CHEJVA) 
Talibuddin M/s Shakil  (CHEJVA)  36
 Addendum  Law Firm
 (CHEJVA) 
 (BHP)
 (CHEJVA) 
 1  (BHP) 

 TCCP  TCC  (BHP)

 18.1 (CHEJVA) 37
 39 


 (BHP) 
Annex (A)  18.1  39 (BHP)  16.09.93 

 65 
 65 1970 BMCR






 (CHEJVA) 


 18.1 (CHEJVA) 37
 39 


 (BHP) 
 18.1  39
 (BHP)  16.09.93  Annex (A) 38

 65 
 65 1970 BMCR 





 (CHEJVA) 


 CHEJVA  BHP  39
 BHP  25: 75
 GOB 
 DBA19-07-1994 
 BMCR  BDA/BHP
 4 1970
 3347226
 5  3347226/-  (i)
 33  4  1
 1970
 .40


 BHP  
 11-08-1994  BDA  2019-04-1994
 19-07-1994 
 19-09-1994 19-07-1994 
  3347226  3.34716-11-1994 
 3.347

 BHP 
 19-07-1994 
 BHP-BDA 
 / 
 B H P - B D A
 3.347  16-11-1994
 BMCR 1970 
 BHP  .41
 BHP  33 BMCR 1970  19-07-1994 
 5 BHP  5
 3 3 4 7 2 2 6 / -  1
 BHP  1 5  16-11-1994
 16736130/- 
 BHP  BDA 
 BDA  CHEJVA  44
 BDA 

 F-9 
 7592010  4668/2006
 BHPBDA 

 BAA  199313

 29-07-1997 

 BDA

 22-07-1993 BDA 

 BDA (1)
 BHP 
 BHP 

 29.07.1993  (2)
 BDA


"  "  29.07.1993 
 27.07.1993 
 29.07.1993 CHEJVA Addendum 04.03.2000  20.01.1994
 3.0 

 Process 



23 1872 



 1970  CHEJVA 
CHEJVA 
 23 
 45
 JVA  1  1976
 CHEJVABDABDA
 1 CHEJVA 

 " "  3.2.7 UNIDROI.T


 CHEJVA  50



 CHEJVA 




 1983 

 1970 BMCR 14  52
 16 CHEJVA 

 (BO)  LO 
451  1984 
 1984 452

 Delaware    CHEJVA53



 456 
 452451 1984
  
 55




 17 Registrar Act 1908  ASC  57
 TCC  ASC 
 17(1)(b) ACT 

 BHP-BDA 
Alliance  17
 17  Agrement

 BMCR1970  .62
  BMCR 1970 
11  2 1948 
 BMCR1970 




  11.8.2 
 11.03.2
 11 
BDA 11-04-1-2 11.3.3 
BHP 
 BHP 






  17 







 173(3)  69


 139(2) 
1976  (2)7 
 139(2) 


 CHEJVA  CHEJVA 


 DELAWARE 
 
CHEJVA 
CHEJVA 
 2.1CHEJVA 


 CHEJVA 
 CHEJVA  4.3.2000 
 CHEJVA
 GOB 
 1974 



  CHEJVA 
CHEJVA 


CHEJVA 


 CHEJVA 
 CHEJVA 
CHEJVA 
 CHEJVA 
20 1872 

 CHEJVA 

 CHEJVA,  GOB 70
 GOBBHP  M/S 
 3.9.1999 
BDAJVA  GOB  JVA 
(not GOB through   BDA GVA 
 capacityrepresentative  BDA)
 JVA  JVA 
GOB BDA  BHPBDA
 BDA 
 10-11-1999  BDA  M/S
 JVA  JVA  "
 JVA  GOB  173 

"  B H P B D A  J V A
 BHPBDA 04-03-2000 
 CHEJVABDA 
GOB  GOB  GOB 
 7 Rules of Business, 1976
 TCC  7  BDA 
 BDA 

Authorization  71
 BDA  [  ()]  Letter
 Authorization 

 GOB12-10-1999
 24-12-1999 
 CHEJVA  1872  196 
 Authorization Letter  DBA 



 CHEJVA  72
 PCC  CHEJVA

 5.10  5.3.1 CHEJVA
 B  CHEJVA  13000

(AIR 1926 
 29 
 Nagpur 435 at 439)

 20 
(1998 CLC 
(PLD 1961 BJ 79)
(2009 MLD 704) 
1464)
 CHEJVA  73
 20  agent 




1974 



 75
 CHEJVA 

 4 1974 
 1716 
 /  CHEJVA 
 CHEJVA 

 20 
 "
 "
 CHEJVA  80
 3.1  CHEJVA 

 3.2  CHEJVA 
 75%  BHP 
 3.3  BHP  75% 
 BHP  BHP  3.4
 25%  "" 
 CHEJVA "  "
 BHP/TCC 
 /



 BHP  81



25%  BDA  25%  BDA
 BDA 

 25% GoB   BHP 
CHEJVA  25%   CHEJVA 
 12.4


(i) 
CHEKA  2%  (ii) 
 50%  12.5 
 12-6 
 7.2  3.2CHEJVA 84
 75 

  50  12.5 
 CHEJVA 
 25GOB 
 25 
 CHEJVA 
  GOB  CHEJVA  GOB  85 CHEJVA  CHEJVA 


 GOB 


 (2003 CLC 138) 
 CHEJVA  GOB
 GOB 
 GOB
 )(2001 CLC 595) 
 AIR 1936 PC 1936 PC (193 
  GOB 
 )   196
BHP  BMCR 1970CHEJVA  TCC86
 20-1-94  TCC 
 1-4-2006  CHEJVA 
TCC  CHEJVA  MBR 
 BHP 
 CHEJVA 
 EL-5  CHEJVA 
 CHEJVA  TCC  GOB 


 BDA  BHP 
 621872  87


 CHEJVA  EL-5 



 (AIR 1954 Nag)

 (AIR 1954 Mad 528) 
(AIR 1963 MP  (AIR 1959 Andh Pra 647)
 323)



 23 

 
 CHEJVA 
 (PLD 1958 SC 104)  (2002 YLR 1531)  (1991 MLD1101) 
(PLD 2008SC 663)  (2003 SCMR 549)
 88
 7 
 DBA 
 CHEJVA 
BHP  BDA

 CHEJAV 
 CHEJAV 
 CHEJVA 

 4710 BMR 2002  92
 99  TCC  08-02-2011 "F"
 /  14
 TCC  03-02-2011 


 TCC's BMR2002 
 94
 TCC
 14-11-2011  BMR2002 97 TCC  TCC  15-11-2011 

 TCC  BMR2002
 199 
 Constitution Petitions  116

 CHEJVA 
 Petitions  199 
 Petition 
 Petition  184(3) 


2010 
 CMA 252/2011  ECNEC
 TCC 
    CHEJVA  08.02.2011 


 Reported 

  (PLD 1985 SC 345) Gulam Bibi Vs Sarsa Khan
(PLD 1995 SC 530) Zahid Akhtar Vs Government of Punjab"
"(2008 SCMR 105) Iqbal Hussain Vs Province of Sindh"
" ( P L D  2 01 0  S C  7 59 )  H um an  R i gh t s C a se s  N o .  4 66 8/ 2 00 6 ,
111/2007,15283-4/2010 (2007 CLC 441), Dilshad Ali Vs Ahmed Khan
 184(3) 
 trichotomy 





 .117

Bhanu 
Constructions Company v. A.P State Electricity Board [1997(6) AL T 328]... ...
 CHEJVA 
 /
 CPLA  .122
 184(3) 
  23.07.1993 
Mineral Development Act 1948, the Mining Concession Rules, 1970 
  Transfer of Property Act, 1882 Contract Act, 1872

Option Agreement ,04.03.2000 Addendum No.1 
 Novation Agreement 03.04.2002  Alliance Agreement 28.04.2000
 CHEJVA 01.04.2006 Barrick Gold Antofagasta TCCPTCCMINCORBHP 
  EL-5 
  CHEJVA  TCCP 

