IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
     Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
     Mr. Justice Iqbal Hameedur Rahman  
 
CMA No.2943/14 in CMA No.2774/14 in Const. Petition No.51/2010 
(Miscellaneous matter rega rding unwanted posters and banners in Islamabad)  
 
Independent Media Corporation (Pvt.) Ltd.   Petitioner  
 
Versus  
  
Federation of Pakistan through  
Ministry of Information and PEMRA    Respondent s 
 
Voluntarily Appeared :  Sheikh Ahsan -ud-Din, ASC  
     Mr. Ta ufeeq Asif, ASC  
     Mr. Yaqoob Butt,  
 
On Court’s Call :   Mr. Salman Aslam Butt, AGP  
 
On Court Notice:  
For the Federation:    Khawaja Ahmad Hussain, DAG  
 
For M/o Interior:    Nemo  
 
For I.B.:     Ms. Naveeda Noor, Director (Law)    
 
For Islamabad Police:   Mr. Aftab Ahmad Cheema, I.G.  
     Mr. Jameel Hashmi, S.P.  
     Mr. Azhar Shah, DSP  
     Mr. Hakim Khan, SHO, PS. Aabpara  
     Mr. Azhar Mehmood, S.I./I.O    
      
Date of Hearing:    2.07.2014  
 
ORDER  
 
 We have repeatedly expressed our concern that the police has  been 
less than diligent in this case. We note that FIR No.234 /14 was lodged by         
Mr. Azhar Mehmood, S.I. at Police Station, Aabpara on 27.05.2014 , 
where after , the police file shows extreme lack of diligence in investigating 
the case and bringing the  culprits to book. Two accused were arrested on 
27.05.2014 . The main accused in the case namely Muhammad Rashid was 
identified more than one month ago. It is unfortunate that due to a lack of CMA No.2943/14 in CMA 2774/14 in Const.P.51/10  2
diligent efforts and investigation , the said Muhammad Rashid was  arrested 
only last night.  
2. The Inspector General of Police , Islamabad is present in person. He 
was not in a position to explain as to why diligent effort in the case had not 
been made by the police. He also conceded that there had been incompetence 
(ﻧﺎ اﮨﻠﯽ ) in the investigation. He being head of the Police Force in Islamabad 
shall within seven days submit an explanation  firstly, as to the reasons 
behind the incompetence and secondly, disciplinary action, if any, which he 
has taken against those who hav e been incompetent.  It may also be that there 
may have been some attempt to cover -up/protect the accused. His 
explanation should also comment on this aspect of the case.   
3.   We may also add that we have seen the police file. From the same it 
is evident that there have been long periods when no action at all appears to 
have been taken in the investigation of the case. When questioned, the I.G. 
also conceded that he had not seen all zimnees . This also reflects a sorry state 
of affairs within the police. It  needs to be emphasized again that whoever the 
persons were involved, could as easily have com e in the same way and 
escaped undetected after planting 22  bombs or explosive devices instead of 
banners. This must be a cause of concern  to the citizen s of Pakis tan.  
4. Sheikh Ahsan -ud-Din and Mr. Taufeeq Asif, learned ASCs  had 
pointed out in Court more than one month ago the main accused was in fact 
one Muhammad Rashid who could lead t o those who were behind the anti -
state activity. Mr. Taufeeq Asif, learned ASC  also states that although he had 
passed on this information earlier, he will be happy to record his statement 
with the police even today or tomorrow.  
5. The report of the I.G. shall be submitted before the next date of 
hearing. Re -list on 8.07.2014.   Mr. Yaqoob Butt brother of Shafiq Butt (one of 
the accused) present in person states that his brother is in judicial custody. CMA No.2943/14 in CMA 2774/14 in Const.P.51/10  3
He wishes to record his statement. The police shall ensure that his statement 
is recorded at the earliest.   
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
2nd July, 2014  
(Nasir Khan)  
 
 
 