IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT:   
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
 
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.230 OF 2019 IN SUO 
MOTU CASE NO.26 OF 2018 AND CIVIL MISC. 
APPLICATIONS NO.4479 , 4955 AND 4956 OF 2019 IN 
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.230 OF 2019 IN SUO 
MOTU CASE NO.26 OF 2018 AND CIVIL REVIEW 
PETITIONS NO.109, 150 TO 153, 165, 214 TO 226 OF 
2019 IN SUO MOTU CASE NO.26 OF 2018 AND CIVIL 
MISC. APPLICATION NO.2072 OF 2019 IN CIVIL 
REVI EW PETITION NO.NIL OF 2019 IN SUO MOTU 
CASE NO.26 OF 2018  
(Regarding selling of Bottled Water extracted from the 
ground without any charge and its fitness for Human 
Consumption)  
 
AND 
 
CIVIL PETITIONS NO.1195, 1196, 1197 AND 1322 OF 
2019  
 
Water and Sanitati on Agency, Lahore through its Managing 
Director   
 …Petitioner(s)  
(In all cases)  
VERSUS  
Lotte Akhtar Beverages (Pvt.) Ltd., Lahore etc.  In 
C.P.1195/2019  
Shezan International Ltd., Lahore etc.  In 
C.P.1195/2019  
Coca Cola Beverages Pakistan Ltd., Lahore e tc. In 
C.P.1195/2019  
Nestle Pakistan Ltd., Lahore etc.  In 
C.P.1195/2019  
 …Respondent(s)  
 
In attendance:  Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, Addl.A.G.P.  
Mr. Tariq Mehmood Jehangiri, A.G. Islamabad  
Mr. Qasim Chohan, Addl.A.G. Punjab  
Barrister Qasim Wadood , Addl.A.G. KPK 
Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl.A.G. Balochistan  
Mr. Zahid Nawaz Cheema, ASC  C.M.A.No.230/2019 etc.   -: 2 :-
Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
Mian Irfan Akram, ASC  
Mr. Khalid Javed Khan, ASC  
Mr. Qasim Mirjat, AOR  
Mr. Suleman Akram Raja, ASC  
Mr. M. Munir Paracha, ASC  
Mr. Hassan Irfan Khan, ASC  
Mr. Munawar -us-Salam, ASC  
Mr. Iftikhar Ahmed Mian, ASC  
Mr. Farooq Amjad Meer, ASC  
Mr. Gulzar Begum, ASC  
Mr. Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC  
Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC  
Dr. M. Ahsan Siddiqui, Head of Committee  
Mr. Ashiq Ali, Director SEPA  
Mr. Shahbaz Ahmed Sheikh, Law Officer Finance 
Punjab  
Mr. M. Ramzan, A.D. Legal EPA  
Dr. Zubair Khan, in person  
Syed Zahid Aziz, M.D. WASA Lahore  
Mr. Aamir Latif, Secy. Industry KPK  
Mr. Rahim Ullah, S.O Local Govt. KPK  
Mr. Wajhat A. Qureshi, Executive Vice President, 
NBP 
Mr. M. Ali Bator, Acting  Dir. EPA Balochistan     
  
Date of hearing:  02.07.2019  
 
ORDER  
 
  We have heard the learned Additional Attorney 
General, the Advocate General  ICT and the Additional 
Advocate General Balochistan, KP and Punjab, Dr. M. 
Ahsan Siddiqui, Chairman of the Coord ination Committee 
constituted by this Court and M.D , WASA, Lahore. The 
following observations are made about the proceedings at 
the hearing.  
2.  The Additional Attorney General informs that 
the Law Officer s of the Federation, ICT and the Provinces 
have di scussed draft legislation for uniform C.M.A.No.230/2019 etc.   -: 3 :-
implementation of the water cess through legislative 
measures. It is clarified that the uniform law is intended 
to cater not just ground water but also surface water 
usage . Whereas water has several categories of 
consu mers, inter alia , agricultural , domestic, commer cial 
and industrial users, nevertheless presently the focus of 
the proposed legislation for the charge and collection of 
water cess shall be the industrial use rs. The ambit  of the 
proposed regulatory law for water conservation shall be 
extended gradually to other categories of consumers. The 
learned Attorney General and the Provincial and ICT Law 
Officers have assure d the Court that a consensually 
proposed Model Law shall be filed in the Court within one 
month .  
3.  The Court has earlier  directed the installation 
of flow meters at the industrial units where  bottled 
drinking water or other beverages are prepared for 
measuring the volume of water that is consumed, utilized 
and wasted. The Government of Punjab has sought three 
weeks  time to install flow meters along with CCTV 
cameras and monitors at all units in the Province. The 
other Provinces have also made progress in this regard but 
are not equip ped with data. Accordingly, six weeks time is 
granted to the Prov inces and ICT for installing the 
requisite flow meters , the specifications and data about C.M.A.No.230/2019 etc.   -: 4 :-
which shall be shared by them with the Coordination 
Committee .  
4.  This Court has previously directed the water 
cess funds to be invested in the National Bank of Pak istan 
(“NBP”) . Such funds have been deposited by all the 
Provinc ial Governments and ICT in accounts established 
with the NBP  which has filed CMA No. 6617 of 2019 to 
seek directions regarding the deposited funds. At this 
stage , whilst the water cess collect ion mechanism  is under 
finalization, it is directed that all funds of the water cess 
shall be deposited by the Provincial and ICT governments 
in the NBP account established by them under the title 
“Water Conservation Account” in one of the authorized 
branc hes of the NBP. Upon deposit t he NBP shall 
forthwith transfer such funds from its respective branches 
to the Head Office Account bearing the title Principal 
Water Conservation Account (“Principal Account”) . All 
funds credited to the Principal Account shall  be invested 
immediately in the best available NBP investment scheme 
on a daily balance basis for onward recurring investment 
in 03 month s treasury bills at the first available biweekly 
auction by the State Bank of Pakistan. The funds 
deposited with the NB P shall be reported to the Court 
through monthly statements providing the details of the 
depositor agencies, the amount of deposit, date thereof C.M.A.No.230/2019 etc.   -: 5 :-
and profit accrued on daily basis; the date of transfer to 
Principal Account , its investment and maturity value  in 
Treasury Bills and the dates thereof. It may be noted at 
this juncture that Government of Punjab has al ready 
deposited an amount of Rs.380/ - million in the Principal 
Account, the Government of KP has deposited Rs.15.5/ - 
million and the Government of Ba lochistan has deposited 
Rs.2.7/ - million  in the said account . The Government of 
Sindh is not represented today  as also on the last date of 
hearing . It is directed that on the next date of hearing, the 
Advocate General, Sindh shall personally assist the Cou rt 
duly prepared in respect of the matter s in issue otherwise 
the Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh shall be in 
attendance to assist the Court.  
5.  Be that as it may, Dr. M. Ahsan Siddiqui, 
Chairman of the Coordination Committee has informed 
that rough ly an amount of Rs.70 -75/- million has been 
deposited by the Government of Sindh in the NBP under 
the heading of water cess. It is directed that the respective 
Governments of the Provinces and the ICT shall convert or 
open account s under the afore -mention ed title “Water 
Conservation Account” in the concerned NBP branches 
from where such funds shall forthwith be transferred to 
the Principal Account for investment in the terms directed 
by the Court. The cha rging of , transfer, disbursement and C.M.A.No.230/2019 etc.   -: 6 :-
use of such fund s shall be subject to orders of this Court. 
The compliance report s by each of the Provinces and the 
ICT with respect to the foregoing discussion shall be filed 
before the next date of hearing.  
6.   Dr. M. Ahsan Siddiqui has expressed 
admiration for the Fai salabad plant which filters and 
cleanses canal water  to supply pure drinking water . The 
Provincial Governments shall apprise whether they have 
received offers of foreign assistance for establishing such 
plants and if so, their response s thereto. The detail s of the 
Faisalabad project are available in CMA No. 5588/2019 . 
Further technical and financial details about the said 
project as well as its smaller variants shall be filed by the 
Punjab Government with disclosure of the foreign sponsor 
and its terms of as sistance. Comment shall also be made 
on the feasibility of such smaller project s. This 
information may be helpful for the  other Governments in 
understanding and for adopting , the concept and 
technology  enabling the project . The Court is inclined that 
in th e first place the available funds be deployed in areas 
that are severely deficient in clean drinking water , for 
example desert lands in District Tharparkar e.g Mithi and 
such like areas in Balochistan Province where canal water 
may be procured for supply t o drinking water treatment 
plants installed for public consumption.  The Law Officers C.M.A.No.230/2019 etc.   -: 7 :-
of Balochistan and Sindh Provinces shall apprise the 
Court about the areas  where unavailability  of drinking 
water may be redress ed by such water treatment plants.  
7.  The concerned urban water supply agenc ies 
throughout the country shall consider the framing of 
regulations and or executive directions that mandate the 
installation of push -button faucets at water supply point s 
in all public and commercial premises. The propo sed 
means , mechanism, incentives  based on locally 
manufactured equipment and penalties for enforcing the 
regulatory measures shall be presented in writing to this 
Court before the next date of hearing.  
8.  Finally, the Provinces and ICT shall share their 
experiences and knowledge about simple, cost efficient 
methods for rain harvesting and for recycling  used water. 
These shall also be brought to the notice of the Court on 
the next date of hearing.  
  Relist on 26.08.2019.                     
   
Judge 
 
 
Judge 
 
 
Islamabad         Judge 
02.7.2019  
Naseer  
 