IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
       ( Original Jurisdiction)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
  
CMA No.3325/2012 in C.R.P. 270/2011 in Const. Petition No.42/2011  
                                     (Progress repor t by NAB in OGRA Case)  
Crl.M.A.547/2012 & Crl.M.A.565/12 in Crl.O.P.63/2012  
(Show Cause Notice to Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, AOR in accordance with this Court’s order dated 13.9. 2012)  
C.R.P. No. 9/2013 in CMA -3325/2012 in C.R.P.270/2011  
NAB          Versus      Muhammad Yaseen, Registrar OGRA, etc.  
 
   Khawaja Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC (Amicus Curiae)  
 
For NAB:   Mr. K. K. Agha,  Prosecutor General, NAB  
   Rana Zahid Mehmood, Addl. P.G. NAB  
   Mr. Mehmood Raza, Addl. P.G. NAB  
   Mr. Mazhar Ali Chaudhry, DPG, NAB  
   Mr. Akbar Tarar, Addl. P.G. NAB  
   Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
   Mr. Waqas Ahmed  Khan , Dy. Director/ I.O.  
 
In Attendance:   Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
   Rana Shahid Parvaiz, S.P.  
 
For FIA:   Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Director (Law)  
 
For Motorway Police:  Mr. Arshad Al i Chaudhry, AOR  
 
For the respondents  
(in review petitions):  Kh. Azhar Rasheed, ASC  
 
    
 Date of Hearing:  11.2.2013 
 
ORDER   
 
 Jawwad S. Khawaja, J. - This matter has been heard extensively to day following 
from  our orders of  24.1.2013 and 31.1.2013. We have also been ably assisted by Khwaja 
Haris Ahmed, learned Sr. ASC as amicus curiae.  
2. Based on the hearing, documents and considerations discussed below it does 
prima facie, appear  that diligent effort s need to be made to bring back the absconder 
Tauqeer Sa diq from U.A.E. Learned amicus curiae  has referred to a number of legal 
provisions in  the law of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) as notified by the General 
Directorate of Naturalization and Residence. The law is formally known as the Federal 
Law No.6 of 197 3. The entire law is relevant but , of particular importance in the context 
of the present case , are Articles 2, 8, 11, 12, 15, 20 (as amended in 1996) and Article 23  of CMA-3325/12 in CRP -270/2011 in Const.P.42/11  2 
the said Federal Law  of the UAE . From a reading of these provisions it does appear,  
prima facie,  that if a diligent effort is made, the absconder can be deported from U.A.E. 
At p resent, there is nothing on record to indicate that any  request at an official level  
through the right official quarters has been made by the Government of Pakistan to the 
Government of UAE seeking the deportation of the absconder. The learned Prosecutor 
General NAB is directed to submit in Court a report with necessary 
documents/correspondence showing the efforts made since 1st January, 2013 to show 
the efforts made so far in apprehending the absconding accused. This should be done 
before the next date of hearing.  
3. We have also gone through the various texts including ‘ Jones on Extradition ’ by 
Alun Jones, ‘ International Extradition’ by M. Cherif Bassiouni and  ‘Extra dition in 
International Law ’ by Ivan Anthony Shearer . From an  examination of these texts it is 
apparent that deportation may  be the preferred mode for bringing the absconder to 
justice in Pakistan and may also be more expeditious than proceedings for the 
extradition of the accused. Presently, however, in view of what has been noted above, 
we would direct the FI A, the Ministry of Interior and NAB as the prosecuting agency, to 
make sure that proceedings are initiated to bring back  the accused from  the  UAE  
expeditiously . We are concerned that presently there are documents on record which 
show that the expeditious route seeking deportation  has not been pursued  and instead 
the government authorities are contemplating extradition which could be  a lengthy and 
time -consuming process . A legal opinion on UAE laws also has not been obtained from 
local counsel in UAE . We may emphasize  at this point that, prima facie, the right  law and 
the right  approach with the right authorities may not have been pursued  by NAB and 
othe r concerned Pakistani authorities . This needs to be done immediately because a 
letter dated 5.2.2013 has been placed on record which has been issued by the 
Immigration Wing, Embassy of Pakistan, M uscat stating  that “Tauqir Sadiq is detained in 
Al Wathba Pr ison Abu Dhabi for a period of 15 days ending on 14th February 2013(extendable to 
30 days)”.  It would create a lot of difficulty if immediate efforts are not made to ensure 
either that on 14th February, 2013 Tauqeer Sadiq is deported to Pakistan or if that  is not 
possible forthwith, then an extension of th e detention period to 30 days is  sought to CMA-3325/12 in CRP -270/2011 in Const.P.42/11  3 
enable any missing  documentation to be comp leted for ensuring his presence  in 
Pakistan . In addition NAB being the prosecutor , shall take immediate steps to obtain  
such warrants/orders from  the competent  Court as may be required  for the purpose of 
bringing back  Tauqeer Sadiq. Learned amicus curiae  submitted that the warrants when 
obtained from the Accountability C ourt can be served on the absconde r in the UAE, and 
the service of  such warrants will have its own legal consequences.  
4. During  the course of this hearing a letter dated 11th January, 2013 has been 
brought to our notice. This letter which has been issued by the Cabinet Division, Govt. 
of Pakistan is most al arming because it prima facie,  show s interference in the functioning 
and status  of NAB as an independent investigator and prosecutor. In view of the 
importance of this letter it is reproduced herein below  in extenso :- 
       “Most Immediate  
   GOVERNMENT O F PAKISTAN  
       CABINET SECRETARIAT  
         (CABINET DIVISION)  
              *****  
 No.5/3/2009 -RA-II/OGRA   Islamabad, the 11th January, 2013  
 From:  Deputy Secretary (RA)  
  Ph: 9201247  
 
 To: The Chairman,  
  National Accountability  Bureau (NAB)  
  Islamab ad.   
 Subject  :- INQUIRY AGAISNT MR. TAUQIR SADIQ, FORMER   
  CHAIRMAN OGRA   
The Prime Minister has been pleased to desire that NAB may kept 
Cabinet and Establishment Division(s) updated by submitting fortnightly progress 
reports about the developments of the case and further directions of the Apex Court till 
the closure of the case.  
2. Above in view, NAB is requested to furnish a fortnightly report on the subject to 
Cabinet and Establishment Division(s).  
Sd/- 
(Muhammad Ashfaq)  
    Deputy Secretary (RA)”.  
 
 
5. What  is of serious concern to us is that the said letter appears to have been 
received  one month ago  by the Chairman, NAB whose initials appear on the letter  but 
thereafter, as stated by Mr. K. K. Agha, Prosecutor General NAB, the letter was never 
marked or even shown to him and he was totally unaware of the existence of the said CMA-3325/12 in CRP -270/2011 in Const.P.42/11  4 
letter  until  it was referred to in Court by the learned amicus curiae.  A copy of the letter has 
been placed  on record. The very fact that the Prime Minister has desired that NAB “may 
keep Cabinet and Establishment Division(s) updated … about development of the case and the 
further directions of the Apex Court till the closure of the case” , prima facie, amounts to 
interference in the independent working of NAB.  This is particularly so, considering that 
the Prime Minister may himself be prima facie, implicated in the unlawful appointment of 
Tauqir Sadiq as Chairman, OGRA.  We are also some what surprised that this letter has 
not been responded to as yet and nor has the Cabinet Secretari at been informed of the 
independent status of NAB as an investigating a gency. We have already noted in our 
judgment dated 30.8.2012 passed in CRP 167 of 2012 that NAB is designed by law to be 
an independent agency and is to function without being influence d from outside 
quarters. In the  said judgment  we “[found] it odd that the Attorney General adopted a position 
and used words in his letter which should have been objectionable to a truly independent 
investigator but have, to date, remained unanswered and u nattended  ... t he National 
Accountability Ordinance (NAO) has also attempted to insulate NAB from external influence in 
an attempt to ensure its impartiality and professionalism.  This has been done inter alia, by 
providing security of tenure to the Chairm an and Prosecutor General of NAB ”.   
6. We, therefore, direct for the present that FIA , Ministry of Interior, Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and all other authorities of the government and/or their subordinate 
divisions and offices whether within Pakistan or abroad shall render full and prompt 
assistance to NAB in diligently pursuing the absconding accused and to bring him back 
to Pakistan.  NAB must act with alacrity and independently of Government, the Cabinet 
Division or the Prime Minister.  
7. To come up on  18.2.2013.  
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad , the  
11th February,  2013  
Not approved for reporting . 