IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
Bench -II: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Mr. Justice Shahid Bilal Hassan  
C.P.42/2022 and C.P.25/2024  
 
Public Interest Law Association of Pakistan  
Meherbano Ahsanudd in, etc.      
...…. Petitioner(s)  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, etc.       
….Respondent(s)  
In attendance:   Mian Sami -ud-Din, ASC.  
    Mr. Riaz Hussain Azam, AOR.  
    Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, Addl. AGP.  
    Ms. Roomina Khursheed Alam , Coordinator . 
    Eazaz  A. Dar, Secretary Climate Change.  
    Mr. Khalid Ishaq, Adv. Genl. Punjab.  
    Mr. Baleegh -uz-Zaman, Addl. A.G. Pb.  
    Mr. Zahid Akhtar Zaman, Chief Secy. Pb.  
    Mr. Hassan Akbar, A.G. Sindh.  
Muhammad Asif, A.G. Balochistan  
    Mr. M. Ayaz Khan Swati, A ddl. A.G. Balochistan.  
    Mr. Shah Faisal, A.G. KPK.  
    Syed Kausar Ali Shah, Addl. A.G. KPK.  
    Haji Muhammad Nazir, A.G. (G.B.)  
    Mr. Yasir Gul Khan, A.C. (MOPDS)  
    Mr. Mutahir Ahmad, D.S. (F) (G.B.)  
    Nadeem -ur-Rehman, Secretary Env. Bal.  
    Jahangir Anwar, Sect. Env. Lahore.  
    Imran Hamid, D.G. Env. Lahore.  
    M. Nawaz Manik, ADdl. D.G. Env. Lahore  
    Ms Amina, A.D. Legal Env. Lahore.  
    Asmatullah A.D. Legal Env. Lahore.  
    Kashif Sajjan, Asstt. Legal. Env. Lahore  
    Nadeem Aslam Ch. C .S. KPK.  
    M. Masood (Spl. Sec. Forest)  
    Sami Ullah (D.G. Env.)  
    M. Bashar Naveed, Addl. A.G.  
    Dr. Habib ur Rehman Solangi, D.D. Law.  
    Hassan Akber A.G. Sindh.  
    Asif Hyder Shah, C.S. Sindh.  
    Syed Mohsin Hussain Shah, AAG and  
    Focal person to Chief Secretary.  
    Nabeela Umer, Sec. Env. Sindh.  
Date of hearing:   01.07.2024  
ORDER  
Ms. Roomina Khursheed Alam, Coordinator to the Prime 
Minister on Climate Change , Ministry of Climate Change and Secretary Const.P.42 of 2022, etc.  2
Climate Change have tendered appearan ce alongwith Additional Attorney 
General and submit that five posts for Members of the Authority 
established under Section 5 of the Pakistan Climate Change Act, 2017 
(“Act”) have been advertised and as a result 752 applications have been 
received, which ar e under process and soon the said five posts will be 
filled. Let the said exercise be completed within a fortnight from today 
without fail. The Notification of a duly constituted Authority be placed on 
the record on or before the next date of hearing.   
2.  When inquired, if the Ministry of Climate Change has any 
climate change policy in place and the effective steps taken in order to 
address the challenges of climate change, nothing concrete was placed 
before us. It was mentioned  that NDMA & PDMA are lookin g into the 
matter. Our understanding is that NDMA and PDMA are disaster 
management institutions, while the Ministry of Climate Change has to 
come up with preventive policies addressing the challenges of climate 
change head -on. It appears that no such polic y is in place and no action 
on the ground has been taken. Still we provide opportunity to the 
Secretary Climate Change to place the relevant policy on the record and 
apprise the Court on the next date as to what are the key challenges of 
climate change and  what strategies and plans have been put in place by 
the Ministry and what action has so far been taken .  
3.  We have also heard the Chief Secretaries of Punjab, Sindh, 
KPK and Balochistan. We are not satisfied with their submissions and 
notice with concer n that no material steps have been taken by the said 
Provinces to deal with the challenges of climate change  as there is no 
clear strategy (ies), action plans or any adequate steps taken on the 
ground.  The Chief Secretaries undertake  that they will submit r elevant 
strategy/action plans to deal with the issue of climate change in their 
respective Provinces  before the next date. Let the said strategies  clearly 
identifying the threats /challenges of climate change in their respective 
Provinces and steps taken to  address the said challenges .  
4.  All the Chief Secretaries were asked whether the special 
budget has been allocated for the climate change  in the recent provincial 
budget s, their reply to this question was in the negative, however, as far 
as, Punjab is c oncerned, it has been pointed out that a loan of $ 50 
million through Asian Development Bank has been obtained and parked 
as Climate Change Fund, however, no document in this regard has been 
placed on the record.  Const.P.42 of 2022, etc.  3
5.  It is observed that climate change is a serious existential 
threat to the people of Pakistan and directly affects the fundamental 
rights, still  the recent provincial budget s have not allocated any Climate 
Fund for climate change  or come up with any effective strategies . This 
becomes doubly worrying as Monsoon rains are round the corner and the 
country has still not recovered from the devastating floods of the year 
2022.  
6.  All the Chief Secretaries, as well as , Ms. Roomina Khursheed 
Alam, Coordinator to the Prime Minister on Climate Change , Ministry of 
Climate Change and Secretary Climate Change , and, all the concerned 
officers will appear before the Court on the next date of hearing  and 
apprise the Court of their strategies and steps taken . To come up on 
15.07.2024.  Ms Ayesha Khan, Regional Ma naging Director Acumen, 609, 
6th Floor, ISE Tower, F -7/1 Blue Area, Islamabad is also appointed as 
amicus curiae to assist the Court on the aforesaid date. Office will inform 
amici curiae to be present on the next date of hearing.  
7.  Considering the crit ical importance of the issue, let a copy of 
this order be dispatched to the Prime Minister Secretariat so that the 
same be placed before the Prime Minister for his perusal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
1st July, 2024.  
Not approved for reporting  
Iqbal  Judge  
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 