IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB  
 
CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 1950  OF 20 07 
(On appeal against the judgment dated 24.09.2007  
passed by the High Court of Sind h, Karachi in 
Constitutional Petition No. D -2373/2006 ) 
 
 
Government of Pakistan through Secretary Revenue Division/CBR 
House, Islamabad and others  
… Appellant s 
VERSUS  
 
Muhammad J unaid Talat  
… Respondent  
 
 
For the Appellant s: Mr. Muhammad Habib Qureshi, ASC  
    Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
    Ms. Sonia Anwar Rana, D.C. Inco me tax.   
     
For the Respondent:  Mr. Muhammad Jamshed Talat, in person   
 
Date of Hearing:   07.05.2018  
 
JUDGMENT  
 
  FAISAL ARAB , J.- In the year 1999, the respondent’s 
article on non-payment  of income tax by Pakistani seafarers 
discharging duty on foreign flagships  was published in daily 
‘Takbeer’ . Pursuant to such article the Income Tax department 
raised a demand against 812 seafarers for the payment of income 
tax to the tune of Rs.86.606 mil lion, which was followed by ex -
parte assessment orders . The respondent being the author of such 
an article sought recovery of reward in his capacity as informer on 
the amount which led to recovery proceedings against the 
seafarers. He calculated the reward  money to be Rs.1.859 million  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1950 OF 2007  2
under Reward Order dated 14.05.1974  and lodged his claim  for 
payment .  
 
2.  Before the reward could be paid to the respondent, the 
Commissioner of Income Tax , in exercise of suo mot o powers under 
Section 122 -A of the Income Ta x, Ordinance, 2001 , examined the 
assessment orders issued to Pakistani seafarers and set-aside the 
same  on the ground that the resident status of a person is the 
prime factor in the determination of his tax liability and the same 
was not ascertainable with  regard to Pakistani seafarers 
discharging their duties on high seas beyond the territorial limits 
of the country. Upon such d enial of his claim , the respondent 
made a complaint to the Federal Tax Ombudsman, who vide 
recommendation dated 16.07.2001 d irecte d that reward be paid to 
the respondent . The Commissioner of Income Tax , however, 
awarded Rs.3,741/ - against recovery of income tax in a sum of 
Rs.14,910/ - from only one seafarer as Reward Order dated 
27.03.1980 envisage d payment of reward only upon recove ry of 
tax. T he respondent again moved the Federal Tax Ombudsman to 
seek recovery of his entire claim as according to him the Reward 
Order of 1980 was not pu blished in the official gazette  so it never 
came into force, the reward was, therefore,  to be proces sed in 
terms of the Reward Order dated 14.05.1974 which envisage d 
payment  upon making assessment of the evaded tax.  The Tax 
Ombudsman accepted the respondent’s argument and vide his 
recommendation dated 17.02.2006 directed the appellants to pay 
reward in terms of Reward Order  dated 14.05.1974 . As the 
department still did not pay, the respondent filed a Constitutional CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1950 OF 2007  3
Petition No.D -2373/2006 before the High Court of Sindh for a 
direction to the appellants to implement the recommendation of  
the Federal Tax Om budsman . The High Court vide impugned 
judgment dated 24.09.2007 allowed the Constitutional Petition  by 
maintaining the decision of the Tax Ombudsman and directed the 
appellants to compute the reward in accordance with the 
provisions of Reward Order of 1974  and settle the respondent’s 
claim within a period of six months. Being aggrieved by such 
decision , the department filed the present appeal with leave of this 
Court.  
 
3.  Learned counsel for the department contended that 
the Reward Order dated 14.05.1974 was superseded by Reward 
Order No. C.No:63(88)IT -IV/75 -Pt dated 27.03.1980 which was 
published in various tax commentaries and journals and as the 
claim of the respondent pertain ed to the year 1999 it was the 
Reward Order dated 27.03.1980 that was applicab le and not 
Reward Order dated 14.05.1974. He submitted that the Reward 
Order of 1980 contain ed a proviso “ provided that reward will be 
paid only if the tax sought to be evaded has been recovered atleast 
to the extent of the amount of reward being paid ”, therefore, 
payment of reward to an informant was contingent upon recovery  
of tax only . Respondent ’s brother , who is an advocate and upon 
the death of the respondent claims to be his only surviving heir  
appeared in person . He in  rebuttal submitted that the department 
was not even aware that tax was not being paid by the Pakistani 
seafarers discharging duties on foreign flagships and it was the 
respondent who divulged such information, therefore, he rightly 
became entitled to the reward to the tune of Rs.1.859 million CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1950 OF 2007  4
under the provisions of Reward Order dated 14.05.1974  as the 
Reward Order of 1980 had not come into effect for the reason that 
it was not published in the official gazette.    
 
4.  As the whole issue revolves around the entitlement of 
the respondent  on providing ‘definite information ’ with regard to 
tax evasion, we posed a question to the respondent’s brother to 
point out from the record what constituted definite information 
that justifies the respondent’s claim. He was only able to point out 
a letter dated 19.07.1999, written by the Special Assistant to the 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Karachi appreciating respondent’s  
article published in Daily ‘Takbeer ’ identifying non -payment of tax 
by Pakistani seafarers serving on foreign flagships.  
 
5.  In our v iew, a person can take benefit of the Reward 
Order only if he had supplied some definite information relating to 
a taxpayer who has evaded tax. So a condition precedent is 
‘detection of evasion of tax ’, which must have taken place  before 
the question of re ward arises. Merely giving general information  
that tax is not being paid by a person on his otherwise taxable 
income would not ipso facto  entitle the informant to claim a reward  
as non-payment of tax is not always a case of tax evasion. The tax 
department  knows quite very well that many people, whose 
income s are taxable , do not file their tax return s. Pointing towards 
them would not constitute ‘definite information ’ leading towards 
detection of ‘tax evasion ’ whereas t he basis for claiming reward lies 
in pr oviding information that relates to an assessee who has 
concealed a source of income  through manipulation or deceitful 
means that was liable to be taxed had s uch source been known to CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1950 OF 2007  5
the tax department  at the time of making assessment. So 
inform ing the tax  department generally that a person or a section 
of a society is not paying tax would hardly be categorized as 
‘definite information ’ leading to disclosure of evaded tax. There is a 
clear difference between failure to pay tax and to evade a tax. The 
evasio n is established when a source of income  of an assessee , had 
it been disclosed to the tax authorities , would have lead to 
assessing his income more than what has been assessed in 
absence of such information . So disclosure of an assessee’s source 
of income , which he has concealed from the tax department 
through deceit or manipulation , is the key in successfully claiming 
the reward  as only in such a situation it could be said to be a case 
of tax evasion. In the case of t he Regional Commissioner, Income 
Tax Co mpanies II Vs. S. Sultan Ali Jeoffrey  (1993 SCMR 266) this 
Court while exploring the  meaning of ‘tax evasion ’ held as under: - 
 
“Evasion with reference to taxation laws means to illegally 
manipulate things in such a manner that the tax payable 
under law can not be assessed. By an act of evasion the 
assessee can reduce his tax liability or completely eliminate it. 
Evasion of tax or duty is always in breach of the applicable 
and binding law. In taxation law evasion will mean adoption 
of such deceitful mechanism  and manipulation not permitted 
by law which may result in reduction or elimination of legal 
tax liability. ………….But the moment avoidance is sought by 
illegal contrivance; deceitful methods and adopting a course 
not permissible in law it turns into evasion .”  
 
6.  In the present case  merely an article was published in 
the weekly magazine pointing out that  Pakistani seafarers 
employed on foreign flagships are not payi ng income tax on their 
salaries. Though t his was initially considered by Income Tax CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1950 OF 2007  6
Officer to be sufficient to claim reward b ut later this decision was 
reversed by the Commissioner of Income Tax  albeit on an entirely 
different ground . The ex-parte assessment orders were set aside on 
the ground that the resident status of a person is the prime fa ctor 
in the determination of his tax liability and the same was not 
ascertainable with regard to Pakistani seafarers discharging duties 
on high  seas beyond the territorial limits of the country. On 
account of such reasoning , the Commissioner of Income Tax came 
to the conclusion that the salar ies received by Pakistani seafarers 
outside Pakistan on foreign flagships could not be regarded as 
income earned on Pakistani soil and hence is not taxable in 
Pakistan. Resultantly, demand raised in 225 cases was withdr awn 
and the remaining cases were written off in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in the write-off of Irrecoverable Arrear 
Demand.  The department did not examine that the key feature is 
detection of evasion of tax and not failure to pay tax without t he 
element of tax evasion.  
 
7.  From what has been discussed above, i t has become 
quite clear that where a category of persons liable to pay tax have  
failed to do so, merely pointing towards them would not ipso facto  
become definite information  leading to wards detection of tax 
evasion . The department already knew or was suppose d to know 
who are liable to file their tax return s. Department’s lethargy or 
ineffi ciency or whatever the reason it may be in not collecting tax 
from tax defaulters would not bring a ny benefit to an informant 
who points out that tax is not being collected from a person  or a 
section of a society  in absence of any element of tax evasion. So 
merely drawing the attention of the tax department towards a CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1950 OF 2007  7
particular  person or a category of p ersons which has failed to pay 
tax on their incomes would not constitute ‘ definite information ’ 
falling within the ambit of ‘tax evasion ’ as it is the evasion of tax 
that is key in granting of an award not failure to pay tax . The 
whole philosophy of awardi ng a reward is that if on the basis of 
some specific information the income of an assessee which he has 
concealed through manipulation or by adoption of some deceitful 
mechanism comes to light  through an informant , whereby tax 
liability of an assessee increases beyond his declared income or his 
declared  loss stands reduced, only then such information would 
amount to detection of t ax evasion  qualif ying the informant to 
claim reward  not otherwise. Such a situation does not emerge at 
all in the present case , what to speak of which reward order i.e. 
Reward Order of 1974 or of 1980  was applicable at the time when 
the respondent raised his claim for reward with the tax 
department.     
 
8.  For what has been discussed above, this appeal is 
allowed and the impugned judgment is set aside.  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad , the 
7th of May, 2018  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  