IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Constitution Petition No.31 of 2019.  
(Under Article 186 -A of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973  - transfer of case from Islamabad High Court to any 
other High Court ) 
 
Raja Arshad Mehmood  
 
   …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
Mst. Maliha Malik & others  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Muhammad Ahsan Bhoon, ASC  
 Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR  
 
     
For Respondents(1 -3) Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC with 
respondents No.1 & 3.  
    
Date of hearing:  08.11.2019  
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J.  The petitioner 
is amongst the accused, contesting indictment for homicide  
as well as murderous assault,  before the learned Special 
Judge Court -I Anti -Terrorism, Islamabad , during pendency 
whereof, he was admitted to bail by the trial Court vide order 
dated 30 -4-2018 ; an even dated application presented by 
deceased’s mother, Mst. Maliha Malik, respondent herein, 
was entertained  by the office  as a Constitutional petition  and 
posted for hearing before a learned Division Bench of 
Islamabad High Court, same day , whereupon operation of the 
order passed by the learned trial Judge was suspended ; the 
petition was numbered as W.P. No.1721 of 2019  titled as  Mst. 
Maliha Malik Vs. Raja Arshad Mehmood, etc. ; it is now 
clubbed with Crl. Misc. No.326 -BC/2019 titled as Malik Tariq 
Ayoub and Muhammad Jawad Sohrab Vs. Raja Arshad 
Mehmood, etc , seeking cancellation of bail, in exercise of Constitution Petition No.31 of 2019.  
 
 2
powers under section 497 (5) of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 . These petitions are pending adjudication in 
the Islamabad High Court  and the petitioner seeks 
withdrawal thereof from the said High Court for their transfer 
to any other High Court in the country  on the ground  that 
three out of four Judges including the Hon’ble Chief Justice 
had earlier recused  to hear the allied  matters  and, thus, 
according to the learned counsel, the transfer of the cases 
would be most expedient in the interest of justice , a plea 
vehemently resisted by the respondent  with the plea that the 
Judges had since recalled their recusals with the consent of 
both sides and, thus, there was no occasion for transfer of 
cases to some other High Court .  
2.  The case has a chequered history ; motions by both 
sides were earlier attended by the  different Benches of the  
Islamabad High Court . In Criminal Original No. 281-C of 2015  
Barrister Fahad Sohrab Malik Vs. Maliha Sohrab Malik, etc. , 
Athar Minallah, J. as he then was, recused on account of 
personal acquaintance with both sides . On 9 -11-2017, 
respondent sought recusal of Shoukat Aziz Siddiqui, J. as he 
then was , from a Division Bench hearing W.P. No.178 of 2017 
Malik Tariq Ayoub & another Vs. The State , a request acceded  
to, though disapprovingly ; the same Constitutional petition 
came up for hearing before a Division Bench comprising 
Athar Mina llah and Mian gul Ha ssan Aurangzeb, JJ.  when 
they declined to hear the case  on 19 -10-2017  on account of 
acquaintance with one of the petitioners, namely, Muhammad 
Jawad Sohrab  whose counsel also prayed for transfer of the 
case to some other Bench . In yet another  contest  in W.P. 
No.1721/2019 titled as Mst. Maliha Malik Vs. Raja Arshad 
Mehmood, etc , on 19.8.2019,  both members of the Division 
Bench comprising Athar  Minallah, CJ . and Mohsin Akhtar 
Kayani, J.  recused  themselves  in the face of objection s raised 
by both the sides . In supra criminal miscellaneous , the 
petitioner sought recusal of Mohsin Akhtar Kayani, J. from a 
Division Bench headed by Aame r Farooq, J ., a request once Constitution Petition No.31 of 2019.  
 
 3
again granted, with intense  disapproval . In this u ncanny  
state of affairs, three out of four available Judges  in the 
Islamabad High Court  had recused to hear the case, either on 
their own or on the request of the parties, on more than one 
occasion .  
3.  Ordinarily a High Court does not have to be 
precluded to exercise authority conferred upon it by the 
Constitution and the Law, in cases/matters falling within its  
jurisdiction , therefore, this Court would exercise powers of 
transfer under Article 186 -A of the Constitution , most 
sparingly as well as cautiously in extraordinary situations, to 
secure the ends of justice , certainly not in the run of the mill 
cases for the satisfaction of disgruntled parties , however, in 
the present case, we have noticed that th ree Judges of the 
Islamabad High Court had earlier recused to hear the case  
that requires hearing  by a Division Bench and, thus,  in the  
presence of available Judges,  there was no option for them  to 
once again attend the plea without leaving the parties 
remediless , therefore, we find it expedient  as well as in the 
interest of justice  to withdraw W.P. No.1721 of 2019 titled as  
Mst. Maliha Malik Vs. Raja Arshad Mehmood, etc.  as well as 
Crl. Misc. No .326-BC/2019 titled as Malik Tariq Ayoub and 
Muhammad Jawad Sohrab Vs. Raja Arshad Mehmood, etc, 
from Islamabad High Court and transfer the same to 
Peshawar High Court for  disposal in accordance with law . 
Constitutional Petition No. 31 of 2019 is accordingl y allowed.   
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad   
8th November , 2019  
Not  approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 