IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
MR. JUSTICE YAHYA AFRIDI  
MR. JUSTICE SAYYED MAZAHAR ALI AKBAR NAQVI  
MRS. JUSTICE AYESHA A. MALIK  
 
 
Constitution Petition Nos.24, 25, 26, 27 & 28  
and 30 of 2023  
(Petitions to declare the t rials of civilians under the 
Army Act, 19 52 as violative of Constitution)  
 
Jawwad S.Khawaja   In Const.P.24/2023  
   
Aitzaz Ahsan   In Const.P.25/2023  
   
Karamat Ali and others   In Const.P.26/2023  
   
Zaman Khan Vardag   In Const.P.27/2023  
   
Junaid Razzaq   In Const.P.28/2023  
   
Supreme Court Bar Association 
of Pakistan, through its 
Secretary, Islamabad   In Const.P.30/2023  
 
   
 vs  
Federation of Pakistan and 
others   Respondents  
 
For Petiti oners   : Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC  
      Sardar Muhammad Latif Khan 
      Khosa , Sr. ASC  
Mr. Abid S. Zubairi, ASC  
Khawaja Ahmad Hosain , ASC  
      Assisted by Ms. Rida Hossain, Adv.  
  Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC  
 Sardar Shahbaz Ali Khosa, ASC  
 Mr. Muhammad V awda, ASC  
  
 Zaman Khan Vardag (In person)  
 (Via video link, Lahore)  
      
Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
a/w Mr. Asad Rahim Khan,  Adv.  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
Ms. Bushra Qamar, ASC  
Mr. Muqtedir Akhtar Shabbir,  
(Member s, Supreme Court Bar Associatio n) 
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 2
 
For the  Federation  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Ch. Aamer Rehman,  
Addl. Attorney General  
Assisted by  Ibrahim Khan,  
Mr. Umair Ahmad, Adv.  
M.r Ahmed ur Rehman,  
Mr. Yasir Shah,  
And Mr. Saad Javid Sattil,  
Associates  
      
 
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Sana Ullah Zahid, Addl. AG, P b. 
 
For Govt. of KP   : Mr. Amir Javed, Advocate General, KP  
(Via video link, Peshawar ) 
 
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Addl. AG, 
KP 
 
For Govt. of Sindh    Mr. Akbar Hussain, AG. Sindh  
      Mr. Saifullah, A ddl. A.G. Sindh  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan  : Mr. Muhammad Ayaz Khan Swati,  
     Addl. AG, Balochistan  
 
For Respondent No.9 in CP #25/23 : Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari, ASC  
  
 
For (then) Interior Minister:   Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC  
 
For respondent No.12 in CP#25 : Mr. Ashtar Ausaf Ali, ASC  
       (via video link, Lahore)  
 
For (then) Defence Minist er:  Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC  
     (via video link, Lahore)  
 
Dates of hearing   :  22.06, 23.06, 26.06,  
      27.06,  18.07, 19.07,  
      21.07, 01.08,  02.08,  
      03.08  and 23.10.2023  
 
 
 
JUDGMENT  
Munib Akhtar, J. : Lord Atkin, in one of his  most well -known 
speech es (a famous dissent instantly recognizable) , said that in 
England, even amid the clash of arms , the laws were not silent, 
that they sp oke the same language in peace and  in war. Delivered 
in 1941,  the opinion  has resounded through the decades and is set 
to echo down the ages.  It was the direst of times , the darkest of 
hours . Great Britain and her Allies were engaged upon a titanic, 
globe -spanning struggle against the Axis  Powers. Though (the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 3
utterances of some  to the contrary notwithstanding) things in this 
country  at the present time  are, by the Grace of the Almighty, not 
at all comparable to the perilous times in which Lord Atkin 
protested (“even though I do it alone”), in their own way the issues 
raised are nonetheless  stark and compelling. For the question put 
to the Court is this: in respect of fundamental rights, in relation to 
the trial of civilians by courts martial  whatever the circumstances 
may be , what is the lan guage of the Constitution? What language 
should —nay, must —the Constitution speak? Very respectfully, the 
petitioners ask : what says  the Court?  On 23.10.2023, the following  
answer  was given  (“short order”) : 
 
2. “For detailed reasons to be recorded later, and s ubject to 
such amplification and/or explanation therein as is considered 
appropriate, these petitions are decided in the following terms:  
 
i. It is hereby declared by Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, Mr. 
Justice Munib Akhtar, Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali 
Akbar Na qvi and Mrs. Justice Ayesha A. Malik that 
clause (d) of subsection (1) of Section 2 of the Pakistan 
Army Act, 1952 (in both of its sub clauses (i) & (ii)) and 
subsection (4) of Section 59 of the said Act are ultra 
vires the Constitution and of no legal eff ect.  
 
ii. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing the 
trials of civilians and accused persons, being around 
103 persons who were identified in the list provided to 
the Court by the learned Attorney General for Pakistan 
by way of CMA No.5327 of 20 23 in Constitution 
Petition No.24 of 2023 and all other persons who are 
now or may at any time be similarly placed in relation 
to the events arising from and out of 9th and 10th May, 
2023 shall be tried by Criminal Courts of competent 
jurisdiction establis hed under the ordinary and / or 
special law of the land in relation to such offences of 
which they may stand accused.  
 
iii. It is further declared that any action or proceedings 
under the Army Act in respect of the aforesaid persons 
or any other persons so simi larly placed (including but 
not limited to trial by Court Martial) are and would be 
of no legal effect.  
 
iv. Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi reserves judgment as to para 
(i) above, but joins the other members of the Bench as 
regards paras (ii) and (iii). ” 
 Set out be low are our reasons for this answer.  
 
3. For present purposes the Constitution may be regarded as 
existing and operating in either one of two primary “modes” or 
states. The first is its operation in the ordinary course, which may Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 4
be regarded as the “default” mode. (This may be likened, echo ing 
Lord Atkin, to its “peacetime” operation). The other is when it 
operates in a time when there is in force a Proclamation in terms of 
Part X, the Emergency Provisions. Of particular relevance here is 
the Proclamation of E mergency that can be issued in terms of 
Article 232 , when there is a threat to the security of the country, in 
whole or in part, by war or external aggression or internal 
disturbance beyond the power of a Provincial Government to 
control. (A Proclamation u nder Article 232 may be likened, again 
echoing Lord Atkin but subject to strong caveats  and heavy 
qualifications , to its “wartime” operation.)  It may be stated at the 
outset that in the present context it is, strictly speaking, 
constitutionally not relevan t whether the country is in a state of 
peace or war. What matters is whether the Constitution  is 
operating in the normal course , or a Proclamation under Part X 
(and in particular, of Emergency)  is in the field . There is  also a 
third, though s econdary , stat e or “mode”  in which the Constitution 
may operate. That is when the Federal Government, in lawful 
exercise of its powers under Article 245, has called upon the 
Armed Forces to act in aid of civil power , or the Armed Forces are, 
under the directions of said  Government, defending Pakistan 
against external aggression or threat of war . This s econdary  state 
may exist and operate in either of the two principal “modes”.  
 
4. During the course of submissions, our attention was invited 
to a number of authorities. Of the se, three in particular require 
mention : F.B. Ali v State  PLD 1975 SC 506  (hereinafter “ F.B. Ali ”), 
Liaquat Hussain and others v Federation of Pakistan and others  
PLD 1999 SC 504  (hereinafter “ Liaquat Hussain ”) and District Bar 
Association, Rawalpindi and others v Federation of Pakistan and 
others  PLD 2015 SC 401  (“District Bar Association ”). The first case 
involved consideration of the relevant provisions of the 1962 
Constitution . The provisions referred to in para (i) of the short 
order were inserted  in the Pakistan Army Act, 1952 (“Army Act”) in 
1967. These were enacted at a time when the country was under a 
Proclamation of Emergency , under Article 30 of th e late  
Constitution which was in pari materia  Article 232 of the present 
Constitution. The acts by r eason of which Lt. Col (R) F.B. Ali and 
his co -accused stood charged and tried by court martial under the 
Army Act were said to have been done during the period from Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 5
August 1972 to 30th March 1973. At that time the country was 
governed by the Interim Const itution, and under a (deemed) 
Proclamation of Emergency under Article 139 thereof. Again, that 
provision was in pari materia  the present Article 232. In the second 
of the cases noted above, the country was under a Proclamation of 
Emergency under Article 23 2 and the Armed Forces had also been 
called in aid of civil power  under Article 245 . At issue was the 
constitutionality of an Ordinance of 1998, which did not amend  or 
as such directly apply  the Army Act but set up military courts 
outside the military just ice system. The third case had to consider 
certain amendments made to the Constitution itself , which made 
possible the trial of civilians by courts martial  under the Army Act, 
the statute being amended along with the Constitution for such 
purpose . Those am endments , both constitutional and statutory,  
were subject to successive sunset clause s which expired  in 2019 . 
 
5. It will be seen from the foregoing that  the present challenge  
is the first time (other than, perhaps, Shahida Zahir Abbasi and 
others v President  of Pakistan and others  PLD 1996 SC 632, where 
however the matter proceeded on markedly  different lines) that this 
Court has been called upon to directly consider, in the light of 
fundamental rights, the very basis o f the trial of  civilians by courts 
marti al at a time when the Constitution is operating in the normal 
course. The vision of the Court is therefore  unobstructed  and 
untroubled by any constitutional occlusions. We will certainly  also 
have to consider the effect of the Emergency provisions.  But the  
pivot on which these petitions turn is  the “default” mode of the 
Constitution.   
 
6. First however, the facts.  These will be stated with brevity and 
at a somewhat h eightened level of generality.  This is for two 
reasons. Firstly, as directed in terms of the se cond and third paras 
of the short order , there are a large number of persons (and not 
just the around 103 referred to therein) who will face trials in 
criminal Courts of competent jurisdiction established under the 
ordinary and/or special law for the offen ces of which they stand 
accused. While those trials will lead to verdicts dependent solely on 
the evidence led and other material/record as is relevant for 
criminal trials, the less said here of the factual matrix the better. 
Secondly, these petitions have , as is clear from the short order and Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 6
is elaborated below, been decided essentially on the constitutional 
plane because that was primarily (and in some cases solely) the 
ground taken before the Court. (There was one petition in which 
only non -constitution al grounds were taken.) The facts need 
therefore be stated only to the extent a s is required to anchor the 
considerations  relevant for this judgment , and no further.  
 
7. Over two days, the 9th and 10th of May, 2023, a series of 
events unfolded across the coun try (though primarily in two 
Provinces)  that saw an unprecedented assault on many military 
and defense installations, and which included the desecration of 
monuments commemorating the martyrs of the nation and even 
the ruination of the official residence o f a Corps Commander. The 
condemnation of these acts was immediate and thunderous. The 
reaction of the Army High Command was severe  as was that of the 
then Federal Government (comprising of elected representatives), 
according to the material and record plac ed before the Court . What 
is of importance is the statements made, and resolve declared,  at 
the highest levels that the persons who stood accused of these 
offences were to be tried by courts martial  under the Army Act. The 
petitioners placed  reliance on ne ws reports regarding a Special 
Corp Commanders meeting held at the General Headquarters 
(GHQ) on 15.05.2023, the 81st Formation Commanders conference 
held there  on 07.06.2023, the approval granted by the Federal 
Cabinet on 19.05.2023 to decisions taken in the National Security 
Committee  (which were along the same lines)  and a resolution 
moved in the National Assembly and passed by that House on 
12.06.2023.  
 
8. We pause to note that all of the petitioners before us were as 
one in denouncing these acts and event s, which none found 
defensible. All were united in unequivocally stating that those who 
had committed criminal offences were liable to face in full the 
awesome majesty of the law.   
 
9. In the immediate aftermath of the events of 9th and 10th May, 
several FIRs  were registered in various police stations across the 
country. These FIRs were primarily (though not exclusively) in 
terms of offences committed under the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997.  
Some of those FIRs were placed on the record, both with reference Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 7
to the p ersons therein implicated but also as a sampling of the 
factual basis that led to the filing of the present petitions.  These 
FIRs involved initially dozens and then hundreds of persons as the 
investigations proceeded.  These persons were almost entirely 
civilians who had  no, and it appears had never had any , 
connection with the Armed Forces, though a very few  were possibly 
retired personnel.  The criminal courts under whose jurisdiction the 
offences , and hence the accused , came were the Anti-Terrorism 
Courts  (ATCs)  created under the aforementioned Act.  However, it 
appears that thereafter, and starting as early as 20.05.2023, the 
concerned Army authorities made a series of applications before 
the ATCs, under s. 549 of the CrPC, seeking the transfer and 
delivery  of the accused named therein to the said authorities for 
their trial, under ss. 2(1)(d) and 59(4) of the Army Act, for offences 
committed against the Official Secrets Act, 1923. In other words, 
the Army authorities claimed jurisdiction over the said perso ns for 
their trial by court martial. All of these applications were allowed 
and the named accused, eventually numbering around 103, were 
delivered to the custody of the Army authorities. This  then was the 
situation that  set the stage for, and triggered the  filing of, the 
present petitions.  The principal question raised is that it is 
constitutionally impermissible for civilians to be tried by courts 
martial  under the Army Act. Some of the petitions framed the relief 
sought with specific reference to the prov isions set out in para (i) of 
the short order, while others stated their claim in broader terms. 
But, however viewed, the point in issue boiled down to what has 
just been stated. There was, as noted, one petition that did not 
raise any constitutional groun d for challenging the trial of the 
civilians by courts martial . 
 
10. With the factual matrix set and the constitutional challenge 
established, we turn to the submissions by learned counsel for the 
parties.  In Const .P 24/2023 Mr. Ahmed Hosain, ASC submitted  
contended that s. 2(1)(d) , in both its sub -clauses (i) and (ii), was in 
conflict with the legislative intent of the Army Act , i.e., regulating 
and maintaining discipline of the members of the Armed Forces in 
exercise of their duties, and thus directly affect ed the guaranteed 
fundamental rights  under Article s 9, 10A, and 25  of the civilians 
brought to trial by courts martial . The provisions d id not  fall within 
the scope of the ouster  clause  under Article 8(3)(a). It was argued Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 8
that the jurisprudential foundatio n to strip civilians of their 
fundamental rights, otherwise not voluntarily regulated by the 
military laws, d id not exist. Learned counsel  contended that the 
courts martial  did not comply with the requirements of Article 10A 
on account of fact that they we re manned by Army  officers who 
thereby  assuming judicial functions , a substantial right of appeal  
outside the Army chain of command was non -existent , and the 
said forums did not  fall within the scope of Article 175. Learned 
counsel challenged the applicabi lity of F.B. Ali and sought to 
distinguish it on the ground that the 1962 Constitution, in relation 
to which the matter was decided , did not recognize the 
fundamental right to a fair trial.  More fundamentally, learned 
counsel sought a declaration that F.B. Ali was wrongly decided.  
District Bar  Association  was distinguished on multiple counts, 
namely : (a) the civilians were  there  made subject to the Army  Act 
through a constitutional amendment ; (b) said amendments had a 
sunset clause ; and (c) the amendment s which subjected civilians 
to courts martial  were specifically included in the Part I of  the First 
Schedule to  the Constitution.  
 
11. In Const .P 25/2023, Sardar Muhammad Latif Khan Khosa, 
Sr. ASC contended that trials of civilians  by courts martial  by 
virtue of the noted provisions of the Army Act were  violative of 
Articles 4, 9, 10A, 25 and 175 of the Constitution. It was argued 
that s. 94 of the Army Act, read with Criminal Procedure (Military 
Offenders) Rules, 1970  (framed under s. 549, CrPC) and in terms 
of which orders were obtained by the Army authorities for delivery 
to their custody of persons accused of offences committed on the 
9th/10th of May,  were discriminatory and violative of Article s 10A, 
25 and 175 of the Constitution. Learned counsel argued that the 
transfer of the custody was illegal as s . 549  was exclusively meant 
for members of the Armed Forces being handed over to their 
commanding officers. It was submitted  that in the facts and 
circumstances of the case the 1997  Act was applicable and the 
accused persons were triable under that law and by the ATCs 
established in terms thereof.  
 
12. In Const .P 26/2023, Mr. Faisal Siddiqui ASC, at the very 
outset submitted that he did not  challenge the vires of the noted 
provisions of the Army Act. The stance of lea rned counsel was that Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 9
the charging of civilians under the Army Act read with the Official 
Secrets Act, 1923 , in the facts and circumstances before the Court 
was mala fide and discriminatory. Learned counsel argued that the 
presence of a dual jurisdiction , i.e., criminal courts  under the 
general and ordinary law of the land  and courts martial , presented 
a situation where in the former case  the accused retain ed all rights 
intact while in the latter they did not. This  exercise of unregulated 
discretion  was arbitrary and discriminatory. Reference was made 
by learned counsel to F.B. Ali  and District Bar Association . It was 
argued that the principle of reasonable classification was a 
distinguishing feature and civilians should only be subjected to 
military laws in  exceedingly rare circumstances.  The present 
situation was manifestly not one such.  
 
13. In Const .P 28/2023, Mr. Salman Akram Raja ASC made 
submissions on how, since the  judgment in  F.B. Ali , the legal 
landscape ha d evolved and changed radically. It was argued  that in 
light of Article 175(3)  and how this provision had been interpreted 
and understood by various judgments of this Court,  there 
remain ed no justification for trial of civilians before courts martial , 
presided over and manned by Army o fficer s and thus  by the 
Executi ve branch.  In this regard learned counsel submitted that a 
distinction had to be drawn between the trial of members of the 
Armed Forces and civilians by courts martial. For purposes of 
Article 175, he did not challenge the trial of the forme r; it was only 
that of the latter that was objectionable. A line was sought to be 
drawn between the two categories.  Learned counsel contended that 
the instant deprivation of fundamental rights of the accused who 
stood transferred to Army custody on merely an accusation was 
contra ry to the constitutional scheme and ex -facie discriminatory. 
In support of his contentions, the learned counsel  inter alia  placed 
reliance on  Liaquat Hussain,  District Bar Association  and Mushtaq 
Ahmed and others v Secretary Ministr y of Defence and others  PLD 
2007  SC 405 . 
 
14. Mr. Uzair Karamat Bhandari ASC, representing the 
respondent No.  9 in C onst.P 25/2023, supported  the arguments of 
learned counsel for the petitioners and contended that under the 
current constitutional dispensation civilians c ould not be tried by 
courts martial . Learned counsel relied on Liaquat Hussain  and also Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 10
referred to F.B. Ali . It was argued that the latter judgment was 
premised on a constitutional context without Articles 175(3) and 
10A, and at a time when the  period of five years provided under 
Article 175(3) had not lapsed. He argued that the right of trial and 
appeal before an impartial forum was a recognized fundamental 
right well established by, and attested in, the case law and cited 
various decisions of the Court in this regard . Learned counsel 
submitted out that if Article 8(3)(a) were not exclusive to members 
of the Armed Forces  and the other disciplined forces therein 
specifically mentioned , Article 8(3)(b) would become redundant . It 
was submitted that if at all  civilians could be tried by court martial  
that would require a constitutional amendment and even then 
would be permissible only in highly exceptional and well -defined 
circumstances involving matters of national security.  
 
15. Mr. Abid S. Zuberi ASC,  appearing on behalf of the S upreme 
Court Bar Association  in Const .P 30/2023 contended that the 
noted provisions of the Army Act were violative of Article 175 , as it 
thereby led to the  creat ion of a parallel judicial system not under 
the administrative con trol of a ny High Court. It was argued that a 
civilian’s trial by court martial  was unconstitutional unless there 
was a clear nexus between that civilian's actions and the discipline 
of the Armed Forces. He emphasized even such a nexus was  not 
enough  in and  of itself. Any such trial had to be under the aegis of 
a constitutional amendment. Seeking to d istinguish F.B. Ali , 
learned counsel contended  that it c ould not serve as a precedent in 
this case as the right to enforce fundamental rights were 
suspended und er Article 30 of the 1962 Constitution at the 
relevant time. Learned counsel assert ed that a mere allegation d id 
not automatically make a person an "accused" under criminal law 
jurisprudence, and thus the application of s . 2(1)(d)  could not be 
triggered me rely on such basis . It was  argued that until a civilian 
was formally charged the transferring of custody to the Army  
authorities under s . 549 CrPC was illegal.  
 
16. The learned Attorney General for Pakistan, Mr. Mansoor 
Awan ASC, began his submissions by  referring to the voluminous 
material placed on record, both documentary and pictorial, 
whereby a detailed account was presented of the events and 
incidents that took place across the country on 9th and 10th May Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 11
2023. The learned Attorney General submitted that the offenses 
under consideration ha d a direct nexus with the discharge of 
duties of the members of the Armed Forces and their functioning. 
Contesting the submission by learned counsel for the petitioners, 
the learned Attorney General maintain ed that no con stitutional 
amendment was required and that the noted provisions of the 
Army Act were within the scope of Article 8(3)(a). In this regard, the 
learned Attorney General submitted that ss. 2(1)(d) and 59(4) were 
directly relatable to the “proper discharge of  duties” by the 
members of the Armed Forces within the meaning of the cited 
constitutional provision. The events of the 9th and 10th of May 
were, even on a prima facie basis, an interference with such 
discharge of duty  and thus the accused, though civilian s, could be 
properly made subject to the Army Act and tried by courts martial . 
The noted provisions, falling as they did within the scope of Article 
8(3)(a) , were  constitutionally protected and immunized from the 
applicability of fundamental rights. Relian ce was placed on  Said 
Muhammad Zaman and others v Federation of Pakistan and others  
2017 SCMR 1249. The s ubjecting of civilians to courts martial , the 
learned Attorney General argued, was well within the 
constitutional scheme  and in this regard reliance wa s placed also 
on clause (3) of Article 199. The learned Attorney General p laced 
strong reliance on F.B Ali , Liaquat Hussain  and the District Bar 
Association  and read out lengthy extracts from these decisions . 
Relying in particular on one of judgment s in F.B. Ali  (which was 
not, however, the judgment of the Court),  the learned Attorney 
General  submitted that the courts martial  had the indicia and 
ingredients of , and met all the requirements for,  a fair trial.  In this 
context, t he Attorney General read throug h, and explained in 
detail, the working of  the various  stages of trial before a court 
martial as set out in the Army Act and the Pakis tan Army Act 
Rules, 1954 (“1954 Rules”) . On instructions, the learned Attorney 
General more than once made a categorical s tatement at the bar 
that in addition to safeguards already built into the system which 
ensured a fair trial, the evidence to be recorded in the trials of the 
around 103 persons would have two additional measures. Firstly, 
the evidence would be recorded in full compliance of the 
requirements of the Qanun e Shahadat Order, 1984 and secondly, 
full reasons would also be given for any verdict of guilt handed 
down by a court martial. Thus, the learned Attorney General Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 12
emphasized, there could not possibly be any danger to any rights 
of the said civilians for purposes of ensuring a fair trial.  The 
learned Attorney General further submitted that the courts martial  
established under the Army Act were not court s within the 
meaning  of Article 175(1) . They were , rather , special tribunal s 
constitutionally sanctioned. Reliance  was placed on various cas es 
in this regard. It was contended that the challenges to the trial by 
courts martial  of civilians on both constitutional and other 
grounds were without merit and failed. The  petitions ought 
therefore to be dismissed.  
 
17. Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties and 
after consideration of the case law and the material placed on 
record, we concluded that the petitions ought to be disposed of in 
the manner as set out  in the short order.  
 
18. We begin by taking a look at the provisions noted in para (i) 
of the short order. Both were added to the Army Act in 1967, by 
two Ordinances (respectively III and IV of 1967) each of which was 
purely amending in nature.  By reason of c lauses (3) and (4) of 
Article 29 of the 1962 Constitution, these Ordinances, having 
secured the approval of the  National Assembly, were deemed to 
have become Acts of the  Central Legislature.  Both clause (d) of s. 
2(1) and s. 59(4) have remained unamended  since then . 
Subsection (1) of s. 2 lists the persons who shall be subject to the 
Army Act, and clause (d) provides as follows:  
 
“(d) persons not otherwise subject to this Act who are 
accused of — 
 
(i) seducing or attempting to seduce any person subject to 
this Act from his  duty or allegiance to Government, or  
 
(ii) having committed, in relation to any work of defence, 
arsenal, naval,  military or air force establishment or 
station, ship or aircraft or otherwise  in relation to the 
naval, military or air force a ffairs of Pakistan, an  
offence under the Official Secrets Act, 1923 ;” 
 
19. As the word “accused” indicates, a person not otherwise 
subject to the Army Act becomes so subject  only if he (or, to say it 
once and for all, she) commits  a criminal offence that falls  in either 
of the sub -clauses. Offences in this country are statutory in 
nature. Therefore, for clause (d) to at all become applicable, anyone Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 13
seeking to subject a person (hereinafter for convenience referred to 
as a “civilian”) to the Army Act in terms th ereof, has to show some 
statute and some provision of such statute creating a criminal 
offence , as complies with either of the sub -clauses.  However, the 
path to subjection in terms of each sub -clause is different. Sub -
clause ( i) does not identify any stat ute as such. It only gives a 
description of the offence. Therefore in principle any statute which 
creates an offence the ingredients or elements of which match the 
description could result in the civilian becoming subject to the 
Army Act. The importance of  this lies in the fact that the same 
offence (i.e., having the same ingredients or elements) can be 
created by more than one statute . This is in fact true of the 
description contained in sub -clause (i). There are at least two such 
statutes (which were both  referred to and considered in F.B. Ali ). 
One of these is the Army Act itself, which has an offence fitting the 
description in its s. 31(d). The other is s. 131 of the Pakistan Penal 
Code.  In material respects each of these offences matches the 
other, and the description given in sub -clause (i).  
 
20. Sub-clause (ii) takes a different approach. It identifies the 
statute where the offence must be created and located. This is the 
Official Secrets Act, 1923 (“1923 Act”).  But the sub -clause has two 
requirements , whi ch result in two consequences . Firstly, n ot only 
must the offence be under the 1923 Act, its ingredients or 
elements must also fit the description given in the sub -clause.  In 
other words, it is not every offence under the 1923 Act that can 
make a civilian subject to the Army Act. It is only that offence 
which fits the stated description. Any other offence, if committed 
by a civilian, would not make him subject to the Army Act. 
Secondly , if there is any other statute (including, though that is 
not in fact th e case, the Army Act itself) that creates an offence the 
ingredients or elements of which match the description , such 
offence, if committed by a civilian, would not make him subject to 
the Army Act.  The other provision, s. 59(4), will be treated later;  
clause (d) of s. 2(1) is by far the more important of the provisions 
insofar as concerns the issues that require  determin ation . The 
effect of any civilian becoming subject to the Army Act by reason of 
either sub -clause of clause (d) is of course that he becom es subject 
to the whole of the statute. In practice, the principal consequence Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 14
ensuing from such subjection is that he become s liable to be tried 
for the relevant offence by court martial under the Army Act.  
 
21. With this initial look at clause (d) and its su b-clauses, we 
turn to take up the first constitutional challenge thrown to the trial 
of civilians by courts martial. This was in terms of Article 175 of 
the Constitution , the contention being that such trials were ultra 
vires by reason of being before foru ms that were  alien thereto, or 
which were fundamentally inconsistent therewith.  There were three 
strands to the argument. One was that courts martial were not 
courts at all, and hence no jurisdiction (or at least none relevant 
for present purposes) could b e conferred on  them by reason of the 
embargo contained in Article 175(2). The second was that even if 
they were courts, they violated the requirement of clause (3) 
inasmuch as they were manned by military officers, i.e., the 
executive branch. In this conte xt it was contended that all 
remedies by way of review or appeal, as provided under the Army 
Act, lay wholly within the military chain of command  or under its 
control  and therefore courts martial were constitutionally  invalid. 
The third facet was that a li ne ought to be drawn for purposes of 
Article 175 between civilians on the one hand and members of the 
armed forces on the other. Whatever may be the constitutional 
status of courts martial vis -à-vis the latter, it was argued that at 
least for the former , trial before such a forum ought to be regarded 
as unconstitutional . 
 
22. We may note at the outset that the third strand of the 
argument is unattractive and un persuasive . Courts martial can, 
and do, impose punishments of all sorts, including the death 
sentence.  The members of the Armed Forces are as much citizens 
of Pakistan as are civilians.  If at all courts martial are 
unconstitutional forums by reason of, or with reference to, Article 
175, then  simply  to draw an artificial line through this provision  
which pu ts members of the Armed Forces on one side and civilians 
on the other is unseemly. If civilians are  beyond the reach of courts 
martial, then the argument must be placed on a constitutional 
footing firmer and surer than a separation essentially arbitrary . In 
our view, the challenge under Article 175  requires consideration of 
the following question : what is the legislative competence in 
respect of the military justice system, which is firmly grounded in, Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 15
and anchored by, the courts martial? Here, a distinctio n must be 
drawn between courts martial themselves and remedies that may 
lie or be made available against verdicts thereof, e.g., by way of 
review or appeal. We are concerned only with the former. To 
answer this question we will have to do an historical ana lysis. 
However , we begin by taking up a nother  point , even though at first 
sight it may seem somewhat of a digression .  
 
23. On Partition, t he Government of India Act, 1935 (“1935 Act”), 
as adapted in each case under the Indian Independence Act, 1947, 
was the f irst constitution for both the Dominions of Pakistan and 
India. In India the post -freedom constitution came into effect in 
1950; in our case, we had to wait till 1956.  It will be recalled that 
the 1935 Act conceived a federal structure for the governance o f 
(British) India, which was maintained by both Dominions on 
Independence. Legislative competences were there divided into 
three lists, one each excusive to the Federation and the Provinces, 
and the third concurrent between them. This scheme was carried 
over into the Indian Constitution and indeed the 1956 Constitution 
as well, with many entries being incorporated as they stood in the 
1935 Act . 
 
24. On 13.02.1948, entry No. 1 of the Concurrent  Legislative  List 
of the 1935 Act as applicable in Pakistan was amend ed, such that 
the existing entry became clause (a), and a new clause (b) was 
inserted. As so amended, the entry was as under:  
 
“1.—(a) Criminal law, including all matters included in the 
Indian Penal Code at the date of the passing of this Act, but 
excludi ng offences against laws with respect to any of the 
matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the use of 
His Majesty's naval, military and air forces in aid of the civil 
power.  
 
(b) Measures to combat certain offences committed in 
connection wit h matters concerning the Federal and 
Provincial Governments and the establishment of a police 
force for that purpose. ” 
 
 We may note that entry No. 1(a) eventually  became  entry No. 
1 of the erstwhile Concurrent Legislative List (“Concurrent List”)  of 
the p resent Constitution, while entry No. 1(b) was entry No. 16. 
“Criminal law” is of course still a concurrent matter, 
notwithstanding the omission of the Concurrent List by the 18th Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 16
Amendment (2010).  Also on 13.02.1948, in exercise of the newly 
conferred legi slative competence in terms of clause (b), the 
Pakistan Special Police Establishment Ordinance, 1948 was 
promulgated, establishing an eponymously named new federal  
police force.  (This Ordinance was ultimately repealed by the 
Federal Investigation Agency Ac t, 1974 , whereby the eponymous 
agency was created , which still continues to exist and act .) Finally, 
on 11.06.1948 the Pakistan Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1948  
(“1948 Act”)  was enacted. This created new federal Courts —known 
as Special Judges —of criminal j urisdiction to try offences as 
specified therein, which had, inter alia, been investigated and sent 
up for trial by the aforementioned police force.  
 
25. In 1953, one Muhammad Yusuf, a Magistrate first class, was 
tried before, and convicted by, a Special Judge  under the 1948 Act 
(as amended) for having taken a bribe of the then undoubtedly 
outrageous sum of Rs. 700/ -. In his appeal to the D acca High 
Court, reported as Muhammad Yusuf v Crown  (1955) 7 DLR 302, 
the appellant took a constitutional objection to the constitution of 
the Special Judge, i.e., a Court of law exercising criminal 
jurisdiction created by the Federation. It was contended that entry 
No. 1 of the Provincial List, inter alia, placed the legislative 
competence in respect of “the administration of  justice;  [and]  
constitution and organisation of all courts, except the Federal 
Court ” exclusively in the Provincial domain. Hence, the 1948 Act 
whereby a federal law constituted a court was ultra vires  the 1935 
Act. 
 
26. We pause to note that a similar questi on had already arisen 
under the Indian Constitution. The first e ntry of the exclusive State 
(i.e., Provincial) List was , in terms as presently relevant , identical 
to entry No. 1 of the Provincial List of the 1935 Act. In State of 
Bombay v Narottamdas Jetha  Bhai AIR 1951 SC 69 , a judgment 
noted and considered by the D acca High Court , it was held that 
the competence to constitute courts was indeed exclusive with the 
States. In India, the matter was finally resolved in 1977 when, by a 
constitutional amendment,  the relevant portion was removed from 
entry No. 1 and shifted to a newly created entry No. 11A of the 
Concurrent List.  
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 17
27. The Dacca High Court rejected the constitutional challenge 
by taking an innovative and interesting approach. In upholding the 
legislati ve competence of the Federation to constitute a court of 
criminal jurisdiction, it relied on entry No. 2 of the Concurrent List. 
This provided as follows: “ Criminal Procedure, including all 
matters included in  the Code of  Criminal Procedure at the  date of 
the passing of  this Act”. This entry eventually became entry No. 2 
of the erstwhile Concurrent List of the present Constitution; 
“criminal procedure” continues to be a concurrent subject. The 
learned High Court reasoned that this entry included not only 
matters relating to criminal procedure stricto sensu  but also all 
matters included in the CrPC (as on the relevant date) even if they 
were not matters of procedure. Now, the CrPC then provided for 
the constitution of courts of criminal jurisdiction (and inde ed, 
continues to  do so). According to the learned High Court this was, 
in constitutional terms and by reason of entry No. 2 , the grant of a 
(concurrent) legislative competence.  Entry No. 1 of the Provincial 
List related to courts of general jurisdiction. E ntry No. 2 of the 
Concurrent List conferred a competence in relation to courts under 
a special law.  In other words, in respect of the constitution of 
courts exercising specific (i.e., special) criminal jurisdiction, the 
competence was not exclusive but con current. The 1948 Act was 
therefore a valid piece of legislation inasmuch as it created 
criminal courts of special jurisdiction. T he constitutional challenge 
accordingly failed. The appeal was also otherwise found to be 
without merit.  
 
28. Undeterred, Muhammad  Yusuf took the matter to the 
Federal Court where he renewed his constitutional ground. His 
appeal was dismissed: Muhammad Yusuf v Crown  PLD 1956 FC 
395 (“Muhammad Yusuf ”). The Federal Court declined to determine 
the correctness or otherwise of the reasoni ng of the High Court (pg. 
400) and instead found the legislative competence for the 1948 Act, 
and the constitution of a court of criminal jurisdiction, i.e., the 
Special Judge, in clause (b) of entry No. 1 of the Concurrent List  
(pg. 400 -401). In addition,  when presented with the decision of the 
Indian Supreme Court noted above, the Federal Court went on to 
hold that entry No. 15 of the Concurrent List ( “Jurisdiction and 
powers of  all courts, except the Federal  Court, with respect to any 
of the matters in t his list”, which corresponded to entry No. 46 of Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 18
the erstwhile Concurrent List of the present Constitution) gave “to 
the Federal Legislature the power to constitute special Courts 
because the constitution of such Courts is itself a measure of the 
kind ment ioned in entry 1 (b) ” (pg. 402 ; emphasis supplied).  
 
29. In our view, the litigation referred to above, and in particular 
the decision of the Federal Court, establishes that the legislative 
competence regarding the constitution of courts is not exclusively  
confined to entries in the legislative lists as refer specifically to 
such matters.  Though such a conclusion would be rare, d epending 
on the subject matter and context , even an entry (such as No. 1(b)) 
that ostensibly had nothing at all to do with courts and their 
constitution and jurisdiction could yet enfold precisely a 
competence of this nature. With this precedent in mind, we turn to 
look at the genesis of, and legislative competence in relation to, the 
military justice system.  
 
30. The history of the armed fo rces employed and deployed by 
the British in India, from their origin in the time of the East India 
Company and , on eventual displacement  of that entity  by direct 
rule by the British Government by the Proclamation of 1858 , and 
the creation and coming into being of the (British) Indian Army 
provide s the necessary backdrop to understanding how the 
military justice system came to be. The East India Company was 
subject to  (some, and increasing)  legislative control even before the 
events of 1857. In respect of t he (British) Indian Army the  
historical background is set out  in Chapter I of Part I of  the Manual 
of Indian Military Law , first published in 1937 . This manual  in fact 
appears to be the precursor of the Manual of Pakistan Military Law , 
which was first publ ished in 1958  and now, in two volumes,  
continues (through various editions) to remain  in service.  Indeed, a 
comparison of the arrangement of the chapters into which the two 
manuals are divided shows a remarkable similarity , and indicates 
that the latter is  but the lineal descendant of the former.  However, 
the present manual does not set out the historical background in 
any detail. We have therefore annexed to this judgment  a better 
copy of  Chapter I of Part I of the earlier manual, as corrected up to 
March 1951 and printed in this country, i.e., up to the very eve of 
the enactment of the Army Act , and reference may be made to the 
same (“Annex ure”). Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 19
 
31. As is clear from the Annex ure, matters relating to the 
discipline of troops were regulated by law from very ea rly on, the 
first such statute going back to 1754. What are of particular 
interest are the laws known as the “Articles of War” which were 
first enacted in India itself by the Governor General in Council 
under the Government of India Act, 1833. The first su ch law (and 
the Articles were, notwithstanding the nomenclature, statutes) was 
enacted in 1845 . Successive such enactments were eventually 
replaced by a law of 1869, known by its short title, the Indian 
Articles of War. This law, which is the earliest such  statute that we 
have been able to access , is available at: 
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/repealedact/repealed_act_document
s/A1869 -5.pdf . It is however, pertinent t o note that the Articles of 
War were already referred to in the Indian Penal Code (enacted in 
1860) in s. 13 9, a section to which we will return later in the 
judgment. The Indian Articles of War  (“War Articles”)  were 
eventually repealed and replaced by the  Indian Army Act, 1911, 
which was in turn repealed and replaced by the Army Act in 1952 
(coming  into force in 1955).  
 
32. An examination of the War Articles shows that it 
substantively contained, in a recognizable form corresponding  to 
the relevant provisions of the Army Act, matters relating to the 
military justice system. Thus, Title II of Part II of the War Articles 
created criminal offences many of which continue to find place in 
the Army Act. Title III, comprising of Articles 72 to 163 and divided 
into sev en chapters , constituted fully one -half of the War Articles 
and is of particular importance as it related to courts martial. 
When Title III is compared with the relevant provisions of the Army 
Act and the 1954 Rules, the present court martial system is 
recognizably relatable to that set in place there by. 
 
33. When the matter is looked at from the historical perspective, 
it is clear that from the earliest of what might for present purposes 
be called modern times (i.e., the commencement of indirect and 
then direc t British rule in the sub -continent) the legislative 
competence relating to the armed forces has included , as an 
integral aspect there of, the power to legislate in respect of the 
military justice system , and in particular the courts martial that Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 20
are one of  its key and defining feature s. Traceable as such 
competence is to periods now centuries past it cannot be unraveled 
and detached , and treated separately and differently from the 
constitutional and legislative power “to raise and maintain the 
Military, Nav al and Air Forces of Pakistan ”. At first sight , and 
especially if viewed from an ahistorical perspective,  this legislative 
competence, articulated in entry No. 1 of the Federal Legislative 
List (and found  also in Article 243(3)) , may appear to have nothing  
at all to do with courts or tribunals or any sort of justice system . 
But it takes on a different color and meaning when histor y is taken 
into account . This is in line with the approach  that led the Federal 
Court  to conclude  in Muhammad Yusuf  that a legisl ative 
competence seemingly wholly unconnected with the constitution of 
courts and their jurisdiction could  yet, on a closer and deeper 
analysis, reveal a reality otherwise not apparent  on a superficial 
and bare reading.  Here of course  the analysis has nece ssarily to be 
grounded in history , and cannot be confined to  a mere  clinical 
consideration of a legislative entry and the statute in question.  But 
the result is the  same: the legislative competence may have a layer 
that relates to matters judicial. In Muha mmad Yusuf , the analysis 
revealed the competence to include the power to constitute a court 
of law properly so called.  Therefore, e ven if courts martial are, as 
observed by the learned Chief Justice (Sir Abdur Rashid, CJ) in 
Muhammad Nawaz v Crown  PLD 1951  FC 73 at p. 86, to be 
regarded in some way as courts and that proceedings before them 
relate to criminal matters, that does not, in our view, alter the 
legislative competence f rom which  these forums spring. Enscon ced 
as they are in the military justice sy stem (being, indeed, the sheet -
anchor thereof) and as irretrievably intertwined that system 
historically is with the Armed Forces themselves, it cannot be 
gainsaid that it is to entry No. 1 of the Federal Legislative List 
(“Federal List”)  that one must loo k in order to discover the 
competence  in relation to courts martial . 
 
34. The legislative competence having been identified and 
located, certain consequences relevant for the present discussion 
inevitably follow. I t has historically been a defining feature of 
courts martial  that they are manned by military officers. Thus, to 
look at, e.g., the War Article s, they provide d (in Article 72) for eight 
different types of court martial. The composition of each type of Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 21
court martial was then specifically provided for i n succeeding 
Articles. In each case, they comprise d of commissioned officers. 
This was itself a defined term . Part I (e), which contained 
definitions, provided that the term (using the now antique 
language of the time, which reflect ed sensibilities long sin ce 
discarded) includ ed “all Officers holding Commissions in the Native 
ranks of the Army, whether they be of purely Native or of a mixed 
European and Native extraction ”. The composition of courts 
martial under the Army Act (ss. 85 to 88) thus accords with the 
historical origins  of such forums . For reasons already stated, this 
direct -line descent ought  to inform any conclusions as to  their 
constitutionality. In our view therefore it would be incorrect to test 
courts martial on the anvil of clause (3) of Arti cle 175. The 
separation there by required seeks to disentangle  a prior  amalgam 
between the judiciary and executive of a n entirely separate and 
different nature.  It has nothing to do with courts martial, which 
have swept to present times on an entirely diffe rent historical arc. 
The second strand of the challenge to courts martial, as set out in 
para 21 above, cannot therefore, with respect, be sustained.  
 
35. This brings us to a consideration of the first strand of the 
challenge, that courts martial  are not at al l courts within the 
meaning of Article 175. Again, and at the risk of some repetition, 
the context must be kept clearly in mind. We are here concerned 
with courts martial constituted and acting within the ambit of the 
military justice system, which is itse lf created by and operates 
within the four corners of the Army Act.  As now firmly established 
by Liaquat Hussain , this is the key point. For courts martial to as it 
were stand outside of Article 175 they must be constituted, exist 
and operate in the manner  as just stated. Courts martial cannot be 
created outside of, or be allowed to exist and operate independently 
from, the military justice system  created by and under a statute of 
the nature of the Army Act . This is so even if such “courts martial ” 
are purp orted to be created with reference to the Army Act. Any 
such “courts martial” would fall foul of the test laid down in 
Mehram Ali and others v Federation of Pakistan and others  PLD 
1998 SC 1445.  They would be nothing more than military courts 
and th at woul d be the creation of a parallel judicial system, which 
is proscribed and prohibited by Liaquat Hussain . The  importance, 
indeed necessity, of the  historical analysis undertaken above , Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 22
which places courts martial within the legislative competence  of 
entry No . 1 of the Federal List , is thus highlighted. That analysis is  
aligned with this decision.  Of course, the question whether the 
legislative competence extends  even to trials of civilians , in the 
context of how fundamental rights are enshrined in the present  
Constitution, remains to be addressed. Here, we are only 
concerned with the argument founded on Article 175.  In this 
immediate context  even F.B. Ali  itself points in th e same direction , 
and corroborates the historical nature of the legislative 
competence . The competence for the insertion of clause (d) in s. 
2(1), whereby civilians could be tried by courts martial, was found 
to exist in entry No. 1 of the Third Schedule to the 1962 
Constitution. This corresponded to entry No. 1 of the present 
Federal List. Now, the trial of civilians by court martial is very 
much an ancillary or subsidiary function of such forums. Existing 
as they do within the military justice system, and confined as they 
are to the four corners  of the Army Act , the principal function 
(indeed, the ir raison d’être) is to deal with the members of the 
Armed Forces.  Even if there were no legislative competence in 
relation to civilians that would leave the functioning and operation 
of the military justice system, and of the courts martial, wholly  
unaffected.  The subsidiary nature of the legislative competence 
with regard to civilians is further indicated by the fact that  in F.B. 
Ali the Court also pressed entry Nos. 48 and 49 into service ( which 
relate d respectively, to matters within the legislat ive competence of 
the Federation or relating thereto, and matters incidental and 
ancillary to others provided in the Schedule). These entries 
corresponded to the present entry Nos. 58 and 59 of the Federal 
List. Thus, a necessary implication of F.B. Ali  is that courts 
martial, and the military justice system , are within  the scope  of the 
legislative competence of entry No. 1; and that conclusion is in line 
with Muhammad Yusuf , as revealed by the historical analysis.  
 
36. It follows from the foregoing that in our  view, in the present 
context,  the challenge in terms of Article 175 to courts martial is of 
no avail . However, a word of caution may be sounded.  This does 
not at all  mean that there cannot be rights of appeal or other 
remedies to courts within the meaning  of Article 175 , from 
decisions of courts martial  or other authorities and forums within 
the military justice system, or that such system cannot at some Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 23
stage itself be directly connected with such courts. Far from it. All 
that is meant is that courts mart ial as presently conceived and 
understood, with which alone we are here concerned, for historical 
reasons stand outside the framework of Article 175 and cannot be 
constitutionally attacked or challenged with reference thereto.  But, 
it is wholly within the legislative competence of Parliament to 
restructure or even recreate the military justice system, including 
courts martial, in such manner —howsoever fundamentally or even 
radically different it may be from the present one —as it deems 
appropriate. History c ertainly informs the legislative competence 
but, constitutionally speaking, neither shackles nor controls it.  
 
37. The challenge on the anvil of  Article 175 having been dealt 
with, we move on to consider the mainstay of the constitutional 
attack to trial  of civilians by courts martial : fundamental rights.  
 
38. Learned counsel for the petitioners challenged the vires of 
the provisions set out in para (i) of the short order (hereinafter, for 
convenience, respectively referred to as the “ clause (d) provision” 
and the “s. 59(4) provision”, and together the “ para (i) provisions”) 
as being in conflict with specific fundamental rights. The primary 
right invoked in this regard was Article 10A , the right to a fair trial. 
Reliance was also placed on Article 9 and certain othe r rights. It 
was argued that by reason of Article 8(3)(a), civilians brought 
before courts martial were denied these fundamental rights and 
the para (i) provisions were therefore ultra vires the Constitution. 
The learned Attorney General argued strongly to  the contrary. More 
than once, it was submitted with particular reference to one 
judgment  from F.B. Ali  and also by a detailed referral  to the 
relevant provisions of the Army Act and the 1954 Rules that  courts 
martial operated within a system that provided  for a fair trial in 
every meaningful sense.  An assurance was held out that there 
would be a further refinement of the system with respect to the 
trials of the 103 persons referred to in the short order.  The learned 
Attorney General also submitted that Art icle 8(3)(a) was being 
incorrectly  interpreted by learned counsel for the petitioners. The 
rights of civilians made subject to the Army Act were fully 
protected.  
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 24
39. The approach taken by learned counsel for the petitioners, 
and accordingly, the response ther eto by the learned Attorney 
General, are understandable. However, in our view, and with 
respect, a challenge that is essentially piecemeal in nature (i.e., 
which seeks to condemn  the para (i) provisions with reference to 
specific and particular fundamental  rights ) may miss the forest for 
the trees. Important as each fundamental right undoubtedly is, 
perhaps the be tter answer lies  in considering the collectivity of the 
fundamental rights  and the manner in which this aggregate is, for 
the first tim e in our co nstitutional history , protected by the present 
Constitution. In the end, for present purposes  it is not this or that 
particular fundamental right that matters.  That may not be what 
clinches the point, even though undoubtedly a consideration of the 
para (i)  provisions on the anvil of individual fundamental rights is 
also meaningful  and may even be decisive . Rather,  what is 
important is how fundamental rights  in the ir plural ity are guarded 
by the Constitution . For, as  we shall see, u ltimately  it is the 
undiff erentiated fullness of the aggregat e that is breached and 
denied by the para (i) provisions.  
 
40. Regardless however, of the approach taken  the denial is the 
result of Article 8(3)(a). Accordingly, we will first examine this 
provision  and then consider the con stitutional provision that 
protects fundamental rights in t he collective sense just noted.  
Finally, we will show that in the conflicting tugs  of these  two 
provisions it is the latter that must prevail.  
 
41. Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution lays out the  rights 
declared to be fundamental. Article 8 , which opens the Chapter , 
deals with laws inconsistent with or in derogation of such rights . 
Clause (1) inter alia declares that any law that is so inconsistent 
shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be voi d. Clause (2) 
prohibits the State (as defined in Article 7) from making any law 
which takes away or abridges fundamental rights, and a law so 
made is void to that extent.  The third clause may, to begin with,  be 
described as an exception to the first two cl auses. It provides that 
nothing in Article 8 shall apply to a law that falls within either of 
its two paragraphs, and that “no such law nor any provision thereof  
shall be void on the ground that such law or provision is 
inconsistent with, or repugnant to, any provision of this Chapter ” Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 25
(emphasis supplied). We are here concerned with the first 
paragraph of clause (3).  
 
42. The genesis of Article 8(3)(a) lies in the well recognized fact 
that given the peculiar nature of the tasks that must be performed , 
in partic ular and especially , by members of the Armed Forces but 
also by certain other agencies (which are usually referred to as the 
“disciplined forces”) , it is infeasible to allow them, in the context of 
the performance of their duties, to enjoy the benefit of f undamental 
rights. Members of the Armed Forces and the disciplined forces are 
of course citizens and, in the ordinary and normal course, as much 
entitled to fundamental rights as any other citizen. That is the 
general rule. However, in relation to certain set and limited 
circumstances a differentiation ought to be made  between them 
and the general citizenry . (Of course, it goes without saying that 
while some fundamental rights are for citizens, others apply to 
persons in general. This point is not directly of relevance here, but 
ought not to be forgotten either.) Undoubtedly, the members of the 
Armed Forces and the disciplined forces come from and return to 
the citizenry. But, while they are in service (and  also, exceptionally, 
when they may by law be recall ed to such service) the peculiarities 
of that service require derogation from what is otherwise their  
birthright , as a fundamental and constituent aspect of the 
Constitution. Hence, Article 8(3)(a).  
 
43. The provision now under consideration is as follows:  
 
“8. … (3) The provisions of this Article shall not apply to — 
 
(a) any law relating to members of the Armed Forces, or of  
the police or of such other forces as are charged with 
the maintenance of public order, for the purpose of 
ensuring  the proper discharge of their duties or the 
maintenance of  discipline among them; …” 
 
 It will be seen that for this provision to appl y two conditions 
must be met. Firstly, it applies to a law made in respect of three 
categories of State employees: (i) members of the Armed Forc es; (ii) 
the police; and (iii) any other force that is charged with the 
maintenance of public order. Secondly, even in relation to such 
categories, the purpose of the law must be to either (x) ensure the 
proper discharge of their duties, or (y) maint ain discipline among Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 26
them. There is no doubt that the Army Act meets both these 
conditions and is therefore a law within the contemplation of 
Article 8(3)(a). In order to properly appreciate its scope and effect, 
it will be instructive to undertake the analysis in both historical 
and comparative terms. For Article 8(3)(a) is by no means the first 
time that such an exception has been carved out, to allow a law of 
the nature of the Army Act to exist in derogation of fundamental 
rights.  
 
44. Turning first to constitutio nal history, each of the 
Constitutions enacted and adopted post-Independence had a 
provision similar to Article 8(3)(a). These are set out in the table 
below  (emphasis supplied) : 
 
1956 Constitution  1962 Constitution  Interim (1972) 
Constitution  
Article 4 : … (3) Nothing 
in this Article shall apply 
to any law relating to the 
members of the Armed 
Forces, or the Forces 
charged with the 
maintenance of public 
order, for the purpose of 
ensuring the proper 
discharge of their duties 
or the maintenance of 
discipline among them . Article 6 : … (3) The 
provisions of this Article 
shall not apply to — 
 
(i) any law relating to the 
members of the Defence 
Services , or the forces 
charged with the 
maintenance of public 
order, for the purpose of 
ensuring the proper 
discharge of th eir duties 
or the maintenance of 
discipline among them; 
… 
 
and no such law nor any 
provision thereof  shall be 
void on the ground that 
such law or provision is 
inconsistent with, or 
repugnant to, any 
provision of this Chapter.  Article 7 : … (3) The 
provision s of this Article 
shall not apply to — 
 
(i) any law relating to the 
members of the Defence 
Forces, or of the Police or 
of such other forces as 
are charged with the 
maintenance of public 
order, for the purpose of 
ensuring the proper 
discharge of their duties  
or the maintenance of 
discipline among them; 
… 
 
and no such law nor any 
provision thereof  shall be 
void on the ground that 
such law or provision is 
inconsistent with, or 
repugnant to, any 
provision of this Chapter.  
 
 It will be seen that the provision ha s essentially remained 
unaltered throughout. Apart from the specific reference to the 
police in the Interim Constitution and the present Constitution, the 
words used are virtually identical.  This is certainly true for the 
purpose of the law, i.e., the prop er discharge of duties and the 
maintenance of discipline.  Furthermore, in both the 1962 and 
Interim Constitutions, the provision is rounded off in exactly the 
same terms as is clause (3) of Article 8 : notwithstanding any 
repugnancy or inconsistency with fu ndamental rights no law 
within the contemplati on of the clause, nor any provision thereof , 
shall be void . Before proceeding further, we may note that since we Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 27
are here concerned  with the Army Act , i.e., members of the Armed 
Forces , references will be only to this category of State employees . 
 
45. The approach taken in our country is not however the only 
manner for tackling the question of how, if at all,  fundamental 
rights a s would otherwise be enjoyed by members of the Armed 
Forces  can be derogated from . For c omparative purposes, we  have 
an example readily at hand: the Indian Constitution. The relevant 
provision there is Article 33. This was substituted in its entirety in 
1984. However, for our purposes that is not material. As it stands 
at present the provisio n is in the following terms  (emphasis 
supplied) : 
 
“33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred 
by this Part in their application to Forces, etc .—
Parliament may, by law, determine to what  extent any of the 
rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to, — 
 
(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or  
 
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance 
of public order; or  
 
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation 
established  by the State for purposes of intelligence or 
counter intelligence; or  
 
(d) person employed in, or in connection with, the 
telecommunication  systems set up for the purposes of any 
Force, bureau or organization referred to in clauses (a) to (c),  
 
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper  
discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline 
among them .” 
 
 It will be seen from the last part of Article 33 that the 
purpose of a law within its contemplation is exactly the same as in 
our country: the proper discharge of duties and the ma intenance of 
discipline. However, the approach otherwise taken is wholly —
indeed dramatically —different.  The starting point is that members 
of the Armed Forces enjoy in full fundamental rights in the same 
manner and extent as does any other citizen of India . But, 
Parliament is empowered (exclusively: see Article 35) to provide by 
law for derogations from this position, i.e., determine which 
fundamental rights , and to what extent , are to be restricted or 
abrogated in relation to the members of the Armed Force s for the 
stated purpose. In other words, the Indian Constitution (leaving Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 28
aside for the moment existing laws for which it makes provision in 
Article 372 and which are, in the present context, also dealt with in 
Article 35) provides for  maximum flexibility . Article 33 starts from 
a position of full availability and applicability of fundamental 
rights, and then allows Parliament to mould or sculpt the position 
by the restriction or abrogation (a word that, at least in our 
constitutional history, has rather d ark, unpleasant and even 
sinister connotations)  of any one or more of the rights, to such 
extent as Parliament deems appropriate. This allows Parliament to 
take an approach that may be as broad brushed or narrowly 
focused as is considered expedient. The wh ole panoply of 
fundamental rights may be denied, or the derogation may be 
confined as specifically as a single such right and even there 
tailored to as refined a point as desired.  
 
46. Article 33 has been considered a number of times by the 
Indian Supreme Cour t. In Union of India v L.D. Balam Singh  (2002) 
9 SCC 73 , the following observations were made  (pp. 76 -77; 
emphasis supplied) : 
 
“While it is true that army personnel ought to be subjected to 
strictest form of discipline and Article 33  of the Constitution 
has conferred powers on to the Parliament to abridge the 
rights conferred under Part III of the Constitution in respect 
of the members of the armed forces, but does that mean and 
imply that the army person nel would be denuded of the 
Constitutional privileges as guaranteed under the 
Constitution? Can it be said that the army personnel form a 
class of citizens not entitled to the Constitution's benefits 
and are outside the purview of the Constitution? To answ er 
above in the affirmative would be a violent departure to the 
basic tenets of the Constitution. An army personnel is as 
much a citizen as any other individual citizen of this 
country. Incidentally, the provision as contained in Article 33  
does not by itself abrogate any rights and its applicability is 
dependent on parliamentary legislation . The language used 
by the framers is unambiguous and categorical and it is in 
this perspective Article 33  may be noticed at this juncture. 
[After reproducing the  Article  the judgment then goes on to 
say:] 
2. A plain reading thus would reveal that the extent of 
restrictions necessary to be imposed on any of the 
fundam ental rights in their application to the armed forces 
and the forces charged with the maintenance of public order 
for the purpose of ensuring proper discharge of their duties 
and maintenance of discipline among them would necessarily 
depend upon the prevai ling situation at a given point of time 
and it would be inadvisable to encase it in a rigid statutory 
formula . The Constitution -makers were obviously anxious Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 29
that no more restrictions should be placed than are 
absolutely necessary for ensuring proper disch arge of duties 
and the maintenance of discipline amongst the armed force 
personnel and therefore Article 33  empowered the 
Parliament to restrict or abridge within permissible extent, 
the rights conferred  under Part III of the Constitution in so 
far as the armed force personnel are concerned …. 
3. This Court in the case of Prithi Pal Singh vs. The Union of 
India  (AIR 1982 SC 1413) observed  [at pg. 1437] :  
"It is one of the cardinal features of our Constitution that a 
person by enlisting in or entering armed forces does not 
cease to be a citizen so as to wholly deprive him of his rights 
under the Co nstitution . […] In the larger interest of national 
security  and military discipline Parliament in its wisdom 
may restrict or abrogate  such rights in their application to 
the armed forces but this process should not be carried so 
far as to create a class of citizen not entitled to the benefits 
of liberal spirit of the Constitution. Persons subject to Army 
Act are citizens of this ancient land having feeling of 
belonging to the civilized community governed by the liberty -
oriented Constitution." ” 
 
47. The approach taken  by the Indian Constitution was 
obviously available for consideration when the 1956 Constitution 
was being enacted and adopted. But, as is clear from the above, in 
complete contrast an entirely different position was taken, which  
has prevailed ever since. Far from allowing for any flexibility, i n our 
country the p rovision is maxim ally rigid. Once it is shown that a 
law comes within the ambit of Article 8(3)(a) the denial of and 
derogation from fundamental rights, in their totality, is immediate 
and absolute . The provision is therefore not simply an “exception”; 
it is in fact exclusionary.  Unlike the Indian provision, it does create 
a separate class of citizens  who are, if only for the duration, wholly 
bereft of fundamental rights . It may be that i n the India n 
jurisdiction  Parliament “dials down” fundamental rights to “zero” 
(as it were) for a particular class of State employees . But even so 
the principle  of the entitlement  to fundamental rights would always 
remain, no matter how extensive or “deep”  the restri ction or 
abrogation. In our country, even if Parliament were  to “dial up” the 
position  (as it were) , so that the rights available even in relation to 
a law within the scope of Article 8(3)(a) were to be  no different from 
those available under Chapter I of Part I I, in principle  there would 
always be a denial  of fundamental  rights.  The rights would, no 
matter how indistinguishable they may appear to be from 
fundamental rights, be no more than those conferred by statute, 
granted or taken away as the legislatur e wills. This is of course the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 30
exact antithesis of fundamental rights.  It is true that in relation to 
some fundamental rights the State may impose “reasonable 
restrictions”. But this power , in the context of the present 
discussion, approximates to the posi tion under Article 33 of the 
Indian Constitution , though it is of course far more restricted than 
that. It has no bearing on, or relevance for, the position created by 
Article 8(3)(a).  
 
48. It follows, given the drastic consequences that flow from it, 
Article  8(3)(a) must be given a narrow and restricted meaning and 
application. This conclusion is firmly based on settled principles of 
constitutional interpretation. Indeed, in F.B. Ali  itself, in the 
judgment of the Court (delivered by the learned Chief Justice , 
Hamood ur Rehman, CJ) the equivalent provision of the 1962 
Constitution  was (though obiter ) likened  to an ouster clause that 
had to be interpreted strictly (pg. 531).  However, the present 
Constitution does not rest its approach to the provision , and its 
application , only on principles of interpretation howsoever deeply  
engraved  they may be in constitution al law. It provides, for the first 
time in our constitutional history, a provision that, as one of its 
different functions, stands in clear and sharp cou nterpoise to 
Article 8(3)(a). This is the provision referred to in para 40 above. It 
is clause (5) of Article 8 , to consider which we now turn.  
 
49. The first two clauses of Article 8 have been touched upon 
above. All the post -Independence Constitutions had si milar 
provisions, which in like manner preceded the prov isions 
equivalent to clause (3) : see, in each case, the first two clauses of 
the Articles referred to in the table above . But none of them had 
the equivalent to clause (5). This provides as follows:   
 
“The rights conferred by this Chapter shall not be suspended 
except as expressly provided by the Constitution. ” 
 
 We begin with the most obvious question: if clauses (1) and 
(2) were already, and always, there, what purpose does clause (5) 
serve? What, if  one may put it so, “value” does it add?  Looked at 
textually, the difference in emphasis and of perspective becomes 
immediately apparent. Clauses (1) and (2) approach fundamental 
rights from the aspect of a law said to be in collision with such 
rights. Cla use (5) on the other hand looks at fundamental rights Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 31
themselves. Now, it is trite law that fundamental rights inhere in 
persons , which is a term broadly defined in Article 260(1) as 
including “any body politic or corporate”. Some rights refer only to  
citizens, a term also defined in Article 260(1) but which has 
through the interpretive process that is the hallmark of common 
law jurisdictions, taken on a broader meaning and shape. Other 
rights inhere in persons. But, in the end fundamental rights inhere 
in someone  (and of course, the sense here is of a plurality that 
encompasses a very broad class that, more often that not, 
comprises the whole of the citizenry or the entirety of persons 
within the country, as the case may be). Clauses (1) and (2) protect 
that someone by voiding a specific law that breaches fundamental 
rights. Clause (5) protects that someone by protecting fundamental 
rights themselves . The first two clauses are engaged when the 
assault on fundamental rights is indirect; the fifth when the rig hts 
are directly under attack.  The denial of or derogation from 
fundamental rights is indirect in the former case inasmuch as the 
impugned law seeks to encroach upon an “area” denied the State. 
It is direct in the latter case because the impugned action would 
displace or deny the very “area” itself.  
 
50. This leads to the second point. In an important sense clause 
(5) underpins  clauses  (1) and (2). If fundamental rights are in a 
state of suspension (or worse ) then clearly the protection afforded 
by clauses (1) and (2) is, at the very least, put in jeopardy or may 
even disappear altogether.  Clause (5) makes the constitutional 
position absolutely clear. Unless the Constitution itself expressly  
so provides (and then only to that extent) there cannot be any 
temporal  or spatial displacement of fundamental rights.  Clause (5) 
requires that at every instant and over every inch of the territory 
fundamental rights must be , and remain,  in existence and in force. 
This then ensures that at all times and in all places (unless 
expressly otherwise so provided by the Constitution) clauses (1) 
and (2) are effectively in force and operation. If these clauses are 
the guardians and guarantors of fundamental rights, then clause 
(5) is the guardian and guarantor of the clauses themselve s. Quis 
custodiet ipsos custodes —who will guard the guards themselves , 
asked the Romans though in quite a nother  sense and context. If 
we may appropriate the words of the maxim for present purposes  Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 32
and put t hem to a rather different use , it is clause (5) th at guards 
the guards themselves (clauses (1) and (2)).  
 
51. This brings us to the third point. The role of clause (5) is 
both situational and positional. It protects fundamental rights, and 
thus those in whom the rights inhere, by standing sentinel over the 
whole of the legal landscape.  No citizen in whom fundamental 
rights inhere can be placed in a situation, either actually or 
potentially, that results in a suspension (or worse) of fundamental 
rights.  It follows that the protection afforded by clause (5) is not 
just when a breach has actually occurred . It is also anticipatory , 
i.e., it acts to prevent a breach occurring at all in the first place. In 
an appropriate conte xt, even before the situation has  reached the 
point where the claimant has to show a denial of or derogation 
from this or that fundamental right, clause (5) is there. That 
context i ncludes the situation  where it can be shown that either 
the purpose or effect of the impugned action (whether a law or 
otherwise) would be to displace fundamental righ ts. In this sense it 
can even be regarded as preceding clauses (1) and (2).  This leads to 
the final point. Clause (5) approaches, and protects, fundamental 
rights in a collective sense. While it would certainly be engaged 
even if a single fundamental right  is, in effect, placed in a state of 
suspension (or worse ) contrary to what is permissible, its real 
substance and power is revealed when one takes a step back and 
looks at fundamental rights as a whole. The reason is that when 
the clause is so engaged, it  is not necessary to identify a specific 
fundamental right that is being affected. If it can be shown that the 
whole panoply of rights is being , or would be,  placed , either 
actually or potentially,  in a state of suspension (or worse ) that 
suffices. Indeed,  on such analysis  even if  it is shown that one or 
more fundamental rights are not suspended  or denied or derogated 
from, that would not matter. Clause (5) locks in its embrace the 
aggregate of fundamental rights, without any need for 
differentiating betwee n individual rights , an exercise that is 
invariably necessary when a law is being tested on the touchstone 
of clauses (1) and (2).  
 
52. One conclusion of the foregoing discussion is that if a claim 
is brought that there is a denial of or derogation from fundam ental 
rights that may warrant , on occasion , a two -step consideration. In Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 33
the first instance the Court may have to consider whether there is 
a breach of clause (5). If the answer is in the affirmative that may 
well be decisive and conclusive  in and of itsel f. If the answer is in 
the negative, then the matter would move  to the second step, i.e., 
to consider whether there is a breach of one or more particular and 
identified fundamental rights, an answer to which question would 
then be determinative.  Two furthe r points may also be made in this 
context. Firstly, i n the overwhelming number of cases the 
challenge is brought, considered and decided only in terms of the 
second step, the first not being engaged or even invoked at all. But, 
in some cases, the challenge  has to be considered in light of both , 
and the matter could stand determined simply at the first stage. 
Secondly, and obviously, for there to be at all even the possibility of 
a two -step analysis  in the sense here contemplated , a 
constitutional provision in the nature of clause (5) must exist. If 
there is no such provision in the constitutional dispensation, then 
it would be in the nature of things that the challenge is confined 
only to one stage, i.e., whether is a breach of this or that specifi c 
fundamen tal right.  
 
53. This brings us to the third and final stage of the analysis 
indicated in para 40 above. For it is clear that clause (3)(a) on the 
one hand and clause (5) on the other stand not just in contrast but 
in direct opposition.  Clause (3)(a) results in  the immediate and 
absolute denial of fundamental rights in their totality. Clause (5) 
on the other hand, stands absolutely and robustly in denial of 
such denial (other than as is expressly provided).  The former tugs 
one way, the latter in exactly the oppo site direction. How is this 
tension to be resolved? In relation to the three categories of State 
employees identified in clause (3)(a), it is clearly this clause that 
will have to take precedence over clause (5). The reason is obvious. 
The raison d’être of  the clause is to enfold  a law enacted for the 
stated purposes in relation to such State employees. But the 
crucial question is of course, what of civilians, who do not fall into 
any of the stated categories?  This is the issue that lies at the heart 
of the  matter.  
 
54. In our view, one way to address this question and explain 
our answer  is to turn to F.B. Ali  itself. One of the grounds on which 
the insertion of the para (i) provisions into the Army Act was Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 34
challenged  was that it violated fundamental right (FR) 15 of the 
1962 Constitution. That right was equivalent to Article 25 of the 
present Constitution, the equality clause. In F.B. Ali , the charge 
against the appellants was in terms of sub -clause (i) of the clause 
(d) provision. We have already seen that the statute book  has two 
offences that answer to this sub -clause: s. 31(d) of the Army Act 
and s. 131 of the Penal Code. The latter section is to be found in 
Chapter VII of the Code, which deals with offences relating to the 
Army, Navy and Air Force.  It was co ntended that the insertion w as 
discriminatory inasmuch as it subjected the civilians brought 
within the scope of the Army Act as a result of sub -clause (i) to a 
different regime even though all the offences under Chapter VII 
constituted but one class  (pg. 528). After a detailed consideration 
the learned Chief Justice concluded that that there was no 
discrimination . The challenge founded on the specific fundamental 
right therefore failed (pg. 531). The learned Chief Justice then 
observed, though obiter , as follows ( ibid.; emphasis supplied ): 
 
“In this view of the matter, it is not necessary to 
consider whether clause (3) of Article 6 of the 1962 
Constitution is attracted in the  circumstances of this case, 
but since arguments have been advanced on the basis of this 
clause, I would like, for the sake of completeness, to say that 
if the law was violative of any of the fundamental rights then 
this clause (3) would not protect it from challenge under sub -
clause (i) . This sub -clause ( i) of clause (3) of Article 6 re ads 
as follows: - [His Lordship  then set out the provision which is 
already reproduced in the table above, and continued:]  
 
This only protects laws relating to the members of the 
defence services or of the forces charged with the 
maintenance of public order  which have bee n made for the 
purpose of ensuring the proper discharge of their duties or 
the maintenance of discipline among them . Such ouster 
clauses must be interpreted strictly and unless the law 
comes within the four corners of the exempting clause, i t 
cannot  claim to be exempted. The Ordinances under 
challenge were not, in my opinion, made for any of these 
purposes and, therefore, did not qualify for the exemption 
granted by the said sub -clause .” 
 
55. It will be recalled that both Ordinances III and IV of  1967 
whereby the para (i) provisions were inserted were purely 
amending statutes. Ordinarily, statutes of such nature are 
regarded as having effaced themselves as soon as they come into 
force, the amendments made passing immediately into the law(s) 
being amended  and becoming incorporated therein . It is for this Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 35
reason th at, e.g., s. 6A of the General Clauses Act, 1897 provides 
that the repeal of an amending statute leaves unaffected the 
amendments made. However, it is clear from the passage extracted 
above  that the learned Chief Justice, for analytical purposes within 
the frame of Article 6(3)(i) of the 1962 Constitution, regarded the 
laws making the amendments (i.e., the Ordinances) as separate 
and distinct from the law being amended, i.e., the Army Act. When 
so considered the Ordinances were held not to be promulgated for 
any of the purposes of the said Article, i.e., for ensuring the proper 
discharge of duties by, or the maintenance of discipline among, 
members of the Armed Forces. The Ordinances could th en be 
tested on the anvil of violation of fundamental rights. If found to be 
inconsistent therewith, or in derogation thereof, they could be 
struck down. In point of fact the Ordinances were challenged on 
the ground of being violative of the equality claus e. That challenge 
having failed, they were held validly enacted and thus passed into, 
and became incorporated in, the Army Act.  
 
56. This analysis was of course within the context of, and in 
relation to, the 1962 Constitution. That Constitution had no 
equivale nt at all to clause (5) of Article 8 of the present 
Constitution. Would a different result have obtained if the 1962 
Constitution had had an equivalent provision, or the para (i) 
provisions were inserted under the present Constitution? In our 
view, the ans wer would necessarily be in the affirmative.  The 
reason for th is is that a consideration,  within the framework of a 
constitutional dispensation containing a provision like Article 8(5) , 
would have entailed the two -step analysis set out in para 52 above. 
This is so because if, and once, the said provisions passed into the 
Army Act and were incorporated therein , they would beco me a 
“provision ” of that law.  And as Article 8(3)(a) explicitly states, as 
did Article 6(3)(i) before it, no law within their contempl ation nor 
any provision thereof  can or could be challenged as being 
inconsistent with, or repugnant to, any of the fundamental rights. 
Put differently, the total, immediate and absolute denial of such 
rights could result either from the law as a whole , or even any 
provision thereof. Given this situation, in considering any 
challenge to a law making insertions into the Army Act of the 
nature as the para (i) provisions, the first step would not  be to 
consider whether this or that particular fundamental right was Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 36
being violated. Rather, it would be whether the effect or result or 
the purpose of the insertion would be in violation of clause (5) of 
Article 8 . To this  question  there could be only one answer: yes. By 
allowing the para (i) insertions to pass into th e Army Act there 
would not just be a suspension of fundamental rights of the 
persons being subjected there to; there would be a complete denial 
thereof.  As has been explained above, Article 8(5) operat es not just  
situationally and positionally  but also anticipator ily. Thus, in 
relation to the para (i) insertions what Article 8(5) would require to 
be considered is, what would be the position of the persons 
affected by them, and in what situation would they find 
themselves, vis -à-vis fundamental rights, if the  insertions were to 
be allowed to go through? In other words, the Ordinances could 
not simply be looked at in isolation, and in relation only to 
themselves . Such an approach would be contrary to, and a denial 
of, Article 8(5).  This constitutional provision  requires also the end 
result to be taken into account. Where, ultimately, would that 
someone, in relation to whom the insertions are being made , be 
placed ? In re spect of  fundamental rights, for the protection of 
which Article 8(5) exists, there can be onl y one answer: that 
someone would be left high and dry. This would be a complete 
violation of Article 8(5). The insertions would thus fail and be liable 
to be declared ultra vires the Constitution at the first stage of the 
analysis, without having to undert ake any exercise in terms of the 
second step, i.e., whether any particular or specific fundamental 
rights were being violated or not.  
 
57. But of course, the 1962 Constitution did not have any 
equivalent to the present Article 8(5). As explained above, the 
analysis therefore necessarily had to be confined within a single 
step frame, i.e., testing the Ordinances on the anvil of a specific 
and identified fundamental right. This is precisely what happened 
in F.B. Ali ; and the challenge failed. In our respectful vi ew, 
howsoever correct this answer may have been in its given context, 
it is no answer at all in the context of the present Constitution. The 
constitutional dispensation having changed in a singularly 
important manner with the introduction of an entirely ne w level of 
protection for fundamental rights, the para (i) insertions cannot 
continue to be viewed from a perspective that must now be 
regarded not only as wanting  and of historical interest , but Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 37
actually constitutionally impermissible . In our view therefo re, the 
correctness of F.B. Ali  need not be called in question, even though 
a robust challenge was mounted by learned counsel for the 
petitioners in this regard. It suffices to note that since the very 
ground on which its  conclusions were erected ha s altered the 
judgment is no longer (and we say this with the utmost respect) fit 
for purpose. It is clearly distinguishable, and is therefore held to be 
so. So, by way of a first and provisional answer, we hold that the 
para (i) insertions must be regarded as be ing ultra vires the 
present Constitution, with particular reference and regard to 
clause (5) of Article 8.  
 
58. The reason why the conclusion just reached has been stated 
to be provisional is because in the situation before the Court in 
F.B. Ali , there were, a s noted in the passage extracted above, two 
separate laws: the Army Act on the one hand and the Ordinances 
on the other . But what of the situation where there is only one 
law? Suppose that the Army Act did not have the para (i) 
insertions, but was now (i.e ., under the present Constitution) 
replaced with fresh legislation (i.e., an entirely new statute) which 
did have, from inception, provisions equivalent to the said 
insertions. The reason for consider ing the matter in this way is 
that the Army Act was an e xisting law for the present Constitution 
in terms of Article 268. In other words, it came to this Constitution 
on its commencing day as but one statute into which the para (i) 
insertions stood incorporated. They were already “provisions” of the 
Army Act. W ould that in any way affect the analysis, by placing 
what were earlier “insertions” , but are now “provisions” , beyond 
the reach of Article 8(5)? In our view, the answer to this question 
has to be in the negative.  No law, whether existing or one minted 
unde r the present Constitution, can defeat the protections 
provided by clause (5). For persons other than the three categories 
of State employees specified in Article 8(3)(a), and especially in 
relation to civilians, any and every law claiming to be within the  
contemplation of the said provision must pass through the sieve of 
clause (5) and also, if so required, be tested on the anvil of any 
violation of a particular and specified fundamental right. In other 
words, the law must be examined in terms of the two -step analysis 
set out above. It is only in this way that the provisions that can 
permissibly  be incorporated within the law can be identified, and Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 38
those impermissibly planted there excised. Any other approach 
would result in Article 8(3)(a) ceasing to be an  “ouster clause”  
subject to strict interpretation.  Thus, the Army Act as an existing 
law would be subject to the same analysis as already carried out 
above. For the reasons given , it matters not whether the para (i) 
provisions were “insertions” or “provisi ons”. Either way, they are 
ultra vires the present Constitution, with particular reference and 
regard to clause (5) of Article 8.  
 
59. It has been noted above that, insofar as specific and 
identified fundamental right s are concerned learned counsel for 
the pet itioners placed strong reliance on Article 10A. The 1962 
Constitution did not have a fundamental right corresponding to 
this Article, which was added to the present Constitution by the 
18th Amendment (2010).  One of us (Ayesha A. Malik, J.) in her 
judgment has concluded that the para (i) insertions are ultra vires 
the Constitution on account of being inconsistent with, and in 
derogation of, Article 10A  and we are in agreement with this 
conclusion. Here, something must be said concerning a point 
repeatedly ma de by the learned Attorney General with regard to the 
matter of a fair trial. The learned Attorney General relied strongly 
on the judgment of Anwarul Haq, J. in F.B. Ali  and also on the 
Army Act and the 1954 Rules to contend that a trial before a court 
martial would meet the requirements of Article 10A. Anwarul Haq, 
J. listed several criteria for, and indicia of, a fair trial (at pg. 551 , 
taking the same from a treatise on constitutional law written by a 
former Chief Justice of Pakistan ) and observed as fol lows:  
 
“The right mentioned at No. 7 is no longer operative in 
Pakistan as the requirement of a trial by jury or with the aid 
of assessors was dispensed with long ago. The other rights 
enumerated by Mr. Munir are clearly available in a trial by a 
Court Mar tial. Although there is no appeal to a higher Court, 
yet the convicted accused has a right of revision to the 
Commander -in-chief of the Pakistan Army or to the Federal 
Government under sections 131 and 167 of the Pakistan 
Army Act. It is true that a Court Martial is not required to 
write a detailed judgment, as is commonly done by the 
ordinary criminal Courts of the country, yet this is obviously 
not one of the essentials of a fair trial, it being intended more 
for the benefit of the appellate Court rather than for that of 
the accused.  
 
… Any criticism or misgivings attaching to the functioning of 
military Courts under Martial Law cannot be imported into a 
consideration of the fairness of trial held by Courts Martial Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 39
established under the relevant Acts for t he Army, Navy and 
Air Force. These Courts Martial are intended to regulate the 
discipline and conduct of the personnel of the respective 
Forces, and of all other persons who may be made subject to 
these laws in certain circumstances. They are thus 
establis hed institutions with well -known procedures, which 
cannot be described as arbitrary, perverse or lacking in 
fairness in any manner. ” 
 
It was  then concluded as below (pg. 552):  
 
“I am, therefore, of the view that there is no merit in the 
contention that a t rial by Court Martial violates the accepted 
judicial principles governing a fair trial as obtaining in 
Pakistan…. ”  
 
The learned Attorney General further submitted, on 
instructions, that in relation to the 103 persons noticed in the 
short order and (as we understood it) any other person brought 
before a court martial in relation to offences committed on May 9th 
and 10th, evidence would be recorded as required in terms of the 
Qanun -e-Shahadat Order, 1984 and detailed reasons would also 
be given for the verdi cts. Thus, it was contended, there was no 
merit to the challenge bas ed on Article 10A.  
 
60. With respect, the stance taken by the learned Attorney 
General wholly misses the point. The question here is one of  
constitutional  principle , i.e., whether fundamental  rights are being 
denied or derogated from. As has been explained above, even if in 
respect of a law within the contemplation of Article 8(3)(a) rights 
are given which correspond to fundamental rights, that does not 
and cannot change their nature. They are and remain statutory 
rights, and because the denial of fundamental rights is total and 
immediate, subject to the will of the legislature , to grant or 
withhold  as it may please . Indeed, the very “offer” made by the 
learned Attorney General, that for the spe cific purpose of trials of 
persons accused of offences on May 9th and 10th, certain additional 
rights would be granted underscores their essentially transitory 
nature. Fundamental rights are, on the other hand, precisely that: 
fundamental and existing  as of constitutional right, engirdled and 
protected by not just the first two clauses of Article 8 but , in the 
present constitutional dispensation , also clause (5). To focus only 
on the operative effect of a right while ignoring its nature and 
substance is to seriously misread  the Constitution  and disapply Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 40
clause (5) . This cannot be. No matter how many rights  are granted 
by the Army Act and the 1954 Rules and howsoever many more  
rights  are piled on top of those , their essence cannot  be altered . It 
cannot be tha t the people of Pakistan are reduced to a point  where, 
in respect of rights which ought to be fundamental, they are 
instead required to go (as it were) cap in hand to the State, 
pleading plaintively: “Please Sir, can we have some more?” That is 
not what fu ndamental rights mean . That is not what fundamental 
rights are. That is not what the Constitution means . That is not 
what the Constitution is. 
 
61. However, one point may be made clear. Nothing said in this 
judgment is to be read as meaning  or implying  that co urts martial, 
operating within the ir traditional  framework , i.e., the military 
justice system  acting upon and in relation to the members of the 
Armed Forces , produce or result in unfair trials or verdicts.  No 
such conclusion is intended or reached here.  How courts martial 
function within their stated sphere and for their own (historical) 
purposes is not the question  which is before us . The issues raised 
are different and are being addressed accordingly.  
 
62. Before proceeding further, we may note for completene ss 
that the 1956 Constitution did have a provision that, at first sight, 
could be regarded as having some similarity with Article 8(5). 
Article 22 of the late Constitution provided, in clause (1), that the 
right to move the Supreme Court for the enforcemen t of 
fundamental rights was guaranteed. Clause (3 ) then stated as 
follows:  “The right guaranteed by this Article shall not be 
suspended except as otherwise provided by the Constitution ”. It 
will be seen that this clause was much more limited than Article 
8(5) inasmuch as it related only to Article 22, i.e., to  a “remedy” or 
enforcement provision and not the fundamental rights themselves 
as such. F urthermore  this clause did not use the term “expressly”  
which is to be found in Article 8(5) , the crucial import ance of which 
for present purposes will emerge shortly.  
 
63. We now turn to consider the interpretation sought to be 
placed by the learned Attorney General on Article 8(3)(a). The 
submission had two strands. Firstly, it related to th e legislative 
competence to  make a law in the nature of the para (i) provisions. Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 41
Reliance was placed on the central holding of F.B. Ali , which  the 
learned Attorney General described as the “nexus” theory.  It was 
submitted that  the decision held that  if the offence had a “nexus” 
with the defen se of Pakistan, then there was legislative competence 
in terms of legislative entry No. 1 of the 1962 Constitution (read 
with entry Nos. 48 and 49, as already noted above) to try even 
civilians by court martial. The clause (d) provision was held to be 
an insertion into the Army Act of precisely this nature.  In this 
regard reference may be made to the following passages from the 
judgment of the learned Chief Justice:  
 
“The words of clause (d), introduced into section 2 of the 
Army's Act by Ordinan ce No. III of 1967, are clear enough. 
The words "persons no t otherwise subject to this Act" clearly 
embrace all others who are not subject to the said Act by 
reason of the provisions of clauses (a), (b), (bb) and (c). The 
intention of the framers of clause  (d) is clearly that even 
civilians or persons who have never been, in any way, 
connected with the Army should be ma de subject to it in 
certain circumstances gravely affecting the maintenance of 
discipline in the army. The nexus required is that they 
shoul d be persons who are accused of seducing or 
attempting to seduce any person subject to the Army Act 
from his duty or allegiance to Government . In this case, the 
appellants were so accused and, therefore, came within the 
ambit of clause (d). The nexus, if a ny required, was provided 
by the accusation. No other nexus or connection was 
necessary. ” (pg. 519)  
 
“… It seems that if the Army Act is a valid piece of 
legislation, then it does permit the trial of civilians, in certain 
circumstances, by a military Court  even in time of peace. ” 
(pg. 521)  
 
“The nexus with the defence of Pakistan was not only close 
but also direct. It is difficult to conceive of an object more 
intimately linked therewith. The prevention of the subversion 
of the loyalty of a member of the De fence Services of 
Pakistan is as essential as the provision of arms and 
ammunition to the Defence Services or their training .” (pg. 
525) 
 
 It is to be noted that throughout his submissions the learned 
Attorney General placed strong reliance on the “nexus” theory. The 
second strand of the argument was in relation to the purposes for 
which a law came within the contemplation of Article 8(3)(a). The 
learned Attorney General  submitted that there  were two such 
purposes, either of which sufficed: (i) the ensuring  of proper 
discharge of duties by members of the Armed Forces, or (ii) the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 42
maintenance of discipline among them. It was submitted that while 
the latter had only an internal aspect, i.e., was only in relation to 
the Armed Forces themselves, the former had b oth an internal and 
an external aspect. There could be third parties, outside of the 
Armed Forces, who disrupted or disturbed the duties of such 
Forces, or acted in a manner that was contrary or detrimental to 
the discharge there of. Any such act would have  a “nexus” with the 
defense of Pakistan. Putting the two strands together, it was 
argued that the para (i) provisions were relatable to the “external” 
aspect of the discharge of duties and therefore came squarely 
within the ambit and scope of Article 8(3)( a). The denial of 
fundamental rights to such persons was therefore constitutionally 
permissible and no challenge could be mounted there to on such 
basis.  
 
64. With respect, these submissions cannot succeed. The first 
strand is in relation to legislative compete nce. It must be clearly 
understood that the existence of a legislative competence and the 
(constitutional) ability to exercise it are not necessarily co -
terminus. Briefly stated, Pakistan is a federal Republic in which 
legislative competences are divided b etween the Federation and the 
Provinces. Some are exclusive to Parliament, others to the 
Provincial Assemblies and a few are concurrent. Whether a law 
made by a particular legislature is within its legislative competence 
is determined by rules of constitut ional interpretation that are well 
settled and established . Their genesis goes back centuries , and is 
traceable in a direct line  to Privy Council judgments in relation to 
the constitution of Canada, the British North America Act, 186 7 
(now known as the Con stitution Act).  If a law is not within the 
legislative competence  of a particular legislature  then it is  
straightaway  ultra vires and liable to be declared as such  simply 
for this reason . However, even if a law is found to be within  
legislative competence,  it may yet be constitutionally impermissible 
for the legislature to enact it.  (Contrariwise, in certain situations 
the Constitution make s it permissible for a legislature to enact a 
law that would ordinarily be beyond its competence.) Two examples 
will su ffice. In the case of a concurrent competence, if Parliament 
has made a law in respect thereof, then the Provincial Assemblies 
cannot, to the extent that the legislative field is so “occupied”, 
make a law in exercise of the ir own competence (see Article 143). Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 43
The existence of the federal law does not denude the Provincial 
Assemblies of their competence over the concurrent field. Thus, 
e.g., to the extent that the field remains “unoccupied”, they can 
make their own laws. But, to the extent of the federal law , and as 
long as it exists, they cannot exercise the competence.  
 
65. The other example is of course in relation to fundamental 
rights. If a law made by either the Federation or a Province is 
challenged as being in violation of a fundamental right and as also 
beyond its legislative competence, then the law , if the second 
ground succeeds,  would be liable to be so declared ultra, without 
the first having to be consider ed at all. If it is within competence 
but in violation of a fundamental right, it would be imper missible 
for the legislature concerned to make the law. This would not be 
because the competence does not exist.  It does. But it cannot be 
exercised , the existence of the fundamental right acting as an 
interdict . If the interdict were , e.g.,  to be suspende d, then the 
competence can be exercised.  Thus (as  we will see shortly ), when 
there is a Proclamation of Emergency in the field, certain (but not 
all) fundamental rights are automatically suspended and the 
concerned legislature can then make a law in exerci se of its 
legislative competence (see  Article 233(1)).  
 
66. Once these settled constitutional principles are kept in 
mind, the (with respect) error in the first strand of the submission 
becomes apparent. At the risk of repetition, it must be emphasized 
that F.B. Ali  was decided within the frame of a constitutional 
dispensation that did not have any equivalent to Article 8(5). The 
existence of a legislative competence in terms of the “nexus” theory 
does not therefore mean that such competence can be exercised in  
the same manner under the present Constitution as was possible 
under the 1962 Constitution. Now, the gateway is not just guarded  
but kept firmly  shut, for reasons already set out, by Article 8(5). A 
law, such as the para (i) provisions, cannot now be made  without 
passing through the sieve of Article 8(5) , and that would be equally 
true for an existing law or one sought to be made under this 
Constitution. A s noted, when tested on this most demanding of 
anvils, it would be found wanting . The legislative comp etence may 
exist; the security provided to fundamental rights by this provision 
means that it cannot be exercised.  This is certainly the case when Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 44
the Constitut ion is operating  in its ordinary course, i.e., the 
“default” mode , when Article 8(5) is in full force and effect. We 
have, at the beginning of the judgment , likened this to the 
Constitution’s “peacetime” operation. Thus, and with great respect, 
the observation of the learned Chief Justice in F.B. Ali , that 
civilians can be tried by courts martial “ev en in time of peace”, 
does not hold true under the present Constitution , whatever may 
have been the position under the 1962 Constitution . Whether the 
position would be different under a Proclamation of Emergency  is a 
matter that is dealt with shortly . It is therefore our conclusion that 
the first strand of the submission is not sustainable.  
 
67. We turn to the second strand.  The submission that  one of  
the purpose s given in Article 8(3)(a) , i.e.,  the ensuring of proper  
discharge of duties by the Armed Forces , has an “external” aspect  
that brings third parties and outsiders (i.e., civilians) within its fold 
cannot, with respect, be accepted. The reason is that this 
effectively splits Article 8(3)(a) into standalone portions. That is an 
incorrect approach to this p rovision. It is one whole, which has to 
be interpreted and applied holis tically. Any other approach would 
mean that the provision ceases to be an ouster clause that has to 
be interpreted and applied strictly. In our view, the correct 
approach is that the p rovision applies (as presently relevant) to a 
law relating to members of the Armed Forces for achieving either 
(or both) of the stated purposes, to the extent and in the manner 
that such purpose (s) cannot be achieved without such a law . It is 
only in this way that the rationale for Article 8(3)(a) —the complete 
and immediate denial of fundamental rights —is understandable  
and acceptable . For if, and to the extent that, either of the stated 
purposes can be achieved  even without  a law relating to the Armed 
Forces, that would mean that the law in question would apply also 
to persons who are not members of such Forces. And in respect of 
a law such as last mentioned, Article 8(5) would intervene and 
deny the denial of fundamental rights. The learned Attorney 
Genera l skillfully sought  to bypass Article 8(5) or, at the very least, 
achieve a result that had that effect.  But what cannot be done 
directly cannot be done indirectly. As has been seen, civilians 
cannot directly be dragged into the ambit of Article 8(3)(a) by  
reason of Article 8(5). That result certainly cannot be achieved 
indirectly by postulating internal and external “aspects” to the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 45
stated purposes of the former provision , and the reby expand its 
scope to include classes of persons other than the three list ed 
categories of State employees.  That would be in utter disregard of 
Article 8(5). The second strand therefore is also found wanting. 
Accordingly, the meaning sought to be put by the learned Attorney 
General on Article 8(3)(a) cannot be accepted.  
 
68. So far,  we have been considering the clause (d) provision. 
The fate of the s. 59(4) provision is tied to the former, since it is in 
the nature of a subsidiary provision. It has effect and meaning only 
if the clause (d) provision has meaning , and has no independen t or 
standalone purpose or existence . The two stand and fall together.  
Since the clause (d) provision fails, so must the s. 59(4) provision.  
 
69. It follows from the foregoing that our conclusion, arrived at 
in para 58 above, that the para (i) provisions are u ltra vires the 
Constitution  is further confirmed . But this answer should still be 
regarded as provisional. The reason is that s o far we have 
considered the matter in terms of the operation of the Constitution 
in the ordinary course, or the “default” mode. It was noted in para 
5 that the pivot on which these petitions turned was this mode. 
But it was also noted there that the Emergency provisions would 
have to be considered. The reason is that Article 8(5) provides that 
fundamental  rights cannot be suspended  except as expressly 
provided by the Constitution. And the place where  the Constitution  
allows this to happen  is of course Part X, the Emergency 
Provisions. We turn therefore to consider the operation of the 
Constitution in this second “mode ” or state.  
 
70. The Proclamation of Emergency that can be issued under 
Article 232 has already been mentioned. The issuance of a 
Proclamation has many consequences.  For present purposes, it is 
those  which are set out in Article 233 that matter. The first two 
clauses are rel evant, and are set out below:  
 
“233. Power to suspend Fundamental Rights, etc., during 
emergency period.  (1) Nothing contained in Articles 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, and 24 shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency 
is in force, restrict the power of the State as d efined in Article 
7 to make any law or to take any executive action which it 
would, but for the provisions in the said Articles, be 
competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 46
the extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect, and 
shall be deemed to have been repealed, at the time when the 
Proclamation is revoked or has ceased to be in force.  
 
(2) While a Proclamation of Emergency is in force, the 
President may, by Order, declare that the right to move any 
court for the enforcement of suc h of the Fundamental Rights 
conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II as may be specified in the 
Order, and any proceeding in any court which is for the 
enforcement, or involves the determination of any question 
as to the infringement, of any of the Rights so spec ified, shall 
remain suspended for the period during which the 
Proclamation is in force, and any such Order may be made 
in respect of the whole or any part of Pakistan. ” 
 
71. It will be seen that clause (1) provides that while a 
Proclamation is in force, then t he Federation on the one hand and 
the Provinces on the other may, within their own legislative 
competences (which directly affect and control the extent of 
executive authority : see Article s 97 and 137) take action that 
would otherwise have been impermissib le, on account of being in 
violation of, or in derogation from, the specific fundamental rights 
set out therein. This point  was made earlier, in para 65 above.  The 
legislative competence that existed but could not be exercised 
because of the stated fundame ntal rights is now “available” to the 
State.  It will be noted that  clause (1) becomes applicable of its own 
force once a Proclamation is in the field.  Of course, as the clause 
makes clear this is  true only for the duration of the Proclamation. 
As soon as i t is revoked, the prohibition at once revives and to that 
extent the action taken stands repealed . Clause (1) is therefore one 
instance where it is expressly provided in the Constitution that 
certain fundamental rights , as specified,  may be suspended. To t he 
extent and for the duration that the clause is operative, and within 
its scope, Article 8(5) therefore ceases to apply.  
 
72. However, as is at once obvious, clause (1) sets out only 
some, and not all, of the fundamental rights enshrined in Chapter 
1 of Part  II. What of the others, and in particular, the operation of 
Article 8(5) in relation thereto? This brings us to clause (2) of 
Article 233. This empowers the President (obviously, acting on 
advice in the constitutional sense) to make an Order suspending 
the right of any person to move such courts for the enforcement of 
such of the fundamental rights as may be specified therein. The 
Order also has an effect vis -à-vis any proceedings as may be 
pending on the date it is made. Finally, the Order may be made for  Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 47
the whole o f Pakistan or any part thereof. As before, the clause 
itself ceases to apply, and hence the Order automatically comes to 
end, once the Proclamation of Emergency is revoked. It is to be 
noted that a Proclamation of Emergency  does not, in and of itself, 
invoke clause (2); a specific Order is required. It can be that a 
Proclamation is made without an Order under clause (2); the 
former can exist without the latter but the reverse is not possible. 
The Order, if made, may be revoked before the Proclam ation. These 
possibilities are exemplified by the leading case of Sardar Farooq 
Ahmed Leg hari v Federation of Pakistan and others  PLD 1999 SC 
57. There a Proclamation was issued on 28.05.1998 (pg. 59) and 
on the same date an Order was made under clause (2) , which was 
then varied on 13.07.1998 (pg. 60). Both were challenged before 
this Court and  while the issuance of the Proclamation was upheld, 
the Order was struck down as ultra vires the Constitution , by a 
short order dated 28.07.1998 (pg. 65).   
 
73. The quest ion for present purposes however is as to the effect 
on, and in relation to, Article 8(5), of an Order under clause (2). 
More precisely, suppose  an Order  is made  which places an 
embargo on the right to move all courts for the enforcement of all 
of the fund amental rights set out in Chapter 1 of Part II . Does that 
mean that the said rights are suspended within the meaning, and 
for the purposes, of Article 8(5)? We are of course here concerned 
with fundamental rights other than the ones expressly listed in 
clause (1); as already noted, they are suspended by that clause of 
its own force. But what is the position as regards the others?  To 
address this question, we turn again to the Indian Constitution.  
  
74. Before going there however, we may briefly take a look at 
the other post -Independence constitutions in our own country. 
There w ere similar ities but also interesting differences . In the 1956 
Constitution, the emergency provisions were set out in Part XI. 
Article 191 corresponded to the present Article 232. Article 192 
corresponded to Article 233 but with the important difference that 
it did not have anything corresponding to clause (1) of the latter. It 
only had a provision similar to clause (2), i.e., that an Order could 
be made  placing an embargo on the right to m ove any court for the 
enforcement of such of the fundamental rights as were specified 
therein.  The 1962 Constitution did not have a separate Part Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 48
dealing with emergency provisions. The only provision was Article 
30. This allowed for a Proclamation to be is sued in terms similar to 
Article 232. Clause (9) of Article 30 corresponded to clause ( 1) of 
Article 233 and indeed, the six fundamental rights listed therein 
corresponded to the six such rights set out in clause (1).  Clause 
(10) of Article 30 corresponded  to clause (2) of Article 233. Finally, 
the Interim Constitution also did not have a separate Part devoted 
to emergency provisions; Article 139 dealt with such measures.  
Clauses (2) and (3) of this Article corresponded, respectively, to 
clauses (1) and (2)  of Article 233. As before, the six fundamental 
rights specified in clause (2) of Article 139 corresponded to those 
listed in clause (1) of Article 233.  
   
75. This brings us to the Indian Constitution.  Part XVIII deals 
with emergency provisions.  This Part has  gone through several 
amendments over the years, and we here consider it as it stands at 
present. Article 352 corresponds to Article 232 of our Constitution. 
Article 358 corresponds to clause (1) of Article 233. It provides that 
while a Proclamation is in the field, the fundamental rights listed 
in Article 19 of the Indian Constitution shall, in effect, be 
suspended in the same manner as does clause (1) of Article 233. 
Article 19 groups, in its clause (1), six specific fundamental rights 
which, on the whole , correspond to those set out in clause (1) of 
Article 233. Article 359 of the Indian Constitution corresponds to 
clause (2) of Article 233.  Clause (1) of Article 359 is in the following 
terms:  
 
“Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, the 
President may by order declare that the right to move any 
court for the enforcement of such of [the rights conferred by 
Part III (except articles 20 and 21)] as may be mentioned in 
the order and all proceedings pending in any court for the 
enforcement of the ri ghts so mentioned shall remain 
suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is 
in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the 
order. ” 
 
 Fundamental rights are set out in Part III of the Indian 
Constitution. The words in square bra ckets were substituted by 
the 44th Amendment (1978). Previous to that, an order under this 
clause could have been made in respect of any of the fundamental 
rights; those specified in Articles 20 and 21  (which correspond, Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 49
respectively, to Articles 12 and 13 , and 9 of the present 
Constitution)  are now excluded.  
 
76. In Makhan Singh Tarsikka v State of Punjab  AIR 1964 SC 
381, a distinction was sought to be made, with reference to an 
order under Article 359(1), between fundamental rights as such on 
the one hand and  the suspension of the right to move a court for 
their enforcement on the other.  On an examination of Articles 358 
and 359, the Indian Supreme Court observed as f ollows (emphasis 
supplied; pp. 3 92-3): 
 
“(8) Let us then revert to the question of construing Art. 359.  
In doing so, it may be relevant and somewhat useful to 
compare and contrast the provisions of Articles 358 and 359. 
Indeed, both Mr. Setalvad and the learned Attorney -General 
contended that Art. 359  should be interpreted in the light of 
the background supplied by the comparative examination of 
the respective provisions contained in Arts. 358 and 359 (1) 
& (2). The said two Articles read as u nder: - [The judgment 
then reproduced the said Articles and continued:]  
 
It would be noticed that as soon as a Proclamation of 
Emergency has been issued under Art. 352  and so long as it 
lasts, Art. 19  is suspended and the power of the legislatures 
as well as the executive is to that extent made wider. The 
suspension of Art. 19  during the pendency of  the 
proclamation of emergency removes the fetters created on 
the legislative and executive powers by Art. 19  and if the 
legislatures make laws or the executive commits acts which 
are inconsistent with the rights guaranteed by Art. 19 , their 
validity is not open to challenge either during the 
continuance of the emergency or even thereafter. As soon as 
the Proclamation ceases to operate, the legislativ e 
enactments passed and the executive actions taken during 
the course of the said emergency shall be inoperative to the 
extent to which they conflict with the rights guaranteed 
under Art. 19  because as soon as the emergency is lifted, 
Art. 19  which was suspended during the emergency is 
automatically revived and begins to operate. Article 358 , 
howeve r, makes it clear that things done or omitted to be 
done during the emergency cannot be challenged even after 
the emergency is over In other words, the suspension of Art. 
19 is complete during the perio d in question and legislative 
and executive action which contravenes Art. 19  cannot be 
questioned even after the emergency is over.  
 
(9) Article 359 , on the other hand, does not purport expressly 
to suspend any of the fundamental rights . It authorises the 
President to issue an order declaring that the right to move 
any court for enforcement of such of the rights in Part III as 
may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending 
in any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned 
shall remain suspended for the period during which the 
Proclamation is in force or for such shorter period as may be Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 50
specified in the order. What the Presidential  Order purports to 
do by virtue of the power conferred on 'the President by Art. 
359(1)  is to bar the remedy of the citizens to move any court 
for the enforcement of the specified rights. The rights are  not 
expressly suspended, but the citizen is deprived of his right to 
move any court for their enforcement. That is one important 
distinction between the provisions of Art. 358  and Art. 359(1). ” 
 
 It will be seen from these passages that the difference 
between Articles 358 and 359 was  that the Order under the latter 
did not expressly suspend the fundamental rights but only the 
remedy. This was in sharp  contrast to Article 358 where the very 
rights enumerated therein were suspended. This is the position 
that emerges also in relation to clauses (1) and (2) of Article 233 of 
our Constitution.  The Indian Supreme Court then proceeded to 
observe further as be low (emphasis supplied; ibid): 
 
“(10) Before proceeding further, we may at this stage, in 
parenthesis, observe that there has been some argument 
before us on the question as to whether the fundamental 
rights specified in the Presidential Order issued under  Art. 
359 are even theoretically alive during the period specified in 
the said Order. The learned Attorney -General has contended 
that the suspension of the citizens' right to move any court for 
the enfo rcement of the said rights, in law, amounts to the 
suspension of the said rights themselves for the said period . 
We do not propose to decide this question in the present 
appeals. We will assume in favour of the appellants that the 
said rights are, in theor y, alive and it is on that assumption 
that we will deal with the other points raised in the present 
appeals. ” 
 
 The Attorney General sought to argue that the suspension of 
the right of enforcement was tantamount to the suspension of the 
right itself. In ot her words, if the remedy was not available then for 
the duration neither was the right. Having noted the distinction in 
the earlier paras, the Indian Supreme Court decided not to actually 
determine the point but proceeded on the basis that the rights 
were “in theory” alive and subsisting. We will see in a moment that 
this is a crucial point of difference from our constitutional context. 
The point however, of citing Makhan Singh  is to highlight the 
distinction between the actual suspension of fundamental rig hts 
on the one hand and the suspension of only the right of 
enforcement on the other.  Subsequent judgments of the Indian 
Supreme Court were to like effect.  
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 51
77. Perhaps because of th e distinction that had been thus 
recognized, in 1975, by the 38th Amendment, a  new clause (1A) 
was inserted in Article 359. This was given retrospective effect. 
This clause was amended  (as presently relevant)  by the 44th 
Amendment (197 8), which also added a new clause (1B). As they 
stand today these clauses  (other than the proviso t o clause (1A) 
which is not relevant for present purposes)  read as follows:  
 
“(1A) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any 
of [the rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and 21)] 
is in operation, nothing in that Part conferring those r ights 
shall restrict the power of the State as defined in the said 
Part to make any law or to take any executive action which 
the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part 
be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, 
to the e xtent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as 
soon as the order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so 
ceases to have effect:…  
 
(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall apply — 
 
(a) to any law which  does not contain a recital to the effect 
that such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency 
in operation when it is made; or  
 
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law 
containing such a recital. ” 
 
 It will be seen that clause  (1A) is, in terms, the same as 
clause (1) of Article 358. Thus, the position obtaining as a result of 
both an issuance of a Proclamation of Emergency and the making 
of an Order regarding enforcement of fundamental rights were 
sought to be equalized. Comme nting on the effect of clause  (1A), a 
leading treatise on Indian c onstitutional law, relying on Union of 
India v Bhanudas Krishna Gawde  AIR 1977 SC 1027, puts the 
matter as follows  (Durga Das Basu’s Shorter Constitution of India  
15th Ed., (2018), Vol. 2, p g. 1888; emphasis in original) : 
 
“This clause, inserted by the 38th Amendment Act 1975, 
makes explicit what was implicit in Cl. (1) of Art. 359. 
Though Cl. (1) of Art. 359 did not directly suspend the 
operation of any fundamental right in the manner of Art . 
358(1), but merely suspended its enforcement through a 
Court of law, in effect  the result was the same, namely, that 
the Fundamental Rights specified in the President’s Order 
cannot be used to test the validity of any law or any 
executive action taken th ereunder, during the subsistence of 
the Order under Art. 359(1). ” 
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 52
78. Now, and this is the first difference  between our 
Constitution and that of India , the latter  does not have any 
provision equivalent to Article 8(5). (Its Article 32 does have a 
provision si milar to that which was to be found in Article 22 of the 
1956 Constitution. As already noted, that does not have any 
relevance for Article 8(5).) In relation to Article 359 (1), a distinction 
was recognized in terms as noted , between the suspension of 
funda mental rights  as such  on the one hand and the right to seek 
their enforcement on the other. This distinction was sought to be 
removed by the insertion of clause (1A) into Article 359. This 
clause , and this is the second difference,  has no equivalent in our  
Constitution in relation to  the operation or effect of clause (2) of 
Article 233 . It therefore has no relevance  in our constitutional 
context  for any consideration of the distinction  between the 
suspension of the rights and their enforcement . Finally, acc ording 
to at least one leading Indian commentator, the insertion of clause 
(1A) in Article 359 made explicit what was already implicit in 
clause (1). This c an only mean that on account of the suspension 
of the right of enforcement  in terms of Art. 359(1),  by necessary 
implication  the right itself got suspended. And h erein lies the third  
difference. Article 8(5) explicitly states that fundamental rights 
cannot be suspended except as expressly  provided in the 
Constitution. In other words, in respect of the ap plication of this 
provision, there can be no implication, no matter how “necessary” 
it may be claimed to be. All that counts, and all that can be taken 
into consideration, is what the Constitution expressly stipulates. 
Nothing else can be accepted.  
 
79. It follows from this that while the fundamental rights set out 
in clause (1) of Article 233 are suspended because the clause 
expressly so provides, the distinction drawn in terms as above 
continues to exist, and has always existed, in relation to clause (2). 
Even though the right to move a court for the enforcement of 
fundamental rights may be suspended, the rights themselves are 
not, and cannot be so regarded. In the earlier constitutional 
dispensations, where there was no equivalent to Article 8(5), the 
distinc tion perhaps made no difference.  Perhaps there it could be 
said that the suspension of the right of enforcement by implication 
meant that the fundamental rights themselves got suspended.  And 
it could be that even in the present Constitution, the same posit ion Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 53
may, in effect,  obtain  in the context  of Article 233(2) itself . But that 
is not the point with which we are here concerned. We are 
concerned, rather, with the interplay of clauses (3)(a) and (5) of 
Article 8. For the latter to continue to override and deny the denial 
of fundamental rights brought about by the former, fundamental 
rights must not be in a state of suspension. It is only then that the 
protection provided by clause (5)  continues to remain available , 
vis-à-vis clause (3)(a).  We have already s een that this is indeed so 
when the Constitution is operating in its ordinary course. It is now 
clear from the foregoing discussion t hat it continues to remain true 
even if a Proclamation of Emergency is in the field and an Order is 
made under Article 233( 2). Other than the six fundamental rights 
enumerated in clause (1), the others are not suspended even if 
such Order is made , because the Constitution does not so provide 
expressly . There can, in the present context, be no suspension by 
implication.  Further more, t he fact that some fundamental rights  
would  stand expressly suspended by reason of Article 233(1) is of 
no moment. Most of the fundamental rights would not be 
suspended.  Clause (5) therefore, would continue to stand athwart 
the gateway even if an Ord er is in the field in terms of Article 
233(2), and continue to deny the denial of fundamental rights that 
would result from an application of clause (3)(a).  
 
80. It follows from the foregoing that even when the 
Constitution is operating in the second “mode” , i.e., under a 
Proclamation of Emergency, and even if that Proclamation is 
“bolstered” by an Order under Article 233(2), the para (i) provisions 
would be, and remain, ultra vires the Constitution, on account of 
the continued protection provided by Arti cle 8(5). 
 
81. We now turn to consider the three cases noted in para 4 
above, and begin with F.B. Ali . This judgment has already been 
considered a t several places above.  It formed a central plank of the 
submissions by the learned Attorney General, and came under 
sustained challenge by learned counsel for the petitioners.  The 
appellants  there  were tried by court martial in terms, inter alia, of 
the clause (d) provision (under its sub -clause (i)) , the acts relevant 
for purposes of the said offence having occurred duri ng the period 
from August 1972 to 30th March 1973 . Now, in 1965, on the eve of 
the war between Pakistan and India, the President had issued a Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 54
Proclamation of Emergency  on 06.09.1965  under Article 30(1) of 
the 1962 Constitution (reported at PLD 1965 Cent. S tat. 261). On 
the same day, exercising his powers under clause (9)  (as it then 
stood) , the President also made an Order (reported at ibid.) 
whereby the right to move a High Court for the enforcement of the 
ten fundamental rights  listed therein was suspende d. On 
16.09.1965 another Order was made whereby the right to move a 
High Court for the enforcement of FR 15 (the equality clause) was 
also suspended (reported at PLD 1965 Cent. Stat. 556 ). We may 
note that Article 30 had originally, and up to the dates jus t 
mentioned, a rather different shape from that which has been 
noticed in this judgment, inasmuch as  it had not then contained 
any clause (10), and clause (9) only allowed for the suspension of 
the right to enforce fundamental rights before a High Court. B y the 
5th Amendment Act, passed on 30.11.1965, but given retrospective 
effect to 06.09.1965 (reported at PLD 1966 Cent. Stat. 76) clause 
(9) was substituted  and a new clause (10) inserted, for the position 
to become as described in this judgment.  
 
82. It appea rs that when the Ordinances of 1967 were 
promulgated both the Proclamation and the Orders aforementioned 
were in the field.  Insofar as the period over which the acts of the 
appellants stood charged, that was when the Interim Constitution 
was in the field, as it came into effect on 21.04.1972 (see Article 
1(2) thereof).  The Interim Constitution continued till the 
commencing day of the present Constitution (which was 
14.08.1973). On 23.11.1971 , on the eve of the war between 
Pakistan and India,  the President h ad issued a Proclamation of 
Emergency (reported at PLD  1972  Cent. Stat. 30 ). As noted, that 
was deemed to be a Proclamation under the Interim Constitution 
in terms of Article 139(8), which then had the consequences noted 
above. We may note in passing that in fact the Proclamation just 
noted was also deemed by the present Constitution  under Article 
280 to be one issued on the commencing day. Thus, at all times 
material for F.B. Ali , the country was under  a state of Emergency.  
 
83. The central holding of F.B. Ali  has already been noted, i.e., 
that there was a legislative competence in terms of entry No. 1  read 
with Nos.  48 and 49 of the Third Schedule to the 1962 
Constitution to try civilians by courts martial if the offence in Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 55
question had a “nexus” with the defe nse of Pakistan.  The reasons 
for which this holding does not apply  under the present 
Constitution , particularly  in the context of Article 8(5) vis -à-vis 
clause (3)(a) , thus making the cited decision distinguishable , have 
also been set out.  Therefore, even if one proceeds on the basis that 
the same legislative competence is to be found within the 
corresponding entries of the Federal List of the present 
Constitution  (a position that can be regarded as finding support in 
observations made in Liaquat Hussain ) that does not alter the 
conclusions arrived at in this judgment. The distinction between 
the existence of a legislative competence and the ability of the 
legislature to (constitutionally) exercise it must always be kept in 
mind. The intervening element of A rticle 8(5) —the great point of 
difference between the present Constitution , on the one hand , and 
the 1962 and Interim Constitutions  on the other —is decisive and 
conclusive.   
 
84. While the foregoing is, in a sense, dispositive of all 
submissions as to the appl icability of F.B. Ali , we would like to 
consider the decision from another aspect also. This is entirely 
separate and distinct from the constitutional position set out 
above. Here, within the framework provided by F.B. Ali , we turn to 
consider whether the manner in which the around 103 persons 
referred to in para  (ii) of the short order, were (or could at all have 
been) lawfully handed over to the Army authorities by the Anti 
Terrorism Courts on the applications made  under s. 549, CrPC . It 
is our view that even in such terms what was done was unlawful 
and hence a clear violation of Article s 9 and 10A  of the 
Constitution.  
 
85. It will be recalled that the clause (d)  provision makes a 
person subject to the Army Act if he is accused in terms of either of 
its sub -clauses. In F.B. Ali , the question arose as to when would a 
person so stand accused.  This was partly in the context that the 
appellants had been charged and convicted by the court martial 
also for  an offence under s. 121 -A of the Penal Code, which was 
not an  offence that came within the ambit of the clause (d) 
provision. After a lengthy and detailed consideration, the learned 
Chief Justice held as follows (pg. 534 ; emphasis supplied ):  
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 56
“In my view the mere lodging of an information does not 
make a person an accused nor does a person against whom 
an investigation is being conducted by the police can strictly 
be called an accused. Such person may or may not be sent 
up for trial. The information may be found to be false. An 
accused is, therefore, a person charge d in a trial . The Oxford 
English Dictionary defines an "accused" as a person 
"charged with is a crime" and an "accusation" as an 
"indictment". Aiyer in his Manual of Law Terms also gives the 
same meaning. I am of view, therefore, that a person becomes 
an accused only when charged with an offence . The Criminal 
Procedure Code also uses the word "accused" in the same 
sense, namely; a person over whom a Court is exercising 
jurisdiction. ” 
 
 A little earlier (at pg. 533), the learned Chief Justice observed 
that t he appellants became subject to the Army Act from 
09.07.1973, when the charges were read out to the m by the court 
martial convened to try them. The charge sheet in this regard was 
prepared  by the Army authorities  on 04.07.1973 (see at pp. 514 -5). 
As to the  s. 59(4) provision, the learned Chief Justice opined as 
follows (pg. 532 ; emphasis supplied ): 
 
“The object of adding subsection (4) was to give jurisdiction 
to try an offence mentioned in clause (d) of subsection (1) of 
section 2 as if it was an offence u nder the Army Act and was 
committed at a time when such person was subject to the 
said Act, merely to avoid the objection that if a person to 
whom clause (d) of section 2(1) applied was to become subject 
to the Act only from the time of the accusation then  the offence 
which would necessarily have been committed before such 
accusation, would not be triable under the Act . The new 
subsection (4), by using the words ‘such offence’ necessarily 
refers to an  offence mentioned in clause (d) and no other 
offence an d, therefore, an offence which is not mentioned in 
clause (d) would not be triable by a Court Martial under the 
said subsection. ” 
 
86. These observations  raise an interesting question.  At all 
times prior to the charging of a person (i.e., the civilian) for an 
offence that falls within either of two sub -clauses of clause (d)  of s. 
2(1), he is obviously not subject to the Army Act. And so the 
question: if this is so, then any and all acts done by any authority 
acting under the Army Act in respect of such person ( such as, e.g., 
seeking to arrest him or obtaining his custody from any other 
authority, the preparation of a  charge sheet , the convening of a 
court martial,  his production before that forum,  etc.) would prima 
facie be unlawful. This is so because then the person w ould not be  
subject to the said Act.  The Army authorities and any court martial  Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 57
(if one could at all be then convened)  would not yet have any 
jurisdiction.  All those acts and proceedings would (and could only) 
happen within the four corners of the Army Act, which would at 
that time not be applicable at all.  
 
87. Could s. 59(4) apply  and, as it were, save the day ? The 
purpose for the deeming in this provision was explained by the 
Chief Justice in the passage extracted. It is for a limited (and, in a 
sense, obvious) reason and purpose. But could the deeming also be 
extended and stretched to cover the acts done  prior to the charging 
before the court martial, i.e., to make legal what was illegal  when 
done?  Now, validating clauses are well known to the law. T hese 
clauses are in a sense a special type of deeming clauses. They are 
enacted when, usually, a Court has given judgment that an act 
(e.g., the levy of a tax  or fee ) is unconstitutional or illegal. If at all 
the defect can be cured, then appropriate legis lation is passed, 
which also has a validating clause making it retrospectively 
applicable.  (We may note in passing that validating clauses have 
also been subject to challenge before the Courts.)  Can s. 59(4) be 
regarded as a validating clause thereby cover ing the prior ( illegal ) 
acts done in relation to the civilian who is charged for an offence 
before a court martial? In our view, the answer has to be in the 
negative. The reason is that it would be contrary to the 
interpretation of the provision, and the r eason for its insertion, as 
given by the learned Chief Justice. It is only to obviate the 
objection that could otherwise be taken by an accused that he was 
not subject to the Army Act when the offence was committed. The 
narrowness of the applicability is h ighlighted by the fact that when 
it was sought to be pressed by the State in respect of the s. 121 -A 
PPC offence, the learned Chief Justice was dismissive of the 
submission.  But there is another reason why s. 59(4) cannot be 
regarded as a validating clause . The rationale on which such a 
clause is premised is that the law as subsequently enacted could 
have been in the field at the time the impugned action was found 
to be unlawful or unconstitutional, and therefore it could be given 
retrospective effect to va lidate what was done. But that can never 
be true of an offence under the clause (d) provision. A civilian 
would always not be subject to the Army Act when the offence 
under either of the two sub -clauses was committed. That, of a 
necessity, had to come late r, when he stood charged. The only way Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 58
for the two to be combined would be to, in effect, provide that a 
civilian is always subject to the Army Act, a conclusion that cannot 
be accepted, and one which was firmly rejected by the Court in 
F.B. Ali  itself. Se ction 59(4) allowed the Army Act to pull itself up 
by its own bootstraps but only to a limited extent.  In any case, it 
would be highly inappropriate to so construe it as covering , and 
thereby legitimizing , acts, things and proceedings done prior to the 
charging for the offence, which would of a necessity be unlawful 
when done.  
 
88. If all of this is so, it could of course be legitimately asked, 
how could a civilian ever be brought before, and tried by, a court 
martial for an offence under the clause (d) provisi on? If all acts 
under the Army Act prior to the charging of the offence were illegal 
and unlawful then, so it could be said, the para (i) provisions 
would be a dead letter. In our view, this is not so. There is a way 
out of this apparent conundrum. The rea son is that civilians could 
be charged for an offence under either of the two sub -clauses by 
and before a forum (being a Court of competent jurisdiction) 
outside of, and externally to, the Army Act. Once  so charged, they 
would  then become subject to the Ar my Act , and all actions and 
proceedings against them could then be taken within the said 
statute . To explain the point, we look at each sub -clause of the 
clause (d) provision separately.  
 
89. We have already taken , in para s 18 to 20  above , a first look 
at each  sub-clause. Beginning with sub -clause (i) it will be recalled 
that there are two offences that answer to the description, one 
under s. 31(d) of the Army Act, and the other s. 131 of the Penal 
Code.  Now, if it is alleged that a civilian has committed an of fence 
under the latter section, then he would be subject to the 
jurisdiction of a Court of criminal jurisdiction in terms of the 
ordinary law of the land. He would be investigated, and if a case is 
made out challaned and be brought before that Court. All o f this 
would of course happen outside of, and without reference to, the 
Army Act. When so brought before the Court, and on it being 
satisfied that there was a case to answer,  the civilian would then 
be charged. On such cha rge the civilian would  stand accus ed of 
the necessary offence as would, per F.B. Ali,  make him  subject to 
the Army Act. Then, action and proceedings could be taken against Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 59
him in relation thereto, such as his being handed over to the Army 
authorities, the convening of a court martial and t rial before it, etc. 
Interestingly, s. 139 of the Penal Code (now) provides as follows:  
 
“139. Persons subject to certain Acts. –No person subject 
to the Pakistan Army Act , 1952, (XXXIX of 1952) the 
Pakistan Air Force Act , 1953, (VI of 1953) or the Pakistan  
Navy Ordinance, 1961 (XXXV of 1961) is subject to 
punishment under this Code for any of the offences defined 
in this Chapter. ” 
 
 (As originally enacted in 1860, this section had been in the 
following terms : “No person subject to any Articles of War for th e 
Army or Navy of the Queen, or for any part of such Army or Navy, 
is subject to punishment under this Code for any of the offences 
defined in this Chapter ”.) Thus, the very charging of a civilian 
under s. 131 would, by making him subject to the Army Act b y 
reason of the clause (d) provision, take him outside the jurisdiction 
of the Court charging him. But of course the crucial point here 
would that all acts done and proceedings taken prior to the charge 
would be lawful and continue to remain so notwithstan ding s. 139. 
He could then be handed over to the Army authorities for 
proceedings by way of court martial under the Army Act.  
 
90. As sub -clause (i), so sub -clause (ii). It will be recalled that 
here the offence has to be one under the Official Secrets Act, 19 23 
(“1923 Act”) . Again, as before, the civilian alleged to have 
committed an offence that fits the description given in sub -clause 
(ii) would be dealt with in the manner provided for under the 
ordinary law of the land . Ultimately , he would be  brought befor e 
the competent Court  having  jurisdiction  in respect of the 1923 Act , 
which could then charge him for the offence. All acts done and 
proceedings taken against the civilian prior to the charge would be 
lawful. Once so charged the civilian would become subje ct to the 
Army Act by reason of the clause (d) provision and then the 
ensuing acts and proceedings required under that Act could be 
taken. We may note that in the case of this sub -clause there would 
be the added “complication” of ss. 94 and 95 of the Army Act but 
that can, for present purposes, be regarded as a matter which , 
though important,  does not require attention here.   
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 60
91. It is thus clear from the foregoing that in respect of the 
clause (d) provision, and offences within the scope of either of its 
sub-clauses, the lawfully correct procedure and manner is for the 
civilians to be charged for the relevant offence outside of the Army 
Act and by a Court of competent jurisdiction. It is only then that 
such civilians, having become subject to the said Act, can  lawfully  
be taken into custody by the Army authorities and proceed ed 
against  in terms of th at statute , by way of court martial.  
 
92. In the case of the around 103 persons mentioned in para (ii) 
of the short order, nothing of the sort appears to have happened.  
Firstly, they were all before the ATCs because the FIRs under 
which they were arrested listed offences under the Anti Terrorism 
Act, 1997. Now, this statute does not give any jurisdiction to the 
ATCs to try offences either under s. 131 PPC or the 1923 Act . No 
application could at all have therefore been made to the said 
Courts by the Army authorities under s. 549, CrPC. Furthermore, 
even if these Courts did have jurisdiction over the  offences, the 
persons before them had not yet been charged for the same. They 
had therefore not become subject to the Army Act. Therefore not 
only could the Army authorities not have filed any applications 
under s. 549 but the same could not even be entertained by the 
ATCs. There was, in other words, a double lack of jurisdicti on. The 
manner in which the around 103 persons were dealt with was 
therefore contrary to law and hence a violation of Article s 9 and 
10A of the Constitution. Here, we may note s. 549, CrPC. 
Subsection (1) of this section provides as follows  (emphasis 
suppl ied): 
 
“549. Delivery to military authorities of persons liable to 
be tried by Court -martial : (1) The Federal Government may 
make rules -consistent with this Code and the Pakistan Army 
Act, 1952 (XXXIX of 1952 the Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953 
(VI of 1953) a nd the Pakistan Navy Ordinance, 1961 (XXXV 
of 1961) and any similar law for the time being in force as to 
the cases in which persons subject to military, naval or air 
force law shall be tr ied by a Court to which this Code 
applies, or by Court -Martial , and when any person is brought 
before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he 
is liable to be tried either by a Court to which this Code 
applies or by a Court -martial , such Magistrate shall have 
regard to such rules, and shall in proper cases del iver him, 
together with a statement of the offence of which he is 
accused, to the commanding officer of the regiment, corps, 
ship or detachment, to which he belongs, or to the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 61
commanding officer of the nearest military, naval or air -force 
station, as the c ase may be, for the purposes of being tried 
by Court -martial. ” 
 
 As the words emphasized indicate, for s. 549 to apply at all 
the civilian must be charged with the offence that can be tried 
either by the ordinary law or a court martial. What has been said 
above is wholly consistent with this, subject to the gloss that it is 
the very charging of the civilian for the offence that alone makes 
him subject to the Army Act , and hence  liable to be handed over to 
the Army authorities and  triable by court martial. T he rules 
referred to in the subsection are the Criminal Procedure (Military 
Offenders) Rules, 1970. Nothing therein is inconsistent with what 
has been set out above.  
    
93. In conclusion, the following can be said of F.B. Ali . In the 
first instance, the judgm ent is distinguishable . On account of the 
material difference between the present Constitution and the 1962 
Constitution (i.e., Article 8(5)) it does not apply. Even otherwise, if 
the matter were to be treated within the framework provided by the 
judgment,  the manner in which the around 103 persons have been 
dealt with  would be contrary to law, and that in itself would be a 
violation of Article s 9 and 10A . On any view of the matter therefore, 
and with great respect, the judgment does not apply at all in the  
manner pressed for by the learned Attorney General.  
 
94. We turn to consider Liaquat Hussain . This judgment has 
also been touched upon above.  As noted, a Proclamation of 
Emergency was issued on 28.05.1998. (The Orders under Article 
233(2) seeking to suspend t he right to enforce fundamental rights 
were, also as noted,  found to be unconstitutional  in a prior 
decision .) On 20.11.1998 the Pakistan Armed Forces (Acting in Aid 
of the Civil Power) Ordinance, 1998 was promulgated ( “Ordinance”; 
reported at PLD 1999 Cen t. Stat. 156, and described in detail  at 
pg. 683 et . seq.). This was amended in quick succession 
(amendments at pg. 687 et. seq.). A notification invoking Article 
245 was issued on 27.11.1998 (pg. 687). The vires of the 1998 
Ordinance (as amended) were cha llenged in the cited decision, and 
the law struck down as unconstitutional (a short order was made 
on 17.02.1999, reproduced  at pg. 549). Thus, Liaquat Hussain  is Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 62
also a decision given in the context of the country being under  a 
state of Emergency.  
 
95. The Or dinance  initially applied to such areas in Sindh in 
which the Armed Forces were called upon to act in aid of civil 
power under Article 245. This was subsequently changed to the 
whole of Pakistan  where the Forces were so acting . In essence, it 
allowed for t he convening of as many courts martial, as directed by 
the Federal Government, “as may be necessary to try offences 
triable under this Ordinance…” (s. 3). The said offences were set 
out in the Schedule, which listed  various offences already created 
under d ifferent laws. In addition, s. 6 created a new offence of “civil 
commotion”, which was of course also triable by the courts martial 
convened under the statute. Section 4 of the Ordinance provided 
as follows  (emphasis supplied) : 
 
“4. Powers of the Court .—(1) A Court convened under 
section 3 shall have the power to try any person including a 
person who is not a member of the Armed Forces  who has 
committed any offence specified in the Schedule to this 
Ordinance in any area in which the Armed Forces are acting 
in aid of civil power and pass any sentence authorized by law 
within three days.  
 
 (2) For the trial offences under this Ordinance 
procedure provide in the Pakistan Army Act, 1952 Pakistan 
Air Force Act, 1953 and Pakistan Navy Ordinance, 1961, and 
the rule s made thereunder shall apply.”  
 
It was the trial of civilians that was the bone of contention. It 
is important to keep in mind that though these courts martial were 
formed with reference to the Army Act (and the corresponding laws 
relating to the Navy and  the Air Force), and were required to follow 
the procedure set out in those laws, they stood outside the 
framework of the military justice system.  That is, they were not 
courts martial as conventionally understood.  
 
96. The principal ground on which the Ordina nce was 
challenged was that it set up a parallel judicial system, which was 
impermissible under the Constitution.  The case was that the 
forums set up under the Ordinance were “military courts” and not 
courts martial, properly so called.  A useful classifica tion in this 
regard was made  by Irshad Hasan Khan, J. in his concurring 
judgment (para 51 ; pp. 792 -3). The scope of the challenge was Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 63
explained by Saiduzzaman Siddiqui, J. in his concurring judgment 
as follows ( para 8; pg. 647):  
 
“It is not disputed by the  learned Attorney -General and is 
also evident from the preamble of the Ordinance that the 
Armed Forces have been called in aid of the civil power 
under Article 245 of the Constitution for the purposes of 
security, maintenance of law and order and restorati on of 
peace. The petitioners have not questioned the authority of 
the Federal Government to call the Armed Forces in aid of 
civil power for the purposes of security, maintenance of law 
and order and restoration of peace under Article 245 of the 
Constitutio n by enacting a legislation in this regard. Their 
objection is confined only to the setting up of the Military 
Courts by the Armed Forces for trial of civilians in respect of 
offences not connected with Armed Forces, under the 
Ordinance. The controversy, t herefore, is in a very narrow 
compass, namely, whether the function assigned to the 
Armed Forces by the Federal Government to hold trials of 
civilian population by setting up Military Courts for offences 
not connected with Armed Forces, under the Ordinance , is 
legally and constitutionally sustainable. ” 
 
Delivering the judgment of the Court, the learned Chief 
Justice (Ajmal Mian, CJ) held as follows (pp. 564 -65): 
 
“15. The above -quoted extract from the above judgment in 
the case of Mehram Ali and others v. F ederation of Pakistan 
and others (PLD 1995 SC 1445), indicates that it has been 
inter alia held that our Constitution recognises only such 
specific Tribunals to share judicial power with the Courts 
referred to in Articles 175 and 203, which have been 
speci fically provided by the Constitution itself, like Federal 
Shariat Court (Chapter 3 -A of the Constitution), Tribunals 
under Article 212, Election Tribunals (Article 225) and that 
any Court or Tribunal which is not founded on any of the 
Articles of the Const itution cannot lawfully share judicial 
power with the Courts referred to in Articles 175 and 203 of 
the Constitution. Admittedly the Military Courts to be 
convened under section 3 of the impugned Ordinance do not 
fall within the category of the Courts refe rred to in the above 
Articles. This was even so contended by the learned 
Attorney -General as reflected from his arguments 
reproduced hereinabove in para. 11. Neither the above 
Military Courts nor the personnel to man the same qualify 
the other requirements  spelled out in the case of Mehram Ali 
reproduced hereinabove in para. 14.  
 
The question which needs examination is, as to 
whether by virtue of invocation of Article 245 of the 
Constitution for calling the Armed Forces to act in aid of civil 
power, the imp ugned Ordinance could have been 
promulgated for convening Military Courts in terms of 
section 3 thereof. This will, inter alia, involve the 
determination as to the meaning and import of the 
expression "The Armed Forces shall………and, subject to Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 64
law, act in a id of civil power when called upon to do so" used 
in clause (1) of Article 245 of the Constitution…. ” 
 
 After a detailed consideration of Article 245  and a  large 
number of cases , it was held as follows (pp. 626-7): 
 
“38. Another submission canvassed at the  Bar by the 
learned Attorney -General was that the convening of the 
Military Courts depended on the requirement of aid needed 
by the civil power and, therefore, they are not Courts 
established under law in terms of Article 175(1) of the 
Constitution, but in  fact, it is an act incidental and ancillary 
under clause (1) of Article 245 of the Constitution, or to put 
it differently, it is a step or measure meant to be taken under 
the above clause of the above Article by the Federal 
Government to carry out Constit utional duties and 
obligations envisaged by clause (3) of Article 148, namely, to 
protect every Province against external aggression and 
internal disturbances and to ensure that the Government of 
every Province is carried on in accordance with the 
provisio ns of the Constitution and, hence, the impugned 
Ordinance cannot be tested on the touchstone of Mehram 
Ali's case (supra). According to him, Military 
Courts/Tribunals are of the nature, which are exempted 
from the purview of Articles 175 and 203 of the Con stitution 
like the Courts and Tribunals referred to in Chapter 3 -A, 
Articles 212 and 225.  
 
The above contention is not tenable as convening of 
Military Courts for trial of civilians for civil offences having 
no nexus with the Armed Forces or defence of Pak istan 
cannot be treated as an act incidental and ancillary under 
clause (1) of Article 245 of the Constitution. It may again be 
observed that the scope of clause (1) of Article 245 is to call 
the Armed Forces to act in aid of the. civil power. The scope 
of the above aid to civil power has been discussed 
hereinabove in detail. It may again be observed that the 
above aid to the civil power is to be rendered by the Army as 
a coercive apparatus to suppress the acts of terrorism inter 
alia by apprehending offend ers and by patrolling on the 
roads/streets, where there is civil disorder or disturbances of 
the magnitude which the civil power is unable to control.  
 
In my view the power to legislate the impugned 
Ordinance for establishing/convening Military Courts cann ot 
be spelt out from clause (1) of Article 245 nor it can be 
derived from Entry No. 1 read with Entry No. 59 of Part I of 
the Fourth Schedule contained in the Federal Legislative List 
relied upon by the learned Attorney -General…. ” 
 
 Thus, the Ordinance was  beyond the legislative competence 
of Parliament and hence ultra vires the Constitution.  
 
97. During the course of the judgment, the learned Chief 
Justice had occasion to consider F.B. Ali . After a detailed  Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 65
examination of the decision, its ratio decidendi  was held to be as 
follows (pg. 608):  
 
“The ratio of the above judgment seems to be, inter alia, as 
under:  
 
(i) That even a civilian who is made subject to the Army Act 
can be tried by the Military Courts under the said Act, 
provided that the offence of which s uch person is charged 
with has nexus with the Armed Forces or Defence of 
Pakistan.  
 
(ii) That the two accused in the above case were picked up on 
the basis of valid classification founded on a rational 
basis namely, those who seduce or attempt to seduce a 
member of the Armed Forces from his allegiance or his 
duty, and that there was no possibility of anyone picking 
and choosing a particular person so accused for trial in 
one manner and leaving others to be tried under the 
general laws by reason of amendment  introduced by 
clause (d) of subsection (1) of section 2 of the Army Act; 
and 
 
(iii) That the trial under the Army Act for the persons liable 
to be tried is not violative of any of the principles of fair 
trial.” 
 
It is of course pertinent to remember that Liaquat Hussain  
was decided at a time when Article 10A had no t yet been added to 
the Constitution. The learned Chief Justice also , after referring to 
two decisions cited by the Attorney General (being the minority 
judgment  of Saiduzzaman Siddiqui, J. in Shahida Zahir Abbasi and 
others v President of Pakistan and others  PLD 1996 SC 632 and  the 
judgment of Cornelius, J. in  Maulana Abdur Sattar Khan Niazi v 
Crown  PLD 1954 FC 187)  and extracting certain passages from the 
same,  held as follows (pp. 609 -10): 
 
“It is true that, as regards trial by the Military Courts under 
the Army Act, the above observations have been made, but 
they are to be understood in the context in which they have 
been made. The question at issue before us is, as to whether 
by virtue of the impugned Ordinance the four types of Courts 
envisaged under the Army Act referred to hereinabove can be 
substituted for ordinary criminal Courts created under the 
Constitution for the trial of civilians for civil offences having 
no nexus with the Armed For ces or defence of the country. 
There is no doubt that in terms of the Army Act even certain 
civilians can be tried for the offences covered under the Army 
Act. In this regard reference may be made to the relevant 
portion from the opinion of Hamoodur Rahman , C.J. in the 
case of Brig. (Rtd.) F.B. Ali (supra) quoted hereinabove, 
wherein Hamoodur Rahman, C.J. observed that "the nexus 
with the defence of Pakistan was not only close but also Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 66
direct. It is difficult to conceive of an object more intimately 
linked therewith. The prevention of the subversion of the 
loyalty of a member of the Defence Services of Pakistan is as 
essential as the provision of arms and ammunition to the 
Defence Services or their training". In the instant case the 
offences specified in sec tion 6 of the Schedule to the 
Ordinance have no nexus with the defence services of 
Pakistan. The judgment in the case of Brig (Rtd.) F.B. Ali 
(supra) does not advance the case of the respondent, on the 
contrary it clearly lays down that the Army Act can be  made 
applicable to a person who is not otherwise subject to the 
Army Act if the offence committed by him has nexus with the 
defence services of Pakistan. ” 
 
98. It is important to note that the context in which the learned 
Chief Justice referred to F.B. Ali  was of legislative competence. Did 
Parliament have the competence to enact the Ordinance ? The 
affirmative claim in this regard was put forward, and the 
Ordinance defended,  by the Federation  on various bases, one of 
which was  that such competence had been rec ognized in F.B. Ali . 
However, the  question was answered in the negative  by the Court . 
The tenor of the judgment of the Court is that, within its own 
sphere, F.B. Ali  did confer such a competence, a point already 
considered in detail above. But for the purp oses of the cases now 
before the Court  that is not sufficient. The key issue here is  
whether that competence could be exercised in light of Article 8(5), 
which is a different question altogether . This question  was not 
considered  in Liaquat Hussain , for t he reason that it was not before 
the Court.  Indeed, Liaquat Hussain  is an illustration of the 
scenario depicted in para 65 above, that once an impugned law is 
found to be beyond legislative competence , any other question 
need not even  be raised, let alone an swered.  It was not the vires of 
the para (i) provisions, as part of the Army Act , that w ere under 
challenge . Rather, it was the constitutionality of another statute 
that was being  considered. And indeed, when the Attorney General 
sought to build an argumen t for the validity of the Ordinance with 
reference to Article 8(3)(a), the learned Chief Justice was quick to 
dismiss it (p p. 632 -33): 
 
“42. It was then submitted by the learned Attorney -General 
that in view of clause (3) of Article 8 of the Constitution, the 
other clauses of the above Article are not applicable as the 
impugned Ordinance is a law relating to members of the 
Armed Forces for the purpose of ensuring proper discharge 
of their duties mandated by clause (1) of Article 245 read 
with clause (3) of Article 148 of the Constitution. In order to 
examine the above contention in proper perspective, it may Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 67
be pertinent to refer to clause (2) and clause (5) of above 
Article 8 of the Constitution before dilating upon clause (3) 
relied upon by the learned Att orney -General. It may be 
observed that clause (2) of the above Article enjoins that the 
State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges 
the rights so conferred and any law made in contravention of 
this clause shall, to the extent of such contrave ntion, be 
void. Whereas clause (5) thereof postulates that the rights 
conferred by this Chapter (i.e. Chapter relating to the 
Fundamental Rights) shall not be suspended except as, 
expressly provided by the Constitution. If clause (3) of above 
Article 8 is to be viewed with reference to the above two 
clauses, it becomes evident that paragraph (a) of clause (3) 
does not empower the Legislature to legislate the impugned 
Ordinance for providing a parallel judicial system. The above 
paragraph (a) of clause (3) p rovides that the provision of the 
above Article 8 shall not apply to any law relating to 
members of the Armed Forces, or of the Police or of such 
other forces as are charged with the maintenance of public 
order, for the purpose of ensuring the proper disch arge of 
their duties or the maintenance of discipline among them. 
The above paragraph refers to any law which may be in 
existence or which may be enacted in order to enable the 
Armed Forces or other, forces to discharge their duties and 
to maintain proper discipline. It has nothing to do with the 
question, as to whether the Military Courts can try civilians 
for civil offences which have no nexus with the Armed 
Forces. The Legislature can legitimately amend the Army Act 
or even to enact a new law covering th e working of the 
Armed Forces, Police or other forces which may include the 
taking of disciplinary action against the delinquents 
including trial within the parameters of such law. In fact the 
Army Act and the Rules framed thereunder are complete 
code for regulating the working of the Army including the 
maintenance of discipline and for punishment for civil and 
criminal wrongs. Not only clause (3) of Article 8 but clause 
(3) of Article 199 expressly excludes the jurisdiction of the 
High Court from passing a ny order for the enforcement of 
any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of 
Part II of the Constitution on the application made by or in 
relation to a person who is a member of the Armed Forces of 
Pakistan, or who is for the time being subject to any law 
relating to any of those Forces, in respect of his terms and 
conditions of service, in respect of any matter arising out of 
his service, or in respect of any action taken in relation to 
him as a member of the Armed Forces of Pakistan or as a 
person subject to such law ….” 
 
Thus, unlike the case at hand, where the Army Act is 
undoubtedly a law within the contemplation of Article 8(3)(a), the 
Ordinance was found to be unrelatable thereto.  
 
99. In our view, Liaquat Hussain  does not advance or support 
the submissions made by the learned Attorney General.  The 
consideration by the Court of F.B. Ali  in Liaquat Hussain  has to be 
read and understood  contextually. The question there was in Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 68
relation to another statute that moved within its own compass, and 
presen ted its own issues to the Court . There is an apparent 
similarity , in that  in both Liaquat Hussain  and here the petitioners  
question the trial of civilians by courts martial. But in the present 
petitions (as in F.B. Ali ) the courts martial are (and were) th ose 
convened within the four corners of the Army Act and as part of 
the military justice system. In Liaquat Hussain  the courts martial 
were to be convened outside, and separately from, that system, 
although procedurally they had to follow the same rules an d route. 
An added difference was that Liaquat Hussain  also had to resolve 
the issue of resorting to  Article 245 by the Federal Government. 
The question was of legislative competence. It is for this reason 
that the judgments (including that of the learned C hief Justice)  in 
Liaquat Hussain  contrasted the trial of civilians by courts martial, 
founded on F.B. Ali , with that sought to be done in terms of the 
Ordinance . In this comparison  the latter  was found  to be  utterly 
wanting  in legislative competence . Here,  the position is di fferent. 
Although learned counsel for the petitioners have challenged F.B. 
Ali on various  grounds (including submission s that the case was 
simply wrongly decided and/or that its holding is in violation of 
Article 175) , we have reached ou r conclusion on a rather different 
basis , i.e., Article 8(5), which is a new “entrant” on the 
constitutional plane. Although there is a passing reference to this 
provision in the judgment of the learned Chief Justice (in terms of 
its para 42 extracted abov e), it was not considered  in the manner 
as is required, and therefore has been done , here. And the reason 
is because the Court did not there need to do so. The lack of 
legislative competence to promulgate the Ordinance was 
conspicuous otherwise.  That was i n and of itself  sufficient,  and 
conclusive.  Here, we have to consider the interplay of clause s 
8(3)(a) and 8(5), both when the Constitution is operating in the 
normal course and when it is in emergency “mode” . In our 
respectful view therefore, despite cert ain superficial similarities the 
decision in Liaquat Hussain  is distinguishable from the present 
petitions both with  regard to the facts and circumstances and also 
the constitutional and legal issues raised.  We conclude 
accordingly.  
 
100.  This brings us to the Full Court decision in District Bar 
Association . A number of judgments were delivered by the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 69
seventeen learned Judges who comprised the Bench. However, no 
single judgment enjoyed  the approval of a clear majority  (i.e., nine 
or more of the learned Judges). The judgment delivered by Azmat 
Saeed, J. was approved by seven other learned Judges (some of 
whom gave their own judgments as well). Thus, District Bar 
Association  has a plurality ratio. Learned counsel for the 
petitioners as also the learned Attorney Gen eral referred, in the 
main, to the judgment of Azmat Saeed, J. and we will therefore 
focus our attention there.  
 
101.  As has been noted above, District Bar Association  involved a 
challenge to certain constitutional and statutory amendments that 
were made , with a two -year sunset clause,  by the 21st Amendment 
(2015)  and certain statutes . Those amendments sought to enable 
the trial of persons alleged to be terrorists  (as defined)  by courts 
martial convened under the Army Act  for a large number of 
offences. S ome of those offences  had a nexus with the defense of 
Pakistan but many did not. For this purpose, the Army Act (and 
those of the  other  two Services) was amended, making a range of 
persons subject thereto ( by inserti ng additional sub -clauses in 
clause (d) ). The A rmy Act and those of the other Services , as so 
amended,  were also inserted into the First Schedule to the 
Constitution  by the 21st Amendment , thereby bringing them within 
the scope of Article 8(3)(b).  The statement of objects and reasons 
for the enacting o f the Amendment was in the following terms:  
 
“An extraordinary situation and circumstances exist which 
demand special measures for speedy trial of offences relating 
to terrorism, waging of war or insurrection against Pakistan 
and prevention of acts threat ening the security of Pakistan. 
There exists grave and unprecedented threat to the territorial 
integrity of Pakistan by miscreants, terrorists and foreign 
funded elements. Since there is an extraordinary situation as 
stated above it is expedient that an ap propriate amendment 
is made in the Constitution. ” 
 
102.  As is immediately apparent, District Bar Association  involved 
questions and issues materially different from those at hand. 
Under challenge were amendments to the Constitution itself, and 
to the (amended) statutes that were now placed in the First 
Schedule thereto . Those amendments were extraordinary in the 
sense also that they were time bound; once the period (of two 
years, extended for another two years by the 23rd Amendment Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 70
(2017)) expired so did the ame ndments. Thus, although there was 
no Proclamation of Emergency in force during this period, the 
situation was still exceptional. For a certain period, the 
Constitution itself took on a nother  shape and form , one  that was, 
for present purposes, materially di fferent from its current position.  
 
103.  The questions before the Court in District Bar Association  
were set out by Azmat Saeed, J. at the very beginning of the 
judgment (pg. 652 ; emphasis supplied ): 
 
“These Constitutional Petitions under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, have 
been variously filed to call into question the vires of the 
Constitution (18th Amendment) Act, 2010, Constitution (21st 
Amendment) Act, 2015, and the Pakistan Army (Amendment) 
Act, 2015. After he aring the learned counsel for the parties, 
the issues requiring adjudication by this Court have 
concretized. The elemental questions which have floated to 
the surface are whether there are any implied limitations on 
the power of the Parliament to amend the  Constitution. If so, 
whether such limitations can be invoked by this Court to strike 
down a Constitutional Amendment . Such limitations, if any, 
would also need to be identified and in this behalf whether it 
can be inferred that the amendatory power of the  Parliament 
qua the Constitution is circumscribed so as to place certain 
fundamental provisions of the Constitution beyond the pale 
of the exercise of such pow ers by the Parliament.”  
 
 Given the issues involved, it is not surprising at all that by 
far the greater part of the judgment was involved in addressing 
questions relating to the powers of a legislature to make 
constitutional amendments. Those issues are not raised in these 
petitions. Although both F.B. Ali  and Liaquat Hussain  were 
considered, the con text was that of legislative competence , in the 
light of the constitutional amendments a nd, interestingly, Article 
245. Clause (1) of this Article provides as follows:  
 
“The Armed Forces shall, under the directions of the Federal 
Government, defend Pakista n against external aggression or 
threat of war, and, subject to law, act in aid of civil power 
when called upon to do so .” 
 
 It will be recalled that in Liaquat Hussain , the latter part of 
this clause (“in aid of civil power”) was under consideration, and it 
was held that it did not provide any legislative competence (read 
with the relevant entries of the Federal List) to promulgate the 
Ordinance. In District Bar Association  the Court drew upon the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 71
specificity of this holding and focused attention on the fo rmer part 
of the clause, i.e., external aggression or the threat of war. It was 
observed as follows (pg. 726):  
 
“142.  In the context of the law as already laid down by this 
Court in Brig. (Retd) F.B. Ali’s case  (supra) and Sh. Liaquat 
Hussain’s case  (supra ) civilians cannot be tried by Court 
Martial or other Military Courts, in the eventuality, the 
Armed Forces are called “in aid of civil power” but where the 
Armed Forces are directed to deal with “external aggression” 
or “threat of war” such civilians can be tried where the 
offence in question has a direct nexus with the Armed Forces 
or the Defence of Pakistan, as is obvious from the extracts 
from the above judgments, reproduced herein above. ” 
 
 The Court then considered whether the facts and 
circumstances  that were relied upon by the Federation 
(encapsulated, in our view, in the statement of reasons and 
objects) were such that “the gravity of the current situation and the 
intensity of the armed conflict, warrants its description as a ‘threat 
of war ’ permitt ing trial of civilians by Court Martial” (para 143, 
ibid.). After a detailed consideration of the same, it was concluded 
as follows (pp. 727 -8; emphasis supplied ): 
“144. The contentions raised by the learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan appear to be quite  compelling. Some of 
the facts brought to the notice of this Court are already in 
the public domain. We are not persuaded to hold that the 
gravity of the situation is such that can be met by merely 
directing the Armed Forces to “act in aid of civil power”.  We 
appear to be currently confronted with a warlike situation and 
consequently the Federation is duty bound by the Constitution 
to Defend Pakistan . In the circumstances, the Federation must 
act in accordance with the first part of Article 245(1), by 
categ orizing the current situation as a threat of war requiring 
extraordinary measures in terms of use of the Armed Forces in 
accordance with Article 245 . On the basis of the information 
available to it, a value judgment has been made in this 
behalf by the Fede ral Government i.e. the Executive by 
directing the Armed Forces in terms of Article 245 to deal 
with the terrorists. The Parliament (Legislature) too has 
made a judgment call by enacting the 21st Constitutional 
Amendment and the Pakistan Army (Amendment) A ct, 2015.  
145. We have examined the provisions of the Pakistan Army 
(Amendment) Act, 2015, in this behalf. There is a specific 
reference that the offence must be committed by a person 
known or claiming to be member of a terrorist group or 
organization, usi ng the name of religion or sect, who in 
furtherance of his terrorist design wages war against 
Pakistan or commits any other offence mentioned therein. It 
is the activities of such terrorists that have created the 
warlike situation against the State necessi tating its defence 
by the Armed Forces. Thus, the offences committed by said Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 72
terrorists appear to have direct nexus with the Defence of 
Pakistan. Consequently, the Parliament had the legislative 
competence to take appropriate legislative measure to enable 
the Federation to fulfill its obligation to act in Defence of the 
State of Pakistan to provide for the trial and punishment of 
offences which have a direct nexus with the Defence of 
Pakistan committed by civilians by Court Martial under the 
Pakistan Army A ct, 1952. Such legislative measure appears 
to be in accordance with the Constitution in view of the law 
laid down by this Court in the cases, reported as (1) Brig. 
(Retd) F.B. Ali’s (supra) and (2) Sh. Liaquat Hussain’s (supra) 
in this behalf.  
 
146. Articl e 245 creates an exception to a normal situation 
where the Armed Forces either remain in their barracks or at 
the national borders. Article 245 can be invoked in an 
extraordinary situation but only as a temporary measure. 
Such a measure neither contemplate s nor provides a 
permanent solution . In the instant case i.e. the 21st 
Constitutional Amendment as well as Pakistan Army 
(Amendment) Act, 2015, both contain sunset clauses being 
only effective for a period of two years.”  
 
104.  As noted, the constitutional amend ments added the laws 
relating to the Armed Forces  (as amended) , and another statute, 
the Protection of Pakistan Act, 2014, to the First Schedule which, 
per Article 8(3)(b) , “immunized” these laws against any challenge in 
terms of fundamental rights. It is important to keep in mind that 
the First Schedule can only be altered by constitutional 
amendment. Hence, the applicability of paragraph (b) of clause (3) 
is dependent on the Constitution itself being changed.  As opposed 
to this paragraph (a), with which a re concerned here, is brought 
into play by ordinary legislation . But even in the context of 
paragraph (b),  District Bar Association  went on to observe as 
follows (pg. 744 ; emphasis supplied ): 
 
“175.  However, it may be clarified that if more laws are 
added to the Schedule to Article 8, each such addition would 
need to be scrutinized so as to ensure that the Fundamental 
Rights are not substantively altered. A quantitative change 
can always result in qualitative change brin ging the matter 
within the prohibitio n of the implied restriction upon the power 
to amend the Constitution . 
176. Similarly, with regard to the proviso to Article 175, it 
may be noted that the vast expanse of the Judicial Power of 
the State in terms of Article 175 remains unaffected. As 
noted above, a small clearly ascertainable class of offences 
and persons are to be tried by Forums under the Pakistan 
Army Act. Such Forums are established by Law and pre -exist 
and their creation has Constitutional recognition. The 
selection of cases for trial b y Court Martial and the eventual 
decisions passed and sentences awarded therein are subject Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 73
to Judicial Review, as has been held hereinabove. 
Consequently, the Independence of Judiciary through 
Separation of Powers as a Salient Feature does not appear to 
have been significantly affected in respect of its essential 
nature so as to entail the penalty of invalidation, especially 
in view of the temporary nature of the amendment . 
 
177. However, the trials of civilians by Court Martial are an 
exception and can ne ver be the rule . Amplification of the 
jurisdiction of the Forums under the Pakistan Army Act, in 
this behalf, may step out of the bounds of Constitutionality.”   
 
105.  In our view, it is clear from the foregoing that District Bar 
Association  was decided in rela tion to issues and questions quite 
distinct and separate from the ones now before the Court. With 
utmost respect therefore, it sheds no light on what here falls to be 
determined and the decision is, for that reason, distinguishable.  
 
106.  It will be convenient to dispose of two subsidiary points 
here. The first one is that some may possibly argue that if the 
legislative competence that is the central holding of F.B. Ali  cannot, 
as held above, be exercised under the present Constitution, neither 
when it is operat ing in the normal course nor when it is in 
Emergency “mode”, then the competence has been rendered 
ineffective, and F.B. Ali  essentially nullified. Such an argument 
would be wrong for at least three reasons. Firstly, it has been seen 
that the existence of a legislative competence does not necessarily 
mean that it can be exercised to its fullest extent. Fundamental 
rights are a classic example of the limitations that exist in this 
context. Now, notwithstanding our rather troubled constitutional 
history, ther e can be no doubt that the tenor and spirit of the 
Constitution is that it is expected to operate in the “default” mode, 
i.e., in the ordinary course. Thus, years if not decades may pass 
before there is (if at all) ever a need to issue a Proclamation of 
Emergency, which has the consequences vis -à-vis fundamental 
rights noted above. During all this period, the curbs and 
limitations on the exercise of the relevant legislative competences 
will continue. Therefore, there is nothing inherently odd with a 
legisla tive competence not being exercised in full. Secondly, also as 
noted above, the legislative competence identified in F.B. Ali  is 
actually only its subsidiary aspect, and an ancillary manifestation 
of what may be described as its core, or principal, nature.  That, of 
course, is for courts martial to operate, as an integral part of the 
military justice system, on and in relation to the members of the Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 74
Armed Forces. This principal feature and function is wholly 
unaffected and undisturbed by whether the ancillary  aspect is 
exercisable or not (or even exists at all). It must be remembered 
that the offences encapsulated in the para (i) provisions have 
existed for a long time. In the case of sub -clause (i) of the clause (d) 
provision the offence has been around since  1860 and in the other 
case since 1923. The ancillary aspect of the competence was 
identified only in 1967. Thirdly, the legislative competence can, in 
terms of District Bar Association , be exercised subject to fulfillment 
of three conditions: (i) the coun try must face extreme conditions of 
the sort noted in the judgment; (ii) the exercise of the competence 
must be for a short and stated period, i.e., be subject to a sunset 
clause; and (iii) an appropriate constitutional amendment must 
provide the necessary  support. Thus, the legislative competence is 
in any case to be regarded as very much a “reserve” power, 
exercisable  if at all  only in  extremis . 
 
107.  The second point is in relation to clause (3) of Article 199. 
The learned Attorney General submitted that the words “a person 
… for the time being subject to any law relating to any of [the 
Armed] Forces” indicated that the Constitution recognized the 
legislative competence identified in F.B. Ali . Here, it must be kept 
in mind that Article 199(3), as originally en acted and adopted, had 
contained no such reference. That came about only as a result of 
the 1st Amendment (1974). But more importantly, even if the para 
(i) provisions could validly remain on the statute book under the 
present Constitution  (which is of cou rse not the case)  there is 
nothing that would, constitutionally speaking, prevent Parliament 
from omitting them from the Army Act (and the laws relating to the 
two other Services) at any time. If that were to happen then there 
would be nothing to which the  afore -noted words would apply. 
And, in principle, that situation could exist indefinitely. In other 
words, the mere fact that the para (i) provisions have been around 
since 1967 absolutely does not require, or even suggest, that they 
must therefore remain  in perpetuity. This example illustrates, 
again, the error that can be made, in the context of a legislative 
competence, of conflating existence and exercise.  
 
108.  Our attention was also drawn to Said Zaman Khan and 
others v Federation of Pakistan and others  2017 SCMR 1249, Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 75
whereby a large number of leave petitions  were decided.  These 
matters were decided with reference  to District Bar Association  (see 
para 71, at pp. 1274 -5) and on the touchstone of the three well 
known bases on which, notwithstanding a consti tutional clause 
seeking to oust the jurisdiction of the Superior Courts, an 
impugned action can nonetheless be reviewed. Thus it was 
observed as follows (pg. 1276):  
 
“73. The grounds on the basis whereof a challenge can be 
thrown to the proceedings taken, convictions and sentences 
awarded by the FGCM  [i.e., Field General Court Martial]  have 
been specified hereinabove so as to include the grounds of 
coram non judice , without jurisdiction or suffering from mala 
fides, including malice in law only. ” 
 
The Court  proceeded to review the case of each petitioner 
separately. Each challenge was found wanting. It is interesting to 
note that the challenge was dismissed in terms of a para worded as 
below , or some variant thereof (pg. 1288) : 
 
“105. The extraordinary circu mstances necessitating the 
enactment of the 21st Constitutional Amendment Act and 
the Pakistan Army (Amendment) Act, 2015 are articulated in 
the Preambles thereof. The nature of the offence, the 
commission whereof the Convict in the instant case was 
accuse d is exactly the "mischief" sought to be suppressed by 
the aforesaid Enactments. The selection of the instant case 
for trial by the FGCM reflects the due fulfillment of the 
mandate and purpose of the law. The learned counsel for the 
Petitioner was unable t o make out even the semblance of a 
case that the selection process in this behalf was tainted 
with mala fides  of facts or law or otherwise was without 
jurisdiction or coram non judice .” 
 
 At least 16 examples can be found in the judgment where 
the foregoin g para was repeated with more or less identical 
wording , when concluding that the case s presented by the various 
petitioners were wanting . All the leave petitions were dismissed.  As 
has been noted above, District Bar Association  is, with respect, 
distingui shable. The refore, the  cited decision now being considered 
also does not , with respect, address, or assist in deciding, the 
questions and issues before us.  
 
109.  Accordingly, final shape can now be given to our answer , 
which we have  so far regarded as provision al. It is our  firm view Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 76
that for the reasons set out above, the para (i) provisions are ultra 
vires the Constitution.  
 
110.  In this judgment, we have had to consider the Army Act. We 
may note that the Ordinances of 1967 also amended, in exactly the 
same manner,  the laws relating to the other Services, being the 
Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953 and the Navy Ordinance, 1961.  
Needless to say, this judgment applies equally, and in like manner, 
to those laws as well.  
 
111.  As regards the maintainability of the petitions,  the matter 
has been treated in detail by one of us (Ayesha A. Malik, J.) in her 
judgment. We are in agreement with the same. In addition, briefly 
stated  the determination here is the denial, through Article 8(3)(a), 
of fundamental rights as protected by Articl e 8(5). That provision 
protects all fundamental rights. Therefore, these petitions involve 
and, in effect, seek the enforcement of all fundamental rights. Of 
these, two in particular have also been found involved specifically, 
being Articles 9 and 10A. The re can be no doubt whatsoever that 
the questions raised here are of public importance. Thus, both the 
conditions required for invoking the jurisdiction of the Court in 
terms of Article 184(3) are met. Finally, it is well settled that the 
rules of standing in relation to the jurisdiction of the Court are 
much more relaxed and liberal as, e.g., compared to corresponding 
requirements in relation to Article 199. There can be no doubt 
regarding the standing of the petitioners to file these petitions and 
bring th e very serious questions of fundamental constitutional 
importance identified by the m before the Court.  
 
112.  This brings us to the last aspect that requires attention. 
Although we have made the declaration in para (i) of the short 
order regarding the vires of t he impugned provisions, it must also 
be recognized that a very great many civilians have been already 
been convicted and sentenced by courts martial in terms thereof.  
Some regard m ust be had to this reality and some arrangements 
made in this regard. Accord ingly, it is directed in relation to certain 
categories of cases as below.  
 
113.  As on the date of the short order , and in relation to and by 
reason o f sub -clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (d) of s. 2(1) of the Army Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 77
Act read with s. 59(4) and/or the equivalent pr ovisions of the 
Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953 or the Navy Ordinance, 1961  (all as 
inserted by the Ordinance s of 1967) : 
 
a. Cases of persons convicted by court martial and who 
have either (i) served out the sentence, or (ii) who are 
serving the sentence but hav e exhausted legal 
remedies and/or whose convictions have otherwise 
become final, shall be regarded as past and closed and 
remain unaffected by this judgment;  
 
b. Persons who have been convicted by court martial and 
who are still pursuing legal remedies (wheth er 
statutory or before a Court of law) may appl y to the 
appropriate Court , which shall consider the lawfulness 
of the conviction without reference to this judgment , 
but if  it concludes that the person is otherwise entitled 
to any relief (including, but not  limited to, with regard 
to the sentence ) may, in the facts and circumstances 
of the case before it,  also take this judgment into 
consideration:  
 
For purposes of this sub -para “appropriate 
Court” means (i) this Court if the remedy is 
being pursued here; (i i) a High Court if the 
remedy is being pursued there; and (iii) in all 
other cases, the High Court exercising 
jurisdiction over the place where the person is 
undergoing sentence  or otherwise located ; 
 
c. For purposes of sub -paras (a) and (b) , neither a 
petiti on filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
nor a petition before the President under Article 45 of 
the Constitution  or any provision of law whereby relief 
equivalent to the latter can be sought  (other legal 
remedies having been exhausted) shall be r egarded as  
a pending , or (as the case may be ) the pursuing of a, 
legal remedy;  
 
d. Any person or class of persons for whom a special 
remedy has been created by law  to a Court  outside the 
Army Act or equivalent laws  (whether by way of a right 
of review or re -consideration  or otherwise ) shall, 
whether convicted or still being tried by court martial, 
seek his remedy accordingly, and his case shall remain 
unaffected by this judgment.  
 
114.  The foregoing are the reasons for the short order dated 
23.10.2023.  
 
 Constitution Petition Nos. 24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 and 30 of 2023  
 78
 
 
Sd/- 
Judge 
 
Sd/- 
Judge  
 
Sd/- 
Judge  
 
 
I agree and also give a concurring judgment.  Sd/- 
Judge  
 
Islamabad, the  
9th January, 2024  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
 [BETTER COPY]  
MANUAL  
OF 
INDIAN MILITARY LAW  
PART I.  
CHAPTER I.  
INDIAN MILITARY LAW —ITS ORIGIN AND EXTENT.  
(i) Introductory.  
1. The Indian Army sprang from very small beginnings. 
Guards were enrolled for the protection of the factories or trading 
posts whic h were established by the Honourable East India 
Company at Surat, Masulipatam, Armagon, Madras, Hooghly and 
Balasore in the first half of the seventeenth century. These guards 
were at f irst intended to add to the dignity of the chief officials as 
much as f or a defensive purpose, and in some cases special 
restrictions were even placed by treaty on their strength, so as to 
prevent their acquiring any military importance. Gradually, 
however, the organi sation of these guards was improved and from 
them sprang th e Honourable East India Company’s European and 
native troops. Both of these steadily increased in numbers, until 
in 1857, when the native army reached its maximum strength, it 
numbered (including local forces and contingents, and  a body of 
38,000 military police) no less than 311,038 officers and men.(a) 
2. Statutory provision was first made for the discipline 
of the Honourable East India Company’s troops by an Act(b) passed 
in 1754 for “punishing Mutiny and Desertion of officers and 
soldiers in the service  of the United Company of Merchants of 
England trading to the East Indies, and for the punishment of 
offences committed in the East Indies, or at the Island of Saint 
Helena”. Section 8 of this Act empowered the Crown to make 
Articles of War for the governm ent of these troops, and such 
articles were accordingly made and published. The terms of the 
Act are wide enough to cover both European and native troops, 
but the language of the articles themselves shows that they were 
originally intended for Europeans on ly. In the absence of any other 
code, however, the Governments of Bengal, Madras, and Bombay 
                                       
(a) Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1907, Vol. IV, Ch.  XI. 
(b) 27 Geo. II, Cap 9.   
 
  
seem to have applied these articles, with such modifications and 
omissions as appeared necessary, to the bodies of native troops 
maintained by them, of which the p resent Indian Army is the 
descendant. In 1813, owing to doubts having arisen as to the legal 
validity of the existing arrangement s for the discipline of the native 
armies, provisions were inserted in the Ac t(c) which was passed in 
that year to extend the C ompany’s privileges for a further term, 
which legali sed the existing system and gave power to each of the 
Governments of Fort William, Fort Saint George and Bom bay to 
make laws, regulations, and Articles of War for the government of 
all officers and soldie rs in their respective services who were 
“natives of the East Indies or other places within the limits of the 
Company’s Charter”. It  was further provided in 182 4(d) that such 
legislation should apply to the native troops of each presidency, 
wherever servin g, and whether within or beyond His Majesty’s 
dominions.  
3. Under the statutory sanction of these two 
enactments a military code was framed by the government of each 
presidency and put in force as regards its own troops. These codes 
still followed to a gre at extent the Articles of War then applicable 
to the Company’s Europeans, but the only punishments 
awardable to native officers seem to have been death, dismissal, 
suspension,  and reprimand , and to native soldiers, death and 
corporal punishment. Transporta tion and imprisonment were not 
awardable.  
(ii) The Articles of War  
4. By section 73 of the Go vernment of India Act, 1833 ,(e) 
the power to legislate for the whole native army was restricted to 
the Governor General in Council, and laws so made were given 
general application to all “native officers and soldiers” wherever 
serving. Obviously the native officers and soldiers here referred to 
are the “natives of East Indies or other places within the limits of 
the Company’s Charter” of the earlier legislation. Thi s is confirmed 
by the f act that in later legislation(f) the existence in India of three 
military codes is recognized —i.e., that of the Queen’s troops, that 
of the Company’s Europeans, and that of the Company’s troops 
who are “natives of the East Indies or other places within the 
                                       
(c) 53 Geo. III, Cap. 155, ss.96 and 97 . 
(d) 4 Geo. IV, Cap. 81, s.63 . 
(e) 3 and 4 Will. IV, Cap. 85 . 
(f) 7 and 8 Vic. , Cap. 18; 12 and 13 Vic., Cap.43 .  
 
  
limits of the Company’s Charter”. Under the powers conferred 
upon it by the Act of 1833 the Indian Legislature for the first time 
provided a common code for the native armies of India in 1845, 
“Articles of War” for those armies bein g enacted by the Governor 
General in Council as Act XX of that year. This Act was shortly 
after rep ealed and replaced by Act XIX of 1847 which, h aving been 
frequently amended(g) in the intervening period, was in its turn 
repealed by Act XXIX of 1861 (an Ac t to consolidate and amend 
the Articles of War for the government of the Native Officers and 
soldiers in Her Majesty’s Indian Army). This was repealed by Act V 
of 1869 (“the Indian Articles of War”) which replaced it. In the 
preamble to this Act reference is for the first time made to “native 
officers, soldiers, and other persons in Her Majesty’s Indian 
Army, ” thus recognizing the existence of what are commonly 
known as “followers”.  
5. The amalgamation of the three native armies into one 
in 1895 necessitate d considerable amendments in the “Indian 
Articles of War ”. These amendments were effected by Act XII of 
1894 and the Indian Articles of War, as altered by this Act, and by 
various minor amending Acts,(h) furnished the statutory basis of 
the Indian military  code until 1911. A s time went on, however, 
and the Indian Army began to take its share in the imperial 
responsibilities of the British Army, it was found that an Act 
originally framed for three separate local forces, each serving as a 
rule in its own Pres idency, failed to provide adequately for the 
discipline and administration of that army under modern 
conditions. Owing also to the mass of amendments super -imposed 
on the original articles, these were often difficult to understand, 
and sometimes even self -contradictory.  
6. The amendment of the Indian Articles of War was 
therefore again taken up in 1908, but the consideration then given 
to the subject showed that a new consolidating and amending Act 
would be necessary, any further amendment of the articles o f 
1869 being only likely to accentuate the existing confusion. A Bill 
was accordingly drafted consolidating the existing law as to the 
Indian Army into one simple and comprehensive enactment and 
adding such provisions as experience had shown to be necessar y. 
This w as passed into law on the 16th March 1911 as the “Indian 
                                       
(g) Acts of Governor General in Council — VI of 1850, XXXVI of 1850, III of 1854, 
X of 1856, VIII of 1857 , XXXII of 1857, and VI of 1860 . 
(h) Acts of Governor General in Co uncil, XII of 1891, I of 1900, I  of 1901, IX  of 
1901, XIII of 1904 , and V of 1905 .  
 
  
Army Act” and came into force on the 1st January 1912. All 
previous Acts dealing with the subject were repealed by section 
127 of the Act. Amendments subsequently made b y various minor 
amend ing Acts(i) have been incorporated in this edition.  
7. During t he war 1914 -18 temporary Acts(j) were 
passed to provide for the suspension of sentences. These 
measures were found to be beneficial, and on the 23rd March 1920 
a permanent Act to provide for th e suspension of sentences of 
imprisonment or transportation passed by courts -martial on 
persons subject to the Indian Army Act, which repealed the 
temporary Acts, came into force. This Act which is known as the 
“Indian Army ( Suspension of Sentences) Act”(k) has to be read as 
one with the Indian Army Act. The Act is reprinted in full in Part 
III with notes. For further information see Chapter IV.  
(iii) Present Code  
8. The present military code of the Indian Army is thus 
contained in the Indian Army Act, the Indian Army (Suspension of 
Sentences) Act and certain rules and other matters which latter, 
being made in pursuance of the Indian Army Act by authorities 
therein empowered to do so, have the force of law. Examples of 
this latter class of “subordinate legis lation” are the Rules framed 
by the Central Government under section 113 of the Indian Army 
Act, and those as to “minor punishments” contained in 
Regulations for the Army in India, which derive their statutory 
force from orders issued by the Commander -in-Chief in pursuance 
of section 20 of the Indian Army Act.  
9. We have now to consider what persons are made 
subject to this code.  
The Regular Fo rces include the Indian Army ,(l) and all 
persons in the Regular Forces are prima facie  subject to the Army 
Act,(m) i.e., to the code of the British Army. Such of the Regular 
Forces, however, as are officers, soldiers or followers in His 
Majesty’s Indian Forces are, if “natives of India”, made s ubject to 
                                       
(i) Acts of Governor General in Council, XV of 1914 , X of 1917, XI  of 1918, XVIII 
of 1919, II of 1920, XXXVII of 1920, XXXIII of 1923, VIII of 1930, XXXIII of 1934 
and VII of 1935 . 
(j) Acts of Governor General in Coun cil IV of 1917 and XVIII of 1918 . 
(k) Act of Governor General in Council XX of 1920 . 
(l) A.A., s.190 (8).  
(m) A.A., ss.175 (1), 176 (1) .  
 
  
Indian military law(n) and are to be tried and punished in 
accorda nce with that law. “Natives of India are, for the pur poses of 
the Army Act, defined(o)  as “persons triable and punishable under 
Indian military law,” —which is, in its turn, defined(p) as “the 
Articles of War or other matters made, enacted, or in force, or  
which may hereafter be made, enacted, or in force under the 
authority of the Government of India”. The position therefore is 
that those persons in His Majesty’s Indian  Forces for whom the 
Indian legislature, acting within the extent of its legislat ive powers, 
has provided a military code, are subject to that code and are tried 
and punished in accordance with it instead o f in accordance with 
the Army Act. The Indian legislature h ad, by section 73 of the 
Government of India Act, 1833 ,(q) referred to above, p ower to make 
laws for all “native officers and soldiers” —that is for all persons 
permanently subject to military law and regularly commissioned, 
appointed, or enrolled into the military service of the Crown in 
India who are “natives of the East Indies or o ther places within the 
limits of the Company’s Charter” —in fact for most Asiatics and 
some Africans.  
Section 73 of the Government of India Act, 1833, has been 
repealed  and by section 65 (1) (d) of the Government of India Act, 
1915(r) which replaced it, the  Indian legislature is empowered to 
make laws for the government of officers, soldiers and followers in 
His Majesty’s Indian Forces in so far as they are not subject to the 
Army Act, which laws shall, as in the Act of 1833, apply to them at 
all times and w herever serving. It has, however, been held that the 
scope of the Indian Army Act, 1911, which was passed in exercise 
of the powers conferred by section 73 of the Government of India 
Act of 1833, has not been extended by the subsequent passing of 
the Gover nment of India Act of 1915. Nevertheless, the Indian 
Army Act of 1911 permits the enrolment, for instance, of Anglo -
Indians of Indian domicile, on the ground that such persons are 
“native s of India” for the purposes of the Government of India Act 
of 1833, under which the Indian Army Act of 1911 was enacted. 
The position is the same under the Government of India Act, 1935.  
                                       
(n) A.A., s.180(2) (a) . 
(o) A.A., s. 190 (22) . 
(p) A.A., s.180 (2)  (b). 
(q) 3 and 4 Will . IV, Cap. 85 . 
(r) 5 and 6 Geo.  V Ch. 61 as amended by 6 and 7 Geo. V, Ch. 37 and 9 and 1 
Geo., V, Ch. 101 .  
 
  
The Indian Legislature has so far applied its military code to the 
follow ing classes, wherever serving(s):-- 
(1) Indian commissioned officers .(t) 
(2) Viceroy’s commissio ned officers .(u) 
(3) Warrant officers .(v) 
(4) Persons enrolled under the Indian Army Act.  
10. The persons commonly known as “followers” are not 
ordinarily subject to Indian military law, unless they have been 
enrolled under the Indian Army Act, but it is obviously necessary 
that they and other civilians who accompany the army should be 
subject to military discipline on active service and in certain other 
circumstances. Accordingly we find tha t the Indian Army Act is 
also(w) applied to — 
“Pers ons not otherwise subject to military law, who, on 
active service, in camp, on the march, or at any 
frontier post specified by the Central Government by 
notification in this behalf, are employed by, or are in 
the service of, or are followers of, or accompa ny any 
portion of, His Majesty’s Forces.”  
The above provision does not operate so as to subject 
Europeans, British or foreign to Indian military law when they 
accompany His Majesty’s Forces under the circumstances 
mentioned. Such persons are however subjec t to the Army Act 
(British) when they accompany these forces on active service. Its 
operation as to non -Europeans who are not native Indian subjects 
of His Majesty is in some cases doubtful, and may depend on the 
employment of the person concerned and the locality of the 
service. Any civilian, however, who is on active service with a 
British Indian force, and is not subject to the Indian Army Act, wil l 
be subject to the Army Act ,(x) so that no one will escape entirely 
from military discipline. Further infor mation regarding civilians 
temporarily subject to the Indian Army Act will be found in 
Chapter VIII.  
11. The position of other military and semi -military 
bodies such as the Indian Territorial Force, the Indian State 
                                       
(s) I.A.A., s.2 (1)(a) (b).  
(t) For definition, see I. A.A., s.7 (2) . 
(u) For definition, see I. A.A., s.7(2A).  
(v) For definition, see I.A.A., s.7( 3). 
(w) I.A.A., s.2(1)(c). See also Chapter VIII . 
(x) A.A., ss.175 (7) (8), 176 (9) (10).   
 
  
Forces, the Military Police, the Frontie r Militia, and Levies, will be 
considered in another chapter .(y) 
                                       
(y) See Chapter VIII .  AYESHA A. MALIK, J-. I have read the judgment authored by my 
learned colleague Munib Akhtar , J. and agree with it, however, I have 
given additional reasons in a concurring judgment as the emphasis for 
me, in particular,  is the protection provided by Article 10A of the 
Constitution1 and the  enforcement of  the same . 
2. The Petitioner s challenge the vires of Section 2(1)(d) and Section 
59(4) (the impugned sections ) of the Pakistan Army Act, 195 2 (Army 
Act) being ultra vires the Constitution and also seek a declaration that 
the decision of the Federal Government dated 19.05.2023 to try 
civilians with respect to the events of 9th and 10th May, 2023 by military 
courts under the Army Act read with Official Secret s Act, 1923  (Official 
Secret s Act) as being unconstitutional.  
3. The Petitioner s contend that these Petitions raise question s of 
public importance with reference to the enforcement of fundamental 
rights as conferred by the Constitution essentially being whether 
civilians can be tried and court  martialled under the Army Act. They 
argue that civilians cannot be tried in military courts  as the purpose of 
military courts  and court  martial proceedings is to maintain discipline 
within the armed forces and further that  for any offence made out 
under the ordinary or special law , civilians should be tried by the c ourt 
of competent jurisdi ction  and not military courts . The thrust of these 
Petitions is based on the argument that the fundamental right of fair 
trial and due process as enshrined in Article 10A of the Constitution  
ensures fairness and due process in a trial for citizens,  which is not 
possible before a military court bound by the provisions  of the Army Act 
read with the Pakistan Army Act Rules, 1954  (the Rules ) as the 
principles of fair trial  are missing . Article 10A read with Article s 9 and 
175 of the Constitution , in their opin ion, guarantees civilian s a fair trial 
with an open hearing by an independent forum , ensuring a substantive 
right of appeal against any criminal charge, which forum and right of 
appeal is totally separate from the executive.  The emphasis of the 
argument being  that the trial of civilians should be before an 
independent forum established under Article 175 of the Constitution  
and that the trial of civilians before a military court violates the 
principle of separation of power being a salient feature of the 
Constitution. In the context of this argument, it was also argued that 
the provisions of the Army Act read with the Rules envision s the trial of 
a civilian  before a military court headed by an officer appointed by the 
                                                
1 The Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 2 - 
   Army authorities who is not a judge  under the supervision of any High 
Court  rather a member of the Executive . Further that  there  is no right 
of appeal before an independent forum  which  means that a trial by a 
military court does not guarantee a  fair trial  or due process as 
envisioned under Article 10A of the Constitution . They have relied upon 
Article 8(1)(2) of the Constitution to urge the point that the impugned 
sections being in derogation of fundamental right s is void. They have 
also relied upon the Mehram Ali  case2 to urge the point that the 
separation of judicial functions from executive  and legislative function s 
is required being the constitutional  command  of separation of power.  As 
to the events of 9th and 10th May, 2023 they argue that those involved 
should be tried by the ordinary or special courts of the country, as the 
case may be, because offences under the Official Secrets Act are triable 
before such courts which are established pursuant to Article 175 of the 
Constitution.  The Petitioners clarified that the y do not condone those 
responsible for their participation in the 9th and 10th May, 2023  
incidents nor do they seek their acquittal they only press for the rights 
of the detained civilians to be treated fairly, as per law, before courts of 
competent jurisd iction.   
4. The Attorney General for Pakistan (AGP) raised objections on the 
maintainability of the Petitions and defended the impugned sections as 
well as  trial of civilians by military courts  on the ground that Article 
8(3)(a) of the Constitution  makes the provisions of Article 8 (1)(2)  of the 
Constitution  inapplicable to these trials, meaning thereby, persons who 
are not members of the armed forces but carry out any act which may 
prevent members of the armed forces from the proper discharge of the ir 
duty fall within the scope of  the impugned sections  which in turn 
means that if a close and direct nexus is made between the offence and 
the armed forces then in such case s the trial of civilians in military 
courts  is permissible as per the F.B Ali  case3. So far as the challenge 
with reference to fundamental rights  especially Article 10A of the 
Constitution , the AG P argues that in the cases related to 9th and 10th 
May, 2023 , the offences made out have a direct nexus with the proper 
discharge of duties by  the members of the armed forces, hence, Article 
8(3)(a) of the Constitution  is invoked on the basis of which these 
civilians fall within the exception to Article 8(1)( 2) of the Constitution. 
With reference to the argument of due process and access to just ice, he 
                                                
2 Mehram Ali v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1998 SC 1445)  
3 Brig. (Rtd.) F.B. Ali v. The State (PLD 1975 SC 506)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 3 - 
   argues that the procedure for trial of civilians under the Army Act does 
guarantee a certain level of due process and right of hearing where  the 
ability to prepare their defence and freely communicate with witnesses 
and defending officer or legal a dvisor and that as per his understanding 
and instructions, reasoned judgments will be given in these cases and 
possibly a right of appeal may be created so as to ensure that those 
under custody who are to face military trials are not denied or deprived 
of their right to a fair trial. The AGP has stressed on the dicta laid down 
in the F.B Ali case stating that this is a binding precedent which stops 
this Court from granting any relie f to the Petitioner s especially with 
respect to the vires of the impugned sections . The AGP has also 
stressed on the fact that no new statutory regime or legal instrument 
has been created to try such citizens , that the F.B Ali  case has been in 
place for decades and further that  citizens involved in damaging , 
destroying, breaking  and entering military establishm ents and military 
installations have a close nexus with the Army Act , hence, they can be 
tried by military courts . He has also placed reliance on the Liaquat 
Hussain case4, Shahida Zahir  case5 and District Bar Association, 
Rawalpindi case6 (DBA case) in support of his contention that in certain 
circums tances civilians can be tried by  military courts .   
5. The facts leading up to the arrest of civilians and their trial before 
military courts are  the incidents of 9th and 10th May, 2023 when in 
terms of what has been stated by the AGP several military 
establishments were attacked including the Core Commander House 
Lahore, PAF Base Mianwali, ISI Establishment Civil Lines, Faisalabad, 
Sialkot Cantt ., Rawalpindi, Gujranwala Cantt., and Bannu Cantt. and 
the Peshawar Radio Station . As a consequence, FIRs were primarily 
registered under the Anti -Terrorism  Act, 1997 and  admittedly , the FIRs 
do not mention the provisions of the Army Act  or the Official Se crets 
Act. On 15.05.2023, in the Core Commander Conference,  it was decided 
that the perpetrators of 9th and 10th May will be tried in  military court s. 
This was endorsed by the National Security Meeting o n 16.05.2023 and 
then by the federal cabinet on 19.05.2023 and a resolution by the 
National A ssembly  on 22.05.2023. During  the course of the hearing, the 
AGP clarified7 that 10 3 persons have been detained  pursuant to the 
events of 9th and 10th May, 2023;  that no military trial of civilians will 
                                                
4 Sh. Liaquat  Hussain v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1999 SC 504).  
5 Mrs. Shahida Zahir Abbasi v. President of Pakistan (PLD 199 6 SC 632).  
6 District Bar Association, Rawalpindi v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2015 SC 401)  
7 Contained in the order dated 23.06.2023  of this Petition  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 4 - 
   be held during the pendency of the present Petitions ;8 that the cases of 
the detained civilians are at the investigation stage  and that no detained 
civilian will be charged with the commission of any offence that a ttracts 
capital punishment or lengthy sentence  under the Official Secrets Act.9  
 
Preliminary Objection : Maintainability of the Petition s 
6. The argument raised by the AGP is that the instant P etitions are 
not maintainable given that they do not raise any  question of public 
importance nor any question related to the enforcement of any 
fundamental right . He also states that if at all any Petitioner  is 
aggrieved the ir remedy lies under Article 199 of the Constitution  as per 
the dicta of the DBA case. His argument is that Article 184(3) confers  
original jurisdiction on the Supreme Court only if the matter relates to 
public importance for the enforcement of fundamental rights, which he 
claims is not the case  in these Petitions. So the two objections raised 
are that these Petitions are not maintainable under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution and that their remedy lies before the High Courts under 
Article 199 of the Constitution.  
7. To address th ese argument s the jurisprudence evolved by the 
Supreme Court over the years is sufficient. The first question is whether 
the issues raised are of public importance related to the enforcement of 
fundamental rights. This Court has interpreted Article 184(3) of the 
Consti tution  in the context of public importance and fundamental 
rights to mean that  both are preconditions to the exercise of power 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  which should  not be interpreted 
in a limit ed sense but in the gamut of  Constitutional ri ghts and 
liberties, such that their protection  and breach  would raise serious 
question s of public importance related to the  enforcement of 
fundamental rights and it would not be relevant that the issue arises in 
an individual’s  case or in a case pertaining to a class o r group of 
persons.10 It has also been held that m atters of public importance raise 
questions that are of interest to or affect a large body of people or the 
entire community and must be such to give rise to questio ns affecting 
the legal rights and liabilities o f the community , particularly where the 
infringement of such freedom and liberty is concerned which  would 
become a matter of public importance.11 This Court has also held that 
while interpreting Article 184(3) of the Constitution , the Court must be 
                                                
8 Order dated 26.06.2023  of this Petition  
9 Order d ated 27.06.2023  of this Petition  
10 Miss Benzir  Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1988 SC 416)  
11 Ch. Manzoor Elahi v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1975 SC 66 ),  Syed Zulfiqar Mehdi v. Pakistan International Airlines 
Corporation through M.D. Karachi and others (1998 SCMR 793)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 5 - 
   conscious of fundamental right s and directive principles of s tate policy 
so as to achieve democracy, tolerance, equity and social justice 
according to Is lam and while exercising this power the Supreme Court 
is neither dependent on an aggrieve d person  nor the traditional rule of 
locus standi .12 The issue  before the court in order to assume the 
character of public importance must be such that its decision affects 
the rights and liberties of people at large  and concept s such as political 
rights and  political justice also should be duly considered.13 Before an 
order is made under Article 184(3) of the Constitution , the c ourt must 
identify the issue that is of public importance with reference to the 
enforcement of fundamental right s where public importance is a 
question that involve the rights of the public .14 This Court has 
emphasized that matters of public importance mean s that citizens are 
not deprived of their fundamental right s which is the underlying 
objective of  Article  184(3) of the Constitution .15 The interpretation made 
to the expression public importance has been repeatedly construed  to 
mean relating to the people at large, the nation, the s tate or the 
community as a whole, meaning thereby, that in order to invoke Article 
184 (3) of the Constitution  it must be shown that the matter is of public 
importance arising from the breach of a fundamental right  which affects 
the public at large .16 In the instan t case, the P etitioners who include not 
only affected parties but also notable members of society  and concerned 
citizens  have questioned the decision of the Federal Government to try 
cases pertaining to the events of 9th and 10th May, 2023 before military 
courts. The issue pertains to the enforcement of fundamental right s of 
the citizens of Pakistan, particularly the right to be treated in 
accordance with law17 and the right to fair trial  and due process .18 The 
Petitioners also plead that the independence of the judiciary and 
separation of power being fundamental constitution al principle s must 
be maintained in order to ensure that the mandate of the Constitution  
is preserved and protected  and that people are gover ned in terms 
thereof . Hence, t hey claim that the issue s raised are  of public 
importance related to the  enforcement of fundamental right s of the 
citizens of Pakistan .  
                                                
12 Pakistan Muslim League  (N) v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2007 SC 642)  
13 PLD 2007 SC 642 (supra)  
14 Suo Motu Case No.7 of 2017 (PLD 2019 SC 318)  
15 PLD 2019 31 8 (supra)  
16 Justice Qazi Faez  Isa v. President of Pakistan (PLD 2023 SC 661)  
17 Article 4 of the Constitution  
18 Article 10A of the Constitution  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 6 - 
   8. The subject matter of these Petitions is the constitutionality and 
legality of the trial of civilians before a military court under the Army 
Act with reference to the events of 9th and 10th May, 2023.  The main 
ground of challenge is the enforcement of the fundamental right  to fair 
trial and due process as well as the right to be treated in accordance 
with law.  The vires of the impugned sections have to be considered  
against the requirements of Article 8(1)(2) of the Constitution  which 
requires any law inconsistent with or in derogation of any fundamental 
right to be void. The constitution al values of fair trial, due process, 
independence of the judiciary and access to justice have to be 
considered in the context of the trial of civilians before a military court.  
In the Liaquat Hussain  case,  the constitutionality of the Pakistan Armed 
Forces (Acting in Aid of Civil Power) Ordinance (XII of 1 998) was under 
challenge , a similar preliminary issue arose  wherein the petitioners 
alleged that their right of access to an independent and impartial 
judicial forum, a right guaranteed under the Constitution  has been 
taken away with the establishment of military courts . The petitioners 
contended that their right to an independent judiciary and right to 
access to justice is a fundamental right  guaranteed under Article 9 of 
the Constitution  as held in the Shar af Faridi  case19 and the Azizullah 
Memon  case20. This fundamental right ensures the right to be treated in 
accordance with law and to have a fair trial before an impartial and 
independent court.  The Liaquat Hussain  case concluded that the 
questions which arose before the court  being the infringement of 
fundamental right s with the establishment of military courts was of 
public importance related to the enforcement of fundamental right s, 
hence, the petitions were held  to be maintainable.  In the same context, 
the issues raised before this Court are of serious concern to the citizens 
of this country given that they directly relate to the enforcement of their 
fundamental right s being the right to fair trial and due proces s by an 
independent and impartial court as guaranteed under the Constitution . 
Consequently, the issues raised unequivocally fall within the original 
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution .  
9. The second objection is whether the Petitioners remedy lies before 
the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution. Even this 
question has been answered by this Court in numerous judgments 
being that the opening words of Article 184(3) of the Constitu tion 
                                                
19 Government of Sindh v. Sharaf Faridi (PLD 1994 SC 105 ) 
20 Govt. of Balochistan v. Aziz ullah Memon  ( PLD 1993 SC 341)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 7 - 
   without prejudice to  the provisions of Article 199  means that it is for the 
party who is affected to choose which of the two forums it wishes to 
invoke being either before the High Court or the Supreme Court .21 In 
the Shahida Zah ir case, it was stated  that the scope of jurisdiction and 
exercise of power by this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  
is not bound by the procedural trappings of Article 199 of the 
Constitution  nor its limitation for the exercise of power by the High 
Court. The pro visions of Article 184(3) of the Constitution  are self -
contained and they regulate the jurisdiction of this Court on its own 
terminology such that it is not controlled by the provisions of Article 
199 of the Constitution . The Shahida Zahir  decision also found the 
petitions filed by military officers challenging their Field General Court 
Martial under the Army Act  to be maintainable under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution . Consequently, there is no bar on the Petitioners to 
first avail the  remedy before the High Court given that the only 
requirement to determine the maintainability of the Petitions before this 
Court is to consider whether the questions raised are of public 
importance and with reference to the enforcement of fundamental 
rights. The plain language of Article 184(3) of the Constitution  shows 
that it is open ended  as it does not stipulate who has the right to move 
the Supreme Court nor does it require that the enforcement of 
fundamental right s must relate to a large group or clas s of persons 
rather the only requirement is that the test of public importance for the 
enforcement of fundamental right s be met with.22 The judgments of this 
Court in fact show that in cases where the life and liberty of citizens are 
adversely affected this Court has exercised jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution . Even otherwise, if the arguments of the AGP 
were to be acce pted it would be mean that this Court would have to 
construe Article 184(3) of the Constitution  in a narrow sense 
recognizing that in the first instance a petitioner should avail the 
remedy before the High Court. It will also negate  the established 
jurisdi ction of th is Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  which 
has wide and vast powers when it comes to question s of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement of fundamental right s as 
conferred by the Constitution .23 The Supreme Court is the guardian of 
the Constitution and the fundamental rights contained therein. In 
terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution, this Court enjoys original 
                                                
21 PLD 1988 SC 416 ibid 
22 PLD 1988 SC 416 ibid 
23 Imran Ahma d Khan Niazi v. Mian  Muhammad Nawaz Sharif (PLD 2017 SC 265)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 8 - 
   jurisdiction to protect and enforce fundamental rights, where the 
enforcement is of public importance, meaning that a petitioner can 
come directly to this Court if the issues raised meet the two conditions 
set out in Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Consequently as t he 
questions raised in these Petitions are without a doubt matters of 
public importance related to the enforcement of fundamental right s 
these Petitions are maintainable.  
The Army Act and the Official Secrets Act  
10. The Army Act is the l aw relating to the Pakistan Army and 
Section 2  thereof  prescribes mainly for persons  who are subject to the 
Act. The Act relates to army personnel however Sub-section (d) was 
added  to Section 2 of the Army Act24, and added persons who are 
otherwise not subject to the Army Act , making them subject to the Act. 
The said Sub-Section reads as f ollows:  
 
“(d) persons not otherwise subject to this Act, who  are  
accused of - 
 
(i) seducing or attempting to seduce any person 
subject to this Act from his duty or allegiance to 
Government, or  
 
(ii) having committed, in relation to any work of 
defence, arsenal, naval, military or air force 
establishment or station, ship or aircraft or 
otherwise in relation to the naval, military or air 
force affairs of Pakistan, an offence under  the 
Official Secrets A ct, 1923.”  
(emphasis added ) 
 
At the same time, Section 59(4) of the Army Act was also added25 to 
also include persons not otherwise subject to the Army Act  making 
them liable to face military trial for the offences set out in Section  2(d) 
of the Army Act . Section 59 of the Army Act is reproduced as below:  
“Civil Offences. -- (1) Subject to the provisions of sub -
section (2), any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in or beyond Pakistan commits any civil offence 
shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this 
Act and, if charged therewith under this section, sha ll 
be liable to be [dealt with under this Act], and, on 
conviction, to be punished as follows, that is to say, -- 
 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable 
under any law in force in Pakistan with death or with 
[imprisonment for life], he shall be lia ble to suffer any 
punishment assigned for the offence by the aforesaid 
law or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned; and  
 
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any 
punishment assigned for the offence by the law in force 
                                                
24 By Section 2 of the Defence Services Laws Amendment Ordinance, 1967  (Ordinance No.III of 1967)  
25 By Section 2 of the Defence Services Laws (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1967 (IV of 1967)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 9 - 
   in Pakistan, o r rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years or such less punishment as is 
in this Act mentioned [Provided that, where the offence 
of which any such person is found guilty is an offence 
liable to hadd  under any Islamic law, the sentenc e 
awarded to him shall be that provided for the offence in 
that law.  
 
(2)  A person subject to this Act who commits an 
offence of murder against a person not subject to this 
Act [or the Pakistan Air Force Act, 1953 (VI of 1953)], or 
to the [Pakistan Navy Ordinance, 1961 (XXXV of 1961)], 
or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder 
against such a person or of [ Zina or Zina -bil-Jabr] in 
relation to such a person, shall not be deemed to be 
guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be 
[dealt with under this Act] unless he commits any of the 
said offences, -- 
 
(a) while on active service, or  
(b)  at any place outside Pakistan, or  
(c)  at a frontier post specified by the [Federal 
Government] by notification in this behalf.  
 
(3) The powers of a court martial [or an officer 
exercising authority under section 23] to charge and 
punish any person under this section shall not be 
affected by reason of the fact that the civil offence with 
which such person is charged is also an offen ce against 
this Act.  
 
[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or 
in any other law for the time being in force a person 
who becomes subject to this Act by reason of his being 
accused of an offence mentioned in clause (d) of sub -
section (1) of s ection 2 shall be liable to be tried or 
otherwise dealt with under this Act for such offence as 
if the offence were an offence against this Act and were 
committed at a time when such person was subject to 
this Act; and the provisions of this section shall have 
effect accordingly] .” 
(emphasis added ) 
 
11. The Army Act  regulates  matters concerning the terms of service of 
army personnel such as appointment, enrolment, termination, 
retirement and release. It also deals with offences , the mode and 
manner of arrest and proceedings before the trial, kinds of court 
martial  and punishments , pardons and remissions . There is a range of 
offences provided under Chapter 5 of the Army Act which regulates the 
duty and discipline of army personnel and  also deals with 
consequences where civil offences are committed. The Army Act 
provides the legal framework for a military justice system within which 
army personnel can be tried and convicted of specific offences including 
those  related to the discharge o f their duty and discipline. However,  the 
dispute  at hand is that the Army Act includes a category of persons 
who are otherwise not subject to the Army Act  which essentially means Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 10 - 
   civilians  and subjects them to a military trial for certain offences. This 
Act in its original form26 did not extend to civilians . In 1967 , the law 
was amended during the tenure of Field Marshal Mohammad Ayub 
Khan such that purportedly it would include civilians.  By inserting 
Section 2(1)( d), the scope of the Army Act was expanded to include 
persons not otherwise subject to the Act , accused of specific  offences 
contained in the definition  itself. The first offence is related to seducing 
or attempting to seduce any person subject to the Army Act and the 
second offence is  under the Official Secrets Act  but limited to offences 
made out where it is committed in relation to any work  of defence, 
arsenal, navy, military or air force establishment  or otherwise in 
relation to the navy, military or air  force. So it’s not every offence under 
the Official Secrets Act that would require  a civilian to face military trial 
but only if it is in terms of the description contained in the definition 
itself. Here lies the connection between the Army Act, military trial of 
civilians and the Official Secrets Act.  The vires of this  section was first 
challenged before this Court in the F.B Ali case which declared the 
section to be valid and legal . The question of  civilians being tried by 
military courts was consider ed again  when  in 1998, the Pakistan Armed 
Forces (Acting in Aid of Civil Powers ) Ordinance, 1998 ( 1998 Ordinance ) 
was promulgated which allowed the trial of civilians  before military 
courts  charged with certain offences punishable under the Anti -
Terrorism  Act, 1997, Pakistan Arms Ordinance , 1965 and the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860. Under the 1998 Ordinance, the word “ Court ” was 
defined to include  trials under the Army Act, Pakistan Air Force Act, 
1953 and Pakistan Naval Ordinance, 1961. Section 4(1) of the said 
Ordinance stated that a court convened under Section 3 shall have the 
power to try any person including a person who is not a member of the 
armed forces who has committed an offence specified to the schedule to 
this Ordinance in any area in which armed forces are acting in aid of civil 
powers . The 1998 Ordinance, was challenged for establishing military 
courts which could try civilians and was declared unconstitutional in 
the Liaquat Hussain case. The next challenge to the trial of civilians by 
military courts came when t he Twenty -First Amendment to the 
Constitution27 (Constitutional Amendment)  was introduced which 
extended the jurisdiction of military courts  over civilians by amending 
the Army Act  where  Section 2(1)(d)(iii) was inserted which provided that 
                                                
26 Promulgated on 13th May, 1952 and notified in the official gazette dated 14.05.1952  
27 The Constitution (Twenty -First Amendment) Act, 2015   Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 11 - 
   persons not otherwise subject to the Act , accused of being members of 
terrorist groups or organizations and raising arms or waging war 
against Pakistan or attacking the armed forces  can be tried by military 
courts . This Constitutional Amendment was challenged and upheld in 
the DBA case.  
12. The second statue is the Official Secrets Act which is the law that 
prescribes the offences for which the detained civilians will be tried. The 
Official Secrets Act deals with matters related to official secrets  and 
prohibited areas , its protection, offences and punishments ther eof. The 
Act defines prohibited places in Section 2 and specifies penalties for the 
unauthorized entry in a prohibited pl ace, unauthorized  possession, 
communication or disclosure of an official secret. The punishments 
extend from two years to death penalty under this Act. The Official 
Secrets Act is relevant for the purposes of subjecting civilians  to the 
Army Act for commit ting an offence under the Official Secrets Act in 
relation to navy, military or air force establishments  in relation to any 
work of defence, arsenal, or station, ship or aircraft or otherwise in 
relation to the naval, military or air force affairs of Pakis tan.  
13. The gist of the AGP’s argument is that both the Army Act and the 
Official Secret s Act predate the Constitution ; that the impugned 
sections  have been challenged previously and have been upheld  by this 
Court  which means that the matter in issue has been settled and as 
such no  ground is available to the Petitioner s to challenge the vires of 
the impugned sections. He explained that t he reason that these 
sections have  withstood the test  of time is be cause civilians who 
interfere  with the discharge of duties of members of the armed forces 
and interfere with the security , defence , sovereignty and sanctity of 
Pakistan  must be tried under the Army Act. In such cases, the 
constitutional protection given to funda mental rights under Article 
8(1)(2)  of the Constitution  is not  available , hence , the Petitioner s’ 
argument  that the impugned sections are in violation of fundamental 
rights  provided in the Constitution  is misconceived and contrary to the 
constitutional mandate . In terms of what has been argued, th ere are 
essentially three questions that need to be considered ; first  whether the 
vires of the impugned sections are unconstitutional as they violate the 
fundamental right to fair trial and due process, and the right to an 
independent judiciary  for civilians ; secondly  that the protection of 
Article 8 (1)(2)  of the Constitution is not availabl e to civilians if they fall 
under Article 8(3)(a)  of the Constitution  as the offences relate to the Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 12 - 
   discharge of duties by members of the armed forces ; and thirdly that 
the F.B Ali  case upheld the impugned  sections which is a binding 
precedent  and the present bench cannot have a different view from the 
F.B Ali  case given that the F.B Ali case was delivered by a five member 
bench  and the strength of the existing bench is also five members . 
Adding to this ground is the emphasis on the fact that t he F.B Ali  case 
has not been revisited rather has been applied and followed by this 
Court over the years in several judgments  consequently, the impugned 
sections are constitutional and the trial of civilians does not contravene 
any fundamental right .  
The F.B Ali case  
14. In order to address these arguments, it is appropriate to first 
examine the F.B Ali  case.  A writ petition was filed by two retired army 
officers , who were court  martial led under the provisions of Section 
2(1)(d) of the Army Act , challenging the court martial on the ground 
that they were no longer subject to the Army Act  and could not be tried 
or convicted under the Army Act . Their case was that the Army Act  
applied to persons who are subject to the discipline of the army and 
that they were no longer subject to the discipline of the army given their 
retirement . The argument was that persons who retired  or were 
released or discharged from the army are no longer subject to the Army 
Act. They also challenged the vires of Section 2(1)(d) on the ground that 
it was violative of fundamental rights No.128 and 1529 guaranteed by the 
Constitution of 196230, therefore, void insofar as they were inconsistent 
with the said fundamental rights . The arguments advanced  were that 
the impugned secti on was discriminatory as it created a category of 
citizens who were deprived of their fundamental rights , thereby giving  
them differential treatment which per se  was discriminatory . They also 
stated that citizens are entitled to a judicial trial and that pursuant to 
the impugned section a particular group of citizens accused of seducing 
or attempting to seduce members of the armed forces  were subjected to 
differential treatment as they had to face a military trial , hence, 
discriminatory.   
15. A five member  bench of t his C ourt concluded  that the intent of 
Section 2(1)(d)  of the Army Act is that even retired army personnel 
being civilians can be made subject to the Army Act  and therefore can 
be tried by military courts for an offence which has nexus with the 
                                                
28 Security of Person.  No person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law.  
29 Equality of citizens . All citizens ar e equal before law and are entitled to equal protection of law.   
30 Constitution of Republic of Pakistan, 1962  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 13 - 
   armed forces and the defence of Pakistan. The Court elaborated that 
the nexus in the F.B Ali  case was close and direct as the two retired 
officers were accused of seducing or attempting to seduce person s 
subject to the Army  Act from their duty . On the issue of discrimination, 
the C ourt concluded that equal protection of laws does not mean that 
every citizen must be treated in the same manner. Similarly placed 
persons should be treated in the same manner and a rational  
classification within a class of people can be upheld if th at classification 
is justifiable and reasonable . To the extent that a classification was 
created with reference to retired army officers, the Court concluded that 
this was a valid classification, having rational basis and further that  as 
there is no possibility of picking and choosing a particular person to be 
tried under military courts leaving others to be tried under the general 
law, hence, there is no issue of discrimination. Consequently, the 
classification was neither unreasonable nor arbitrary, nor 
discriminatory aimed simply to prevent the subversion of the loyalty of 
members of the armed forces.   
16. The F.B Ali  case holds that to make a civilian subject to the Army 
Act there must be a nexus of the offence with the armed forces  which 
nexus must be close and direct. The petitioners before the court were 
retired army officers, who were accused of conspiring to wage war 
against Pakistan  and seducing army office rs into joining this 
conspiracy , hence, the court held that the nexus if any was provided by 
the accusation itself and no other nexus was necessary . The court 
clarified  that the allegation was intimately  linked with the defence of 
Pakistan  making the nexus substantially and directly connected with 
the offence . The reasoning that prevailed with the court at the tim e was 
that the subversion of  loyalty of members of the defence services of 
Pakistan is critical and cannot be condoned as it is e ssential to the very 
function of the army . As to the distinction between serving members of 
the army and retired members that disappeared when it came to facing 
charges of seducing persons subject to the Army Act from their  duty 
because the retired army personnel were made subject to the Army Act  
for the time they were in service and on active duty  which is why the 
court declared that the law was not discriminatory in its application as 
the criminal charge was equally applicable to retired  persons  for the 
time they were subject to the Army Act .  
17. Accordingly , the F.B Ali  case established the nexus test , which 
had to be applied when a person not subject to the Army Act , which Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 14 - 
   could be a civilian, is made subject to the Army Act such that the 
offence for which the civilian was charged must have a close nexus with 
the armed forces and the defence of Pakistan, and where no nexus was 
made out there could be no military trial of such persons  i.e. civilians. 
While the nexus test set the standard for its application, the F.B Ali  
case also upheld Section 2(1)(d) of the Army Act  as being constitutional 
and valid law because Parliament was competent to make such law as 
it came directly within Item  1 of the Third Schedule of the Constitution  
of 1962 . This Court concluded that the impugned section being section 
2(1)(d) of the Army Act  was valid law as it fell within the legislative 
competence of Parliament given that the subject matter was listed in 
Items 1, 48 and 49 of the Third Schedule31 to the Constitution  of 1962 . 
The F.B Ali  court held that the Army Act  was a central act which could 
be amended by the central legislature which had the power to enlarge 
or restrict its operation by an amendment and it could introduce a 
specific category of persons who are accused of certain offences in 
relation to defence personnel or defence installations for the purpose s 
of military trial because the pith and substance of the Army Act  was to 
maintain loyalty within defence personnel and protect them from being 
subverted by outside influence.  Based on these findings with reference 
to legislative competence , the AGP states  that the present bench, 
comprising of five judges, cannot hold a different view from the F.B Ali  
case, as that too was delivered by five judges of this Court.     
18. When seen i n the context of the facts and circumstances  before 
us, the F.B Ali  case is distinguishable on three important grounds ; first 
with respect to the enforcement of fundamental rights . The F.B Ali case 
challenged the vires of Section 2(1)(d)  of the Army Act to be violative of 
fundamental right s 1 and 15  of the Constitution of 1962 , which is the 
right to life and the right that all citizens be treated equally . The 
challenge today is with respect to the right to fair trial and due process 
as contained in Article 10A of the Constitution  which is a specific and 
distinctive challenge.  At the time when the F.B Ali  case was decided 
there was no fundamental right to fair trial under the Constitution  of 
1962 , hence , the question of its enforcement did not arise . Accordingly, 
the F.B Ali  case did not consider the vires of Section 2(1)(d)  or Section 
59(4) of the Army Act  in the context of fair trial or due process and 
limited its decision to the extent of Article 15 of the Constitution of 
                                                
31 The Third Schedule pertains to matters with respect to which the Central Legislature has exclusive p ower to make laws ; 
 Item 1 relates to Defe nce of Pakistan, Item 48 relates to matters which fall within the legislative competence of the Cent ral 
Legislature or relate to the Cent re and Item 49 relates to matte rs incidental or ancillary to any matter enumerated in this Schedule.   
 Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 15 - 
   1962 . The s econd  ground of distinction is that in the F.B Ali  case Article 
6(3) of the Constitution of 1962  (the equivalent to Article 8(3) of the 
Constitution)  was never considered as the Court concluded that it was 
irrelevant given that no fundamental right was violated. However,  
interestingly for the sake of completing its own understanding th is 
Court concluded that in fact Article 6(3) of the Constitution of 1962 was 
not applicable because it only protects laws relating to members of the 
armed forces charged with the maintenance of public order to ensure 
proper discharge of their duties and discipline amongst them . The 
Court went on to hold that s uch an ouster clause must be interpreted 
strictly and unless the law comes within the four corners of Article 6(3)  
of the Constitution of 1962  it cannot be argued that on the basis of the 
said Article that a person can be deprived of their fundamental right s. 
Hence, F.B Ali  ruled that Article 6(3) of the Constitution  of 1962 was 
not applicable because the said Article would only apply to laws relating 
to the maintenance of discipline or discharge of dut ies of members of 
forces.  The third distinguishing feature of the F.B Ali  case is that the 
petition was filed with reference to retired army officers on the ground  
of discrimination as a violation of their fundamental right  to being 
treated equally.  The F.B Ali  case clearly states that the provisions of 
Section 2(1)(d) would apply to retired army officers, for the period when 
they were serving, meaning that even though they have retired from 
service, they are still liable and subject to the Army Act for t he relevant 
period when they were serving and were on active duty.  The reason 
clearly being that at the time these retired army officers were subject to  
the Army Act . In this context, the F.B Ali  decision, upholds the law and 
does not find any breach of an y fundamental right because they were 
retired army officers who were made responsible for their acts at the 
time they we re serving  and were subject to the Army Act . This is 
probably wh y it was possible for this Court to conclude that the lack of 
a reasoned  judgment in a court martial was not relevant to the rights of 
the accused. This is not the case or the challenge before us today . The 
Constitution specifically guarantees and protects the fundamental right 
to fair trial as well as the right to an independent judiciary and so the 
context of the challenge has changed from F.B Ali  and as have the 
circumstances in which F.B. Ali  was decided.  At the time it was retired 
army officers who were being made subject to the Army Act post-
retirement whereas today the challenge is specifically of civilians who 
are to face a military trial.  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 16 - 
     Fundamental Right s and  Article 10A   
“10A. For  the determination of his civil rights and 
obligations or in any criminal charge against him a 
person shall be entitled to a fair trial and due process.”  
 
19. Fundamental Right s as guaranteed under the Constitution  
safeguard  citizens or persons, as the cas e may be , from government 
action such that no law, custom or usage can be made in derogation of 
or in violation of any fundamental right . In the event that a law, custom 
or usage is violative of a fundamental right  a person has the right to 
challenge the s ame before a court of competent jurisdiction and  seek a 
declaration that the said law is void. This in turn means that 
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution  cannot be taken 
away by ordinary law . That would in fact defeat the very purpose of a 
constitutional guarantee.  Furthermore, in terms of Article 8(5) of the 
Constitution , fundamental right s cannot be suspended save as provided 
by the Constitution . The rigors of Article 8(5) of the Constitution  are s o 
hard-hitting  that it is only in terms of an express  constitutional 
command that fundamental right s can be suspended  which means that 
fundamental rights are not mere accessories rather they are there for 
the protection of the people, worn like an armour by the people, being 
an intri nsic part of their being that remains impervious regardless of 
the circumstances and challenges.  So, this raises the question as to 
how citizens can be subjected to a military trial when they are protected 
by fundamental rights at all times.  
20. With the incorporation of Article 10A in the Constitution  by the 
Eighteenth Amendment in 201032, the right to fair trial and due process 
has become a fundamental right  for every person  not only in judicial 
proceedings  but also in administrative proceedings . The significance of 
this fundamental right  has been recognized by this Court time and 
again as echoed  in a recent judgment by this Court that n o matter how 
heinous the crime, the constitutional guarantee of fair trial under 
Article 10A  of the Constitution  cannot be taken away from the accused. 
This Court has repeatedly emphasized the importance of Article 10A by 
stating that i t is pertinent to underline that the principles of fair trial 
are now guaranteed as a fundamental right under Article 10A of the 
Constitution and are  to be read as an integral part of every sub -
constitutional legislative instrument that deals with determination of 
civil rights and obligations of, or  criminal charge against, any person.33 
                                                
32 The Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010  promulgated on 20th April, 2010  
33 Naveed Asghar v. The State (PLD 2021 SC 600)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 17 - 
   In another case , this Court has held that the rig ht to fair trial  is a 
cardinal requirement of the rule of law and if an accused cannot be 
tried fairly , he should not be tried at all . This Court has declared that 
Article 10A  of the Constitution  is an independent fundamental right 
which is to receive liberal and progressive interpretation and 
enforcement.34 This Court has also held that by way of Article 10A of 
the Constitution  the right to fair trial has been raised to a higher 
pedestal and any l aw, custom or usage inconsistent with this right 
would be void by virtue of Article 8 of the Constitution . That the right to 
fair trial is a basic right recognized  over the years as fundamental , well 
entrenched in our jurisprudence, having constitutional g uarantee with 
the insertion of Article 10A of the Constitution .35 The basic ingredient s 
for a fair trial in the light of Article 10A  of the Constitution  as 
enumerated by this Court are that there should be an independent, 
impartial court, a fair and public hearing, right of counsel , right to 
information of the offence charged for with an opportunity to cross -
examine witnesses and an opportunity to produce evidence . It also 
includes the right to a reasoned judgment and finally the remedy of 
appeal .36 In fact , even before the insertion of Article 10A of the 
Constitution  the right to fair trial and due process were recognized such 
that the right to  one appeal before an independent forum was declared 
as a necessary  right that must be available to a person .37 Further u nder 
Article 4 of the Constitution  being the right to be treated in accordance 
with law, the right of  access to justice,  the right of  fair trial and the 
right to due process fro m an independent forum  have been recognized38 
as fundamental right s eve n prior to the insertion of Article 10A of the 
Constitution . So for the determination of either civil rights or a criminal 
charge, the right to a fair trial and due process is imperative  and 
absolutely necessary . By incorporating Article 10A  in Part II Chapter I 
of the Constitution  fair trial and due process are  indispensable  for every 
person and it cannot be violated, interfered with or breached by any 
person including the government.   
21. There is another aspect of this right to fair trial.  One of the most 
compelling  human values recognized as a fundamental principle is the 
right of human dignity which actually constitutes the basis of all 
                                                
34 Chairman NAB v. Nasrullah (PLD 2022 SC 497)  
35 Suo Motu Case No.4 of 2010 (PLD 2012 SC 553)  
36 Muhammad Bashir v. Rukhsar (PLD 2020  SC 334), Allah Dino Khan v. Election Commission of Pakistan (PLD 2020 SC 591)  
37 Pakistan  through Secretary, Ministry of Defence  v. The General Public (PLD 1989 SC 6), Muhammad Mubeen -us-Salam and 
others v. Federation of Pakistan  through Secretary, Ministry of Defence and others  (PLD 2006 SC 602)  
38 Aftab Shahban Mirani v. President of Pakistan (1998 SCMR 1863) and New Jubilee Insurance Company Ltd . Karachi v. National 
Bank of Pakistan, Karachi (PLD 1999 SC 1126)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 18 - 
   fundamental right s and encapsulates the right to fair trial, justice and 
equality.  When this fundamental principle is declared as a fundamental 
right its significance increases as it signifies the manner in which 
rights, norms, state practices and the law should be implemented and  
prescribes  the limits.  The State’s duty to secure human dignity is the 
lynchpin as it forms the bedrock upon which all fundamental rights 
stand . Fundamental right to dignity acts  as a compass  that orients 
people and state functionaries in all their actions.39 Consequently, as a 
fundamental right  it becomes a mat ter of judicial interpretation  to 
determine whether executive decisions or legislative enactment have 
encroached upon th ese rights . It places a positive obligation on the 
State and requires it at all times that it protects  and enforce the rights 
of the peo ple so as to maintain their dignity . The right to dignity lends 
real meaning to human rights as it is inherent in every right protected 
by international human rights law.40 Therefore, when the right to fair 
trial and due process is invoked, so is the right to dignity which right 
under the Constitution  is inviolable.41 Article 10A of the Constitution  
fortifies this right to fair trial and due process which is an essential 
requirement of human dignity.   
22. The right to fair trial  and due process are also important 
requirement s of the rule of law .42 It ensure s that the individual’s right 
to life, liberty and freedom prevails  and that everyone enjoys the 
protection of law such that undue interference by the State is 
prevented . The Constitution  mandates  the protection and enforcement  
of Article 10A of the Constitution  which in turn guarantees that the 
principles of fairness in the proces s and procedure will be followed for 
all parties so that they can establish their case . This right safeguards 
the dignity of a person even if prosecuted for a crime or facing a dispute 
before a court.  In fact , the right to fair trial is sine qua non  for the right 
to human dignity which must be preserved. Hence , the ultimate 
objective is to ensure fairness in the process and proceedings and 
fairness itself being an evolving concept cannot be confined to any 
definition or frozen at any moment , with cer tain fundamentals which 
operate as constant s. The independence of the decision maker and their 
impartiality is one such constant . A reasoned judgment before a judicial 
forum is another constant  without which the right to fair trial  would 
                                                
39 Human Dignity in  National Constitution: Functions, Promises and Dangers by Doron Shulztiner and Guy E. Carmi, publish ed in 
American Journal of Comparative Law, Spring 2014, Vol. 62 No.2  
40 Capital punishment and the implementation of the safeguards guaranteeing protection of the rights of those facing the death 
penalty , UN document A/HRC/30/18(2015), Para -5 
41 Article 14 of the Constitution  
42 The Rule of Law by Tom Bingham, Published by the Penguin Groups 2011  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 19 - 
   become meaningless . The right of an independent forum of appeal is 
another relevant constant which ensures fair trial.  These rights were 
recognized in the Azizullah Memon  case as being fundamental right s 
where the legislature cannot frame law which can prevent the right of 
access to the courts of law and justice  for any person . Separation of the 
judiciary from the executive was held to be a key command of the 
Constitution  where the mandate of Article 175 of the Constitution  must 
be obeyed and implemented and any laxity will amount to violation of a 
constitution al provision .     
23. Fair trial standards have global recognition and acceptability as 
being the minimum  requirement for a person facing a trial.  These have 
now become global truths accepted as being fundamental to hum an 
dignity and life. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights43 
prescribes in Article 10 that everyone is entitled to fair and public 
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal for the determination 
of rights and obligations and against any criminal charge.  The various 
elements of fair trial under the ICCP R44 also found in the UDHR include 
rights such as access to justice, public hearing, right to representation, 
to be able  communicate privately,  freely  and confi dentially with 
counsel . The right to call witnesses, cross -examine them and to get a 
reasoned judgment against which the right of appeal is available are 
also considered mandatory  without which this fundamental guarantee 
of fair trial, rule of law and due process becomes illusi onary. The 
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  also provides that a 
fair and public hearing in civil and criminal cases by an independent 
and impartial tribunal is fundamental to the right of fair trial  which 
includes the right to be informed of the  charge against him, the right to 
defence, to legal assistance and to the presumption of innocence in a 
criminal case.45 The right to receive a fair trial is also recognized in the 
First Protocol of the Geneva Convention.46 So the right to fair trial not 
only enjoys constitutional safeguard s being a fundamental right  but it 
is also embodied in Pakistan’s international commitments  which must 
be adhered to.   
24. An important feature of fair trial is access to an independent 
judicial for um, and the separation of powers of the judicia ry from the 
                                                
43 Pakistan became a signatory to the UDHR in 1948  
44 The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which Pakistan ratified on 23.06.2010. Article  14 provides that for the  
determination of any criminal charge the minimum guarantee is that a person be able to defend themse lf through legal assistan ce 
of their own choosing and further that they should have the right to have the conviction reviewed by a higher court according to  
law. 
45 Article 6 of the ECHR  
46 Protocol 1 is a 1977 Amendment to the Geneva Convention with reference  to the protection of civili an victims in international 
wars and armed conflict.  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 20 - 
   executive and the legislat ure. The independence of the judiciary should 
be guaranteed by the State as enshrined in the Constitution, and 
respected and observed by the State .47 Judicial i ndependence is a lso a  
pre-requisite to the rule of law, which requires judicial forums to be 
independent, impartial and maintain integrity. Furthermore, the 
independence of the judiciary requires that judicial forums have 
exclusive jurisdiction over issues  that require adjudication in courts. In 
this context, instances  of military tribunals h earing cases  of civilians  
have been frowned upon by the H uman Rights Committee in general 
but especially  so due to  the procedures f ollowed by the military 
courts .48  
25. In the context of the aforementioned the fact that Article 10A of 
the Constitution  was not a fundamental right at the time of  the F.B Ali  
case is not only relevant but a significant distinguishing factor . This 
right is categoric and unqualified  and fundamental to the existence of 
any person who is to face trial . In the F.B Ali  case, this Court held with 
reference to the concept of fair trial that courts cannot strike down a 
law on any such ethical notion  nor can the courts act on the basis of a 
philosophical concept  of law. With the inclusion of Article 10A  of the 
Constitution , the concept of fair trial and due process are now neither 
ethical not ions nor philosophical concepts . It is a fundamental right 
guaranteed by the Constitution  which must be adhered to . Hence 
although at the time, in the context of the challenge raised this Court 
concluded that civilians can be tried by military courts, the findings 
were based on the challenge to the vires of Section 2(1)( d) of the Army 
Act on the ground of legislative competence and violation of the equal 
protection right under Article 15 of the Constitution of 1962. The F.B 
Ali case did not consider the challenge in the context of the 
fundamental right to fair trial and d ue process which is a different and 
distinct challenge.   
26. The argument of the AGP that the F.B Ali  case rejected the 
argument that trial of civilians was arbitrary and violative of the right to 
equality or that trial s under the Army Act  fulfil the criteria of fair trial is 
misconceived as it was not seen in the context of the  fundamental right  
to fair trial  and due process . The standard now is of a fundamental 
right which in turn confers the right to challenge a law which is in 
derogation of th e fundamental right  with the added protection that 
                                                
47 Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary , OHCHR  adopted  at the 7th United Nations Congress on the Prevention of 
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders  
48 Report 2017 and 2022 Human Right Practices: Lebanon : A Crisis by Design - Mid-Term UPR Report 2023  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 21 - 
   fundamental rights cannot be suspended save as provided under the 
Constitution. Furthermore, although the AGP took us through the 
Rules to show that some elements of fair trial and due process do exist 
under the Army Act , this argument cannot sustain as the very concept 
of a civilian facing  military trial  is violative of the fundamental right of 
fair tri al and due process . This is evident from the facts of this case as 
the names of the detained civilians, facing military trial were revealed to 
the Court for the first time, pursuant to an order of this Court dated 
22.06.2023 on 23.06.2023 vide CMA No.5327/2023. The AGP then 
sought time to see if these names could be made public. In the order of 
21.07.2023, the AGP gave certain assurances to the Court with respect 
to the manner in which civilians were being  detained and tried before 
military courts. This included the fact that  evidence shall be recorded at 
the trial of accused civilians under the law and procedure applicable to 
the criminal courts of ordinary jurisdiction and that the judgment 
delivered in the trial shall be supported by reasons.  The AGP again 
sought time to se ek instructions of whether the right of appeal could be 
given before an independent forum.49 These assurances and statements 
by the AGP in themselves reflect the fact that the concept of fair trial 
and due process  being a fundamental right  is not inherent i n the 
proceedings for the benefit of civilians  before a military court . However, 
notwithstanding the same, the AGP also highlighted some aspects of 
the Rules to further assure the Court of the fact that elements of  due 
process and fair trial do  exist within the military justice system as 
under the Army Act  and the Rules. On examining the Rules, it appears 
that the presiding officers in a military court are serving members of the 
military who in terms of Rule 51 of the Rules  are not required to g ive a 
reasoned judgment rather merely record a finding of “guilty or not 
guilty”  against every charge . There is no independent right o f appeal 
against such a verdict  as Section 133 of the  Army Act provides that no 
remedy of appeal shall lie against any decision of a court martial save 
as provided under the Army Act . Section 133B prescribes for an appeal 
to the court of appeals consisting of the Chief of Army S taff or one or 
more officers designated by him or a Judge Advocate who is also a 
member of the a rmed forces. Rule 26  permits the suspension of the 
rules on the grounds of military exigencies or the necessities of 
discipline which means that where in the opinion of the presiding 
officer convening a court martial or a senior officer on the spot, that 
                                                
49 Order dated 21.07.2023  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 22 - 
   military exigencies or discipline render s it impossible or inexpedient to 
observe some of the Rules then the operation of the Rules can be 
suspended  which in turn means that any limited rights under the Rules 
such as Rule 13(5), being the right to cross -examine  any witness, or 
Rule 23 (1) being the right of preparation of  a defence by the accused 
which includes the right to free communication with witness or friend 
or legal advisor  can be suspended . These are but some of the more 
glaring issues that arise with in a military trial, from which it is clear 
that there is a lack of impartiality and independence within a military 
trial and the concept of fairness and due process is missing from the 
procedure. The basic principle of the independence of the judiciary is 
that everyone is entitled to be tried by the ordinary cou rts or  tribunals 
established  under the law and the trial of a citizen by a military court 
for an offence which can be tried before the courts established under 
Article 175 of the Constit ution offends the principles of independence of 
the judicia ry and of fair trial. One of the arguments raised by the AGP 
is that there are special circumstances in which military trials of 
civilians  are necessary and that there are  certain offences which should 
be tried in military courts due to their gravity . He has asserted that this 
has been the case since 1967 when the impugned sections were 
inserted in the Army Act and civilians have been tried by military 
courts. In the contex t of this argument what has been done in the past 
is not in issue before the Court . Further , these efforts by the AGP do 
not establish that civilians  trial before a military court meets the 
constitutional  standards of fair trial and due process. The question 
raised in these Petitions are  whether the impugned sections are 
inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental right to fair trial 
and due process contained in Article 10A of the Constitution , which 
includes the right to an independent judiciary under Article 175 of the 
Constitution . In terms of the constitutional guarantee of fair trial and 
due process, the trial of a civilian before a mi litary court does not  meet 
the requirements of  this fundamental right .  
27. The military justice system is a distinct system that applies to 
members of armed forces to preserve discipline and good order . Hence, 
they are subjected to a different set of laws, rules and procedures which 
ensures internal discipline and operational effectiveness . The purpo se 
of a separate military justice system is to allow the armed forces to deal 
with matters pertaining directly to the discipline, efficiency and morale 
of the military effectively, swiftly and severely so as to ensure control Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 23 - 
   over military personnel. Milit ary jurisdiction covers members of the 
armed forces and includes  matters related to their service which 
ensures the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of 
discipline amongst them . This is precisely why the Constitution  brings 
such matte rs under the exception to Article 8(1)(2) in the form of Article 
8(3)(a)  of the Constitution  which excludes the operation of fundamental 
rights when it relates to the members of the armed forces  who are 
charged with the maintenance of public order  in the discharge of their 
duties and the maintenance of discipline amongst them. Military trials 
of civilians  on the other hand  totally negates the requirement of an 
independent and impartial judicial forum, hence, it compromises the 
right to fair trial. C itizens  enjoy the protection of fundamental rights 
under the Constitution and are assured that they will be treated as per 
law, such that their life and dignity is protected. At the same time, the 
Constitution commands the legislature  to not make law which takes 
away any fundamental right  protected under the Constitution. In this 
context, the requirement of the Federal Government to try civilians 
before military courts totally defies the constitutional comm and and is 
in derogation to the rights contained in Articles 4, 9, 10A, 14 read with 
Article 175 of the Constitution.  
28. Now to examine t he A GP’s argument  that in exceptional cases 
citizens will fall in the exception to Article 8(1)(2) of the Constitution  
being Article 8(3 )(a) and  can be deprived of their fundamental rights . 
The basic argument is that persons who prevent members of the armed 
forces from the discharge  of their  duty fall within the ambit of Article 
8(3)(a) of the C onstitution , and the issue of  the violation of their 
fundamental right s does not arise. In order to appreciate the argument 
of the AGP, it is relevant to consider the applicability of Article 8(3)(a) of 
the Constitution.  Article 8 of the Constitution is reproduced below:   
  Article 8 of the Constitution      
“8. (1) Any law, or any custom or usage having 
the force of law, in so far as it is inconsistent with the 
rights conferred by this Chapter, shall, to the extent of 
such inconsistency, be void.  
  (2) The State shall not make any law which 
takes away or abr idges the rights so conferred and any 
law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the 
extent of such contravention, be void.  
 
  (3) The Provisions of this Article shall not 
apply to  —  
(a) any law relating to members of the Armed 
Forces, or of the p olice or of such other forces as 
are charged with the maintenance of public order, 
for the purpose of ensuring the proper discharge Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 24 - 
   of their duties or the maintenance of discipline 
among them; or  
 
2 [(b) any of the —  
(i) laws specified in the First Schedule as in 
force immediately before the commencing 
day or as amended by any of the laws 
specified in that Schedule;  
(ii) other laws specified in Part I of the First 
Schedule;] and no such law nor any 
provision thereof shall be v oid on the 
ground that such law or provision is 
inconsistent with, or repugnant to, any 
provision of this Chapter.  
 
  (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
paragraph (b) of clause (3), within a period of two years 
from the commencing day, the appropria te Legislature 
shall bring the laws specified in 1 [Part II of the First 
Schedule] into conformity with the rights conferred by 
this Chapter:  
 
  Provided that the appropriate Legislature may by 
resolution extend the said period of two years by a 
period not  exceeding six months.  
 
 Explanation. – If in respect of any law [Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament)] is the appropriate Legislature, such 
resolution shall be a resolution of the National 
Assembly.  
  
 (5) The rights conferred by this Chapter shall not be 
suspended except as expressly provided by the 
Constitution. ” 
  
29. The A GP argued that Article 8(1) (2) of the Constitution  prescribes 
any law, custom or usage having the force of law which violates any 
fundamental right  guaranteed in Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution  
shall be void. Article 8(3)(a) is an exception to this rule as it provides 
that any law relating to the members of the armed forces for the 
purposes of ensuring the proper discharge of their duties or  
maintenance of discipline  are immune from the applicability of Article 
8(1)(2) of the Constitution . He further argues that Article 8(3)(a)  of the 
Constitution  is not limited to members of the armed forces in its 
applicability , but intrinsically envisions persons who are not members 
of the armed forces  to fall within its ambit , if they  prevent members of 
the armed forces from the proper discharge of their duties or 
maintenance of their discipline . He has placed reliance on the DBA case 
wherein it is held that laws relating to the armed forces  are clearly or 
unequivocally immune from the rigors of Article 8(1) of the Constitution  
and from their validity being scrutinized against the touchstone of being 
oppressive to fundamental rights. Pursua nt to the Twenty -First Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 25 - 
   Amendment  to the Constitution50, the Army Act  was added to the First 
Schedule of the Constitution  to exclude it from Article 8(1) of the 
Constitution  and protect it under Article 8 (3)(b) of the Constitution . As 
per the DBA judgment this was done to protect the amendments in the 
Army Act  from the rigors of Article 8 of the Constitution . This fact in 
itself negates the arguments of the AGP. He has also plac ed reliance on 
the Shahida Zahi r case wherein it was held that the provision of the 
Army Act  is protected under Article 8(3)(a) of the Constitution  from 
being challenged on the ground of being inconsistent to fundamental 
rights as contained in the Constitution . Consequently, the offences 
under  Section 2(1)(d) of the Army Act , if committed by persons who are 
not members of the armed forces, but their actions are closely related to 
the proper discharge of duties by such members then such persons 
they fall under the ambit of Section 2(1)(d) of the Army Act  and are 
prevented from any constitutional challenge on the ground of 
fundamental right s in view of Article 8(3 )(a) of the Constitution . As per 
his argument, t he trial of civilians accordingly is possible and in such 
cases  it cannot be argued that civilians enjoy the protection of 
fundamental right s.  
30. Article 8 (3)(a) of the Constitution  provides that Article 8 shall not 
apply to any law relating to members of the armed forces or the police 
or such other forces , which in essence means disciplinary forces, 
charged  with the duty of maintaining public order . The law here is one 
that relates to ensuring the proper discharge of their duties or 
maintenance of discipline amongst them . What this means is that laws 
which r elate to members of the armed forces with respect to their 
discipline and the discharge of their duties  shall be exempt ed from the 
protection  of Article 8(1)(2)  of the Constitution , meaning that members 
of the armed forces when faced with issues related to  the discharge of 
their duties or the maintenance of their discipline  cannot seek the 
protection of fundamental right  as given in Chapter II of the 
Constitution . Importantly,  Article 8(3)(a) of the Constitution  is 
applicable when two conditions  are met, fi rst it must apply to member s 
of the armed forces and second it must relate to the discharge of their 
duty and maintenance of their discipline.  The AGP argued  that the 
Army Act falls within the purview of Article 8(3)( a) of the Constitution 
which means that persons who are made subject to the Army Act also 
fall within the purview of Article 8(3)(a) of the Constitution  especially if 
                                                
50 The Constitution (Twenty -First Amendment) Act, 2015  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 26 - 
   they disrupt the discipline or discharge of their duty . A similar 
argument was first made  in the F.B Ali  case where a similar provision 
was interpreted being  Article 6(3) of the Constitution  of 1962 wherein 
this Court held that the said A rticle only applies to laws related to 
members of the armed forces charged with the maintenance of public 
order, proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of 
discipline amongst them . Then again  in the Liaquat Hussain  case, this 
Court held that Article 8(3)(a) of the Constitution applied to laws that 
related to the discipline and discharge of duty of  members of the armed 
forces and did not have nothing to do with the question as to whether 
civilians could be tried by military courts.  Yet again, i n the DBA case 
the majority view interpreted Article 8(3)(a)  of the Constitution  to hold 
that the applicable laws under Article 8(3)(a)  of the Constitution  are 
those limited to matters that deal with the discipline amongst the 
members of armed forces for the p roper discharge of their duties and 
since the DBA case dealt with a Constitutional Amendment being a 
matter other than those pertaining to discipline or discharge of duties  
by members of the armed forces  it was necessary to protect the law and 
its amendments by placing the Army Act  as amended in 2015 in the 
First Schedule  to the Constitution . Hence, in terms of the judgments of 
this Court, this argument has failed to persuade the court that Article 
8(3)(a) of the Constitution can apply to persons other than those who 
are in the service of the armed forces.  
31. In order to understand the context of the argument raised by the 
AGP a detailed examination of the two cases,  Liaqu at Hussain  and the 
DBA case is necessary.  In the Liaquat Hussain  case, petitions were filed 
challenging the 1998  Ordinance  promulgated on 20.11.1998  wherein 
civilians were to be tried by military courts for civil offences mentioned 
in the Schedule to the 1998 Ordinance . The justification given by the 
Federation was  that military courts under the 1998 Ordinance are a  
temporary measure to control the law and  order  situation in the 
Province of Sindh  in particular and that this did not mean that a 
parallel judicial system was being introduced so as to replace the 
established judicial system . At the time, Article 245 of the 
Constitution51 was invoked  and the question was whether by invoking 
the said Article and calling for the armed forces to act in aid of civil 
power  the convening of military courts under the 1998 Ordinance was 
                                                
51 Relevant portion of Article 245(1) is that the Armed Forces shall, under the directions of the Feder al Govern ment defend Pakistan 
against external aggression or threat of war, and, subject to law, act in aid of civil power when ca lled upon to do so.  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 27 - 
   constitutional . A nine member bench of this Court  concluded that  the 
armed forces can be called in aid of civil power by the Federation in 
terms of Article 245 of the Constitution  inter alia  to perform police 
functions for limited purpose s of suppressing rights or preventing 
disorder or maintaining law and order and security or to help in nat ural 
calamities  along with civil authorities but the armed forces cannot 
displace civil power of which the judiciary is an important and integral 
part. In other words, the armed forces cannot displace the civil and 
criminal courts while acting in aid of civil power. They can arrest those 
who threaten peace and tranquillity, they can assist in investigation but 
the cases of those involved must be tried by  the ordinary or special 
courts established in terms of Article 175 of the Constitution  as per the 
Mehram Ali  case.52 As to the duties and functions of the armed forces 
under Article 245(1) of the Constitution , the court observed that even 
an act of parliament will not enable the armed forces to perform judicial 
functions unless it is founded on the power conferred by a 
constitutional provision . Hence, the Court firmly maintained that if the 
armed forces are ca lled in aid of civil power under Article 245 of the 
Constitution, it does not give them the power to try civilians before 
military courts as this is against the constitutional mandate.  With 
reference to Article 8(3)(a) of the Constitution , this Court concl uded that 
the said Article only applies to laws relating to members of the armed 
forces  with reference to the discharge of their duties and to maintain 
proper discipline and it does not mean that civilians can be tried for 
civil offences in military courts . The Court explained in the following 
terms that:  
“The Legislature can legitimately amend the Army Act 
or even to enact a new law covering the working of the 
Armed forces, Police or other forces which may include 
the taking of disciplinary action against the 
delinquents including trial within the parameter s of 
such law. In fact the Army Act and the Rules framed 
thereunder are complete code for regulating the 
working of the Army including the maintenance of 
discipline and for punishment for civil and criminal 
wrongs. Not only clause (3) of Article 8 but clau se (3) 
of Article 199 expressly excludes the jurisdiction of the 
High Court from passing any order for the enforcement 
of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by 
Chapter I of Part II of the Constitution  on the 
application made by or in relation to a per son who is a 
member of the Armed Forces of Pakistan, or who is for 
the time being subject to any law relating to any of 
those Forces, in respect of his terms and conditions of 
service, in respect of any matter arising out of his 
                                                
52 PLD 1998 SC 1445, ibid Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 28 - 
   service, or in respect of a ny action taken in relation to 
him as a member of the Armed Forces of Pakistan or 
as a person subject to such law.”  
 
32. The Liaquat Hussain  case while examining F.B. Ali  holds that a 
parallel judicial system cannot be established subjecting civilians to 
military courts.  The Court dispelled the contention of the AGP, at the 
time,  that civilians can be tried in military courts on the ground that 
the functions and duties of the armed forces under Article 245(I) of the 
Constitution will include judicial funct ions as that has not been 
conferred by the Constitution. The reliance on the F.B Ali case as well 
as the Shahida  Zahir case was also rejected on the ground that the 
findings contained therein were under a different context and were not 
applicable to the pr esent case . The Court reasoned that for the trial of 
criminal offences committed by civilians which does not fit within the 
scheme of the Constitution that is an independent judiciary cannot be 
sustained. It is important to note that t he Liaquat Hussain  case while 
considering the vires of the 1998 Ordinance with reference to trial of 
civilians by military courts was hearing the matter under the 
Constitution and also while relying on Articles 4, 9 and 25 of the 
Constitution found that the said Ordinance w as in contravention to the 
given fundamental rights guaranteed  under the Constitution.  It further 
clarified  that the nexus must be between the offence and the discipline 
of the armed forces and that a citizen of Pakistan is entitled to a trial by 
ordinary criminal courts in view of the changes brought about by the 
Constitution.  In the words of Ajmal Mian, CJ, the Court concluded as 
follows:  
 
 “It will not be out of context to mention that clause (1) of 
Article 4 provides that to enjoy the protection of law and to be 
treated in accordance with law is the inalienable right to every 
citizen, wherever he may be, and of every other person for the 
time being within Pakistan. Whereas clause (2) thereof lays 
down that in particular no action detrimental to the life,  
liberty, body, reputation or property of any person shall be 
taken except in accordance with law. The above Article is to be 
read with Article 9 of the Constitution which postulates that 
no person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance 
with law. If a person is to be deprived of his life on account of 
execution of death sentence awarded by a Tribunal which does 
not fit in within the framework of the Constitution, it will be 
violative of above Fundamental Right contained in Article 9. 
Howeve r, the learned Attorney -General contended that in fact 
terrorists who kill innocent persons violate the above Article 9 
by depriving them of their lives and not the Federal 
Government which caused the promulgation of the impugned 
Ordinance with the object to punish terrorists. No patriotic 
Pakistani can have any sympathy with terrorists who deserve 
severe punishment, but the only question at issue is, which Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 29 - 
   forum is to award punishment, i.e. whether a forum as 
envisaged by the Constitution or by a Military Court which 
does not fit in within the framework of the Constitution. No 
doubt, that when a terrorist takes the life of an innocent 
person, he is violating Article 9 of the Constitution, but if the 
terrorist, as a retaliation, is deprived of his life by a 
mechanism other than through due process of law within the 
framework of the Constitution, it will also be violative of above 
Article 9. ” 
 
Consequently, the Court concluded that military trial of civilians for 
civil offences is violative of the Constitution  as the Constitution does 
not warrant setting up a system outside of its framework.         
33. In the DBA case, petitions were filed challenging the vires of the 
Constitution  (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010 , Constitution (Twenty -
First Amendment)  Act, 2015  (Constitution al Amendment) and the  
Pakistan Army (Amendment) Act, 2015 (Army Act Amendment) . 
Relevant to the instant P etition s, the dispute related to the Twenty -First 
Amendment thereunder and the amendments to the Army Act . The 
basic ground of challenge was that the Constitutional Amendment  
envisages that if a person is a t hreat to the country, involved in a 
terrorist attack, they are subject to military tr ials because the  offences 
relate to the defence of the country, hence, military courts can  try 
civilians. In essence the argument was that a parallel  judicial system 
was created such that judicial power was to be exercised by the 
executive, trying civilians  by court martial, which threatens the 
fundamental rights of citizens as well as the inde pendence of the 
judiciary.  The issues raised in that case were different from the ones 
raised in these cases as the DBA case examined the Constitutional 
Amendment which was under challenge and the question was whether 
the Court could strike down the Consti tutional Amendment . As the 
matter at hand was the military trial of civilians the F.B Ali  case and the 
Liaquat Hussain  case were considered as was the nexus test. The Court 
opined that although the F.B Ali  judgment found the amendments to 
the Army Act  by way of Section 2(1)(d) valid legislation, the Liaquat  
Hussain  case held that military courts cannot try civilians pursuant to 
the provisions of Article 245(1) “in aid of civil power” . For the purposes 
of the Constitution al Amendment  under challenge , the nexus test was 
applied  and the Court concluded that  due to rampant terrorist  attacks 
a war like situation  emerged , which  compelled the Federation to defend 
the country. This in turn compelled Parliament to make a 
Constitutional Amendment. The other compelling factor in the DBA 
case was that both the Constitutional Amendment and the Army Act Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 30 - 
   Amendment contained a sunset clause , for a period of two  years  which 
meant that the law was temporary . So far as Article 8(3)( a) of the 
Constitution  is concerned the DBA court held that it was applicable to 
laws relating to the armed forces, for the maintenance of discipline . In 
this regard,  the Court concluded as follows:  
 
“161. The intention of the Parliament is clearly visible. 
By virtue of Article 8(3)(a) the Pakistan Army Act, 
1952, and for that matter the Pakistan Air Force Act, 
1953 and Pakistan Navy Ordinance, 1961, already 
stood protected and exempted from the application of 
Article 8 inter alia to the extent that they deal with 
maintenance of discipline a mong the members of 
Armed Forces and for the proper discharge of their 
duties. As a consequence of the Pakistan Army 
(Amendment) Act, 2015, matters other than those 
pertaining to discipline amongst and discharge of 
duties by the members of the Armed Forces  were 
included in the ambit of the Pakistan Army Act, 
hence, in order to protect such amendments also 
from the rigors of Article 8, it was necessary to place 
Pakistan Army Act, 1952, (as amended) in the 
Schedule. Such was the clear and obvious intention 
of the Lawmakers which must be given effect to. It 
would neither be proper nor lawful to nullify such 
intention by attributing absurdity to the Parliament 
and redundancy to the 21st Constitutional 
Amendment.  
 
162. Thus, there can be no hesitation in holding 
that the Pakistan Army Act, 1952, as amended by the 
Pakistan Army (Amendment) Act, 2015, has been 
validly and effectively incorporated in the Schedule to 
the Constitution as was the clear intention of the 
Legisla ture.”  
 
34. The majority decision in the DBA case also accepted that to 
include mattes other than those pertaining to discipline and discharge 
of duties by members of the armed forces it would be necessary to 
protect those amendments by including in the First Schedule of Part I 
of the Constitution . The clear and obvious int ent of the law maker was 
to protect the amendment from the rigors of Article 8 of the 
Constitution  so as to give effect to the intent of trying terrorists through 
military courts. Clearly, the legislature was conscious of the fact that a 
constitutional ame ndment was required in order to protect the 
amendments to the Army Act  from the enforcement of fundamental 
rights, by placing the Pakistan Army (Amendment) Act, 2015 in the 
First Schedule of Part I of the Constitution .     
35. Important to note is that th is Court allowed and upheld the 
Constitutional Amendment  because its operation was for two years and Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 31 - 
   because there  was a clear defined classification53 of persons and 
offences triable for  the two years by military courts.  In the words of 
Azmat Saeed, J. speaking for the majority, this was a temporary 
measure and does not contemplate a permanent solution because the 
sunset clauses were effective for a period of two years.  Further that the 
trial of civilians by  a court m artial is the exception and not  the rule. 
Hence, in response to the AGP’s argument that the DBA case did  allow 
trial of civilians by military courts, it is important to understand that it 
was a Constitutional Amendment which made such trials possible  that 
to as a temporary measure , to try terrorists accused of offences of 
waging war against Pakistan.  At the cost of repetition, the  ability to try  
civilians in military courts required a constitutional amendment  and 
was not possible through ordinary legislation.  Hence, even though at 
the time Section 2 (1)(d) of the Army Act  existed, Constitutional 
Amendment was necessary to ensure that those subjected to military 
trials pursuant to the Constitutional Amendment cannot invoke any 
fundamental right especially Article 10A of the Constitution .      
36. The A GP has also placed reliance on the Shahida Zah ir case 
which was brought  to court by five military officers who challenged the 
validity of their arrest and detention by a Field General Court Martial 
convened under the Army Act . This C ourt held that the effect  of Article 
8(3)(a) of the Constitution  is that the law specified therein ha s been 
saved from being challenge d or attack ed on the ground of their 
inconsistency with fundamental right s. However, since the Shahida 
Zahir case did not challenge the impugned sections  for being 
inconsistent with fundamental right s, hence, the focus of this Court 
was on the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  as opposed to under Article 199 of the Constitution  
wherein the Court held that whether an element of public importance is 
in issue it is for the court to decide in terms of the dicta laid down in 
Manzoor Elahi  case and Benazir Bhutto  case where public importance 
should be viewed with reference to freedom and liberties guaranteed 
under the Constitution  such that  their protection and breach would 
give rise to  the invoking of Article 184(3) of the Constitution . The Court 
concluded that the petitions are maintainable and went on to discuss 
the right to fair trial  with reference to the Field General Court Martial of 
the five military officers. In this regard, t he Court concluded that the 
                                                
53 In the DBA  case, Para 165 by Sh. Azmat Saeed, J. provides that cases that can be tried under the Army Act have been  clearly 
identified in terms of offences enumerated therein when committed by a terrorist known or claiming t o be a member of a group 
or organization or in the name of a religion or a sect. This is a clear defined criteria which constitutes a valid classif ication.  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 32 - 
   concept of fair trial is available before military courts  for the accused 
who are subject to the Army Act and that with respect to the request for 
open trial that is a matter to be co nsidered by the military court itself . 
Then again , this case is specifically with reference to the trial of military 
personnel  who were subject to  the Army Act  and the R ules, at a time 
when there was no Article 10A of the Constitution, therefore , it does not 
in any way answer the question raised in these Petitions which is with 
reference to the right to fair trial guaranteed under the Constitution  for 
its citizens.           
37. When seen in the context of the Liaquat Hussain  case and the 
DBA case, the interpretation of Article 8 of the Constitution  is that there 
can be no law inconsistent with or in derogation of any fundamental 
right contained in Part II Chapter I of the Constitution  and that the 
State cannot make any law which takes away or  abridges fundamental 
rights. Where such a law is made, it is in contravention to Article 8, 
hence, void. Further Article 8(5) provides that the rights conferred by 
this chapter shall not suspended except as expressly provided by the 
Constitution  meaning thereby that fundamental right s cannot be 
infringed upon nor can any law take away any fundamental right  
guaranteed to a person or a citizen except if specifically provided for by 
the Constitution . In this context when seen Article 8(3)(a)  of the 
Constitution  applies to laws relating to the members of the armed 
forces specifically with reference to matters pertaining to the proper 
discharge of their duties and the maintenance discipline amongst them. 
Laws relating to the armed forces includes the Army Act  to the extent 
that it relates to persons subject to the Army Act because it is with 
reference to such persons that discharge of duty and discipline has to 
be maintained. Furthermore, when such persons are subjected to 
military courts, they do not e njoy the protection of any fundamental 
right as contemplated by Article 8(1)(2)  and (5)  of the Constitution . It 
does not bring within its scope civilians who are persons not otherwise 
subject to the Army Act  because they are not responsible for the 
maintenance of public order and the question of discharge of duties and 
maintenance of discipline does not arise. Article 8(3)(a) of the 
Constitution  specifically applies to members of the Armed Forces  and 
laws rel ated to them  and the AGP’s argument that a person can be 
deprived of any of their fundamental right s especially the right to fair 
trial and due process because they have been made  otherwise  subject to  
the Army Act would mean that the Constitution al guarant ee of Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 33 - 
   fundamental right s can be taken away by ordinary legislation. This 
would totally defeat the purpose of Article 8 (1)(2) and ( 5) of the 
Constitution  which goes against the clear and unequivocal intent of the 
Constitution . This has been the consistent view in terms of the F.B Ali  
case, Liaquat Hussain  case and the DBA case that Article 8(3)(a) of the 
Constitution  is only with reference to laws relating to the members of 
the armed forces in respect of the discharge of their duties and 
maintenance of their discipline.    
Vires  of the impugned sections  
38. Having held that civilians cannot be tried before military court 
because it denies  them fundamental right guaranteed under the 
Constitution, it is but necessary to declare the vires of the impugned 
section ultra vires  the Constitution . The A GP has argued at great length 
that the impugned sections of the Army Act  till date have been 
maintained as being legal and Constitution al and trials undertake n 
over time have been in ac cordance with law. He has argued  that 
civilians have been tried under the impugned sections  and holding the 
impugned sections as ultra vires  would complicate  pending cases and 
other categories of persons who have to be tried in military court s. It is 
his case that t he intent of the legislature has always been to ensure 
that civilians who commit offences that interfere with the proper 
discharge of duty and disc ipline of the armed forces  should be made 
subject to trial by military courts  which intent has been maintained by 
the F.B Ali  case. Therefore, he argues that the vires of the impugned 
sections cannot be challenged. The Supreme Court has held that no law 
can be made in violation of the Constitution  and that a law that violates 
the command  of the Constitution  can be declared ultra vires  the 
Constitution .54 This Court has also held that a provision  of law can be 
declared ultra vires  if it violative of the provisions of the Constitution  
which guarantee fundamental right s, independence of the judiciary and 
separation of power .55 That even though the legislature is competent in 
matters of legislation ev ery law may not necessarily be tenable on the 
touchstone of the Constitution . There is always a presumption in favour 
of the constitutionality of legislation unless ex facie  it is violative of any 
constitutional provision .56 It is the jurisdiction of this Court under the 
Constitution  to consider the constitutionality of enactment and declare 
it non est  if it is in conflict with the provisions of the Constitution . 
                                                
54 Lahore Development Authority v. Ms. Imrana Tiwana  (2015 SCMR 1739 ), Pakcom Limited v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 
SC 44)  
55 Younas Abbas v. Additional Sessions Judge Chakwal ( PLD 2016 SC 581)  
56 Sui Southern Gas Company v. Federation of Pakistan and others ( 2018 SCMR 802)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 34 - 
   Thus, legislative competence is not enough to make valid law, t he law 
must pass the test of constitutionality for it to be enforceable.57 
Fundamental right s as prescribed in Part II Chapter I of the 
Constitution  are sacred rights  which can neither be treated lightly nor 
in a casual or cursory manner rather while interpreting fundamental 
rights the court must always keep in mind that no infringement or 
curtailment of any right can be made unless it is in  accordance  with the 
Constit ution . These rights can be reasonably restricted , however , they 
are to be protected by the courts so as to ensure that citizens are 
protected fr om arbitrary exercise of power.58 The Constitution  treats 
fundamental right s as superior to ordinary legislation which is clearly 
reflected in Article 8(1)(2)  and (5)  of the Constitution  being that 
fundamental rights exist at a higher pedestal to save their enjoyment 
from legislation infractions .59  
39. Although , the vires of the impugned sections were previously 
challenged in the F.B Ali  case, the grounds for challenge today are 
totally different and specifically with reference to the  fundamental  right 
to fair trial under Article 10A of the Constitution  and the right to an  
independent judiciary . Where a law has been challenged with reference 
to it being in derogation to fundamental rights or any constitutional 
command such a law has to be declared unconstitutional and ultra 
vires the Constitution. The trial of civilians bef ore military courts was 
challenged in the Liaquat Hussain  case wherein the vires of the 1998 
Ordinance w as under challenge  on the ground that  it is violati ve of a 
constitutional provision. The 1998 O rdinance was struck down as  this 
Court concluded that trial of civilians by military courts would be 
violative of the Constitution  because citizens have the right to access to 
justice through forums envisioned under Article 175 of the Constitution  
which ensures and guarantees the enforcem ent of all fundamental 
rights especially the right to fair trial and due process . In the opinion of 
one of the Judges60 to the Liaquat Hussain case, military courts do not 
fall under any provisions of the Constitution , therefore, trial by military 
courts of  civilians , for civil offences which have no direct nexus with the 
armed forces or the defence of Pakistan would be ultra vires  the 
Constitution . Thus, the establishment of military courts cannot be 
upheld on the basis of reasonable classification as provi ded in the F.B 
                                                
57 Shahid Pervaiz v. Ejaz Ahmad and others ( 2017 SCMR 206)  
58 Pakistan Muslim League (N) through Khawaja Muhammad Asif, M.N.A.  and others v. Federation of Pakistan through Secretary 
Ministry of Interior and others ( PLD 2007 C 642)  
59 PLD 1988 SC 416 ibid 
60 Irshad Hassan Khan, J. (R)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 35 - 
   Ali case nor can it be declared as valid law on the touchstone of Article 
10A of the Constitution . In the opinion of another Judge61 to the 
Liaquat Hussain case, there is no scope or  power with the federal 
government to set up military courts in place of ordinary courts to try 
civilians for offences which are triable in courts established under 
Article 175 of the Constitution . The establishment of military courts for 
such offences amounts to a parallel justice system which is contrary to 
the judicial system established under the Constitution  and the law . The 
Liaquat Hussain decision focused on the forum established in terms of 
Article 175 of the Constitution  and concluded that any othe r forum 
which seeks to try civilians for offences triable in the ordinary courts of 
the country will be contrary to A rticle 175 and is  unconstitutional 
because every citizen enjoys the right to access to justice by an 
independent judiciary as contemplated under Article 175 of the 
Constitution .  
40. The Constitution  mandates a tracheotomy of powers amongst the 
three organs of the State being the legislature, executive and the 
judiciary and all three organs must work independent of each other and 
cannot encroach upon the work and functions of each other. In this 
conte xt, Article 175 of the Constitution  prescribes that there shall be a 
Supreme Court of Pakistan, a High Court for each Province and a High 
Court for I slamabad  Capital Territory  and such  courts as may be 
established by law  meaning that for the trial of civil ians courts 
established under Article 175, independent of the executive is 
necessary to ensure fairness and due process. Separation of powers 
and judicial independence are part of the essence and spirit of fair trial 
and due process which is why they are r ecognized as fundamental 
rights under the Constitution. Independence of the judiciary and access 
to justice themselves are valuable constitutional rights recognized by 
this Court time and again emphasizing on the fact that the separation 
of judiciary is th e cornerstone of its independence without which the 
fundamental right  of access to justice cannot be guaranteed.62 
Although, an argument was made in the context of court martial and 
Article 175 of the Constitution, what is relevant to the issues raised i s 
the fact that on the touch stone  of fundamental right s, an independent 
judiciary is f undamental  to the right to  fair trial.  
                                                
61 Raja Afrasiab Khan, J. (R)  
62 PLD 1993 SC 341 ibid Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 36 - 
   41. The offences under the Official Secrets Act are triable before the 
ordinary criminal courts, which guarantees fair trial, due process and 
independence as mandated by the Constitution . However, none of the 
103 persons detained were reported for offences under the said Act. Yet 
applica tions were made under Section 54 9 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898  (Cr.P.C. ), for their delivery to military authorities.  The 
referral of an accused person to a trial before a military court is in 
terms of Section 54963 of the  Cr.P.C. read with Section s 59(4), 94 and 
95 of the Army Act . The criminal court having jurisdiction over the 
matter is obligated to form a reasoned opinion as to whether an 
accused person is to be tried by a military court because the transfer 
from the ordinary court to the military court for trial amounts to the 
loss of the right to fair trial and due process  as well as the right to 
independen t forum.  This places a heavy burden on the Magistrate 
under Section 549 Cr .P.C. to protect the rights of the accused before it  
as the Magistrate must satisfy itself that the accused is subject to the 
Army Act  and can only be tried before a military court.  From the 
documents placed before this Court64 the denial of a reasoned order by 
the Magistrate is in fact the start of the process which is in 
contravention to the law as well as denial of the fundamental right  of 
fair trial and due process  for the detained citizens . 
42. With respect to the AGP’s apprehensions on past decisions, the 
law as settled by this Court in numerous judgments with reference to 
past and clo sed transactions provides that cases that have been 
decided should not be opened as a vested right is created in favour of 
the litigants. The concept of past and closed transactions was evolved to 
safeguard accrued and vested rights of parties under a stat ute which 
subsequently were found and declared to be ultra vires  the 
Constitution .65 In fact, the Liaquat Hussain  case itself provides that 
conviction made and sentences awarded by military courts which have 
been executed will be treated as past and closed transactions.  
Therefore, there appears to be no merit in the apprehensions and 
concerns voiced by the AGP.  He ha s also emphasized on the difficulty 
that may come about if the impugned sections are struck down quoting 
examples of cases of Shakil Afridi and Kulbhushan Yadav which are 
                                                
63 In terms of this Section a Magistrate shall in proper cases deliver a person to the military authorities where such person is liable to 
be tried by court martial.  
64 Order dated 20.05.2023, passed by the Judge, Anti -Terrorism Court, Mardan Division, Mardan, Order dated. 25.05.2023, passed 
by the Admi nistrative Judge, Anti -Terrorism Courts, Lahore, Order dated 29.05.2023, passed by the Judge, Anti -Terrorism 
Court -I, Rawalpindi Division, Rawalpindi.  
65 Pakistan Steel Mills v. Muhammad Azam Katper (2002 SCMR 1023), Muhammad Mobeen us Salam v. Federatio n of Pakistan 
(PLD 2006 SC 602)  and Muhammad Moizuddin and another v. Mansoor Khalil and another (2017 SCMR 1787)  Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 37 - 
   pending before different courts and that cases of similar nature will also 
be adverse ly affected. He emphasized that the existing criminal justice 
system may not be as effective or suitable  as the military court s given 
issues of delay, security and national interest. In the context of  both 
these concerns  and emphasis made, it is important to be reminded of 
the basic fact that the Supreme Court stands as the ultimate guardian 
and protector of the Constitution  and is required to ensure that citizens 
are able to enjoy the protection of their fundamental right s and are 
treated in accordance with law.  Judges play a critical role in protecting 
these rights, bound by their oath and the Constitution, they are 
obligated to enforce fundamental rights . The Constitution  does not 
place any restriction or limitation on the Supreme Court when it comes 
to examining the constitutionality of any law, especially  for the 
enforcement of fundamental right s. As per the AGP’s own statement 
before this Court the present Petitions raise a different question than 
those posed before the Liaquat Hussain court and the DBA court.  It 
goes without saying that t he facts in these Petitions are unique and 
unfortunate, however, they do not justify the trial of civilians before a 
military court for offences which can be tried before ordinary courts 
which have the protection of Article 175 of the Constitution . If the 
ordinary or special courts are unable to meet the challenges of trying 
the civilians detained in these cases then the solution is to make an 
effort to strengthen the system . Relying on military courts on the 
ground that the ordinary courts are neither effective nor efficient 
reflects poorly on the State and the government whose primary 
responsibility is to maintain the rule of law and to ensure a strong and 
effective justice s ector for the people. The Federation cannot blame a 
system it is responsible for and thereafter subject citizens to a system 
that violates their fundamental rights.  The AGP has also attempted to 
justify military trial of civilians by quoting examples of di fferent 
countries which allow citizens to be tried in military courts. However, 
this justification is somewhat surprising given the constitutional 
guarantees towards fundamental right which are binding on the State. 
Hence, for the sake of democracy, freedo m and the Constitution with 
emphasis on the right to fair trial, he could have drawn on examples of 
countries that do not try civilians in military courts, or countries that 
have abolished the practice of trying civilians in military courts, or even 
countr ies which establish special tribunal s in extraordinary 
circumstances (like war) to try civilians for certain crimes. True beacons Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 38 - 
   for justice and liberty are the nations that champion the rights of its 
people, steering away from examples where fundamental rights are cast 
aside in the name of expediency . Fundamental rights cannot be 
sacrificed simply because it is deemed expedient.  Finally, it is 
significant to note that f rom the arguments made , the government is 
clear on the fact that the detained persons are all ordinary citizens 
given that the AGP has made assurances before this Court that many of 
the detained citizens are likely to be acquitted or will not be convicted 
by way of capital punis hment or even sentences for more than three 
years.  Yet at the same time  it is compelled to try these 103 persons 
before the military court even though they can be tried before ordinary 
courts. Interestingly, w hen it came to dealing with terrorists who were 
waging war against Pakistan during unprecedented time s, it took a 
Constitutional Amendment  to bring that category of persons66 within 
the jurisdiction of military courts, yet now the Army Act and its 
existence since F.B. Ali  case is being relied upon to try ordinary citizens.    
43. Consequently, in view of the aforesaid, these Petitions are 
decided , in the following terms:  
 
i. It is hereby declared that clause (d) of subsection (1) of Section 
2 of the Army Act  [in both of its s ub clauses (i) & (ii)] and 
subsection (4) of Section 59 of the Army Act  are ultra vires  the 
Constitution  and of no legal effect.  
ii. Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing the trials of 
civilians and accused persons, being around 103 persons who 
were identified in the list provided to this Court by the AGP by 
way of CMA No.5327 of 2023 in Constitution Petition No.24 of 
2023 and all other persons who are now or may at any time be 
similarly placed in relation to the events arising from and out 
of 9th and 10 May, 2023 shall be tried by Criminal Courts of 
competent jurisdiction established under the ordinary and / 
or special la w of the land in relation to such offences of which 
they may stand accused.  
iii. It is further declared that any action or proceedings under the 
Army Act  in respect of the aforesaid persons or any other 
persons so similarly placed (including but not limited to trial 
by court martial) are and would be of no legal effect.   
                                                
66 The Schedule to Article 8 of the Constitution was amended and the Army Act, Air Force Act and Navy Ordinance were 
incorporated in the Schedule  because a war lik e situation had arisen and the F ederation was duty bound to defend the country. At 
the time, a specific reference was given to the person committing the offence who had to be a member  of a terrorist group or 
organization using the name of  sect who in furtherance of terrorist designs wages war against Pakistan or commits any of the 
offences contained in the amendment.   Const.Ps.24 of 2023, etc.                   - 39 - 
    
 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
Islamabad  
09.01.2024  
‘APPROVED FOR REPORTING ’ 
Azmat /*  
 