IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
MR. JUSTICE MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED  
 
Criminal Petition No. 6-P of 2015  
(Against the judgment dated  10.12.2014 passed by the 
Peshawar High Court, Min gora Bench (Dar ul Qaza) Swat 
in Cr. A. No.2 -m/2013)  
 
State through A.G. KP, Peshawar  
 …Petitioner  
Versus  
 
Hakim Zada, etc.  
..Respondent  
     
 
For the  Petitioner(s) : Malik Akhtar Hussain Awan, Addl. A.G. KP  
 
For the Respondent (s): N.R. 
 
Date of hearing:   8.7.2021  
 
ORDER  
 
 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J-. Respondent was tried by 
a learned Additional Sessions Judge at Matta, Swat for committing Qatl-i-
Amd of Mst. Rekhma , no other than his  better half; he himself reported the 
incident to the police on 28.6.201 2, alleging suicide , turned out as homicide 
during investigation ; upon indictment, he was sentenced to imprisonment 
for life  vide judgment dated 13.12.2012 , however, a Division Bench of 
Peshawar High Court, Mingora Bench  considering the death as suicidal 
acquitted him from the charge  vide impugned judgment dated 10.12.2014 , 
vires whereof, are being assailed , primarily , on the ground that autopsy 
report conclusively ruled out possibility of suicide as the medical officer 
noted a complete scar , without obliqu ity, around the neck, unambiguously 
suggesting manual constriction  of the neck  with a ligature , a circumstance 
that escaped notice by the High Court and , thus,  clamours for explanation  
from the respondent with whom  she spent her last moments under the 
same  roof. Leave is granted  to consider , inter alia , the above contention with Cr.P.6 -P/2015  2
a view to secure the ends of justice. Send for the respondent s through 
bailable warrant in the sum of Rs.200,000/ - with one surety in the like 
amount, returnable to the Assistant Re gistrar of this Court at Peshawar, to 
be executed by the Station House Officer, within a fortnight.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Peshawar ,  
8th July, 2021  
Azmat /- 
‘Not approved for reporting’   