IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
        (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
   
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITIONS NO.39 & 90 OF 2011.  
 
Const.P.39/2011.  Ch. Nasir Iqbal and  others Vs. 
Federation of Pakistan through 
Secretary Law and others.  
  
Const.P.90/2011.  Imran Khan, Chairman, P.T.I., etc. 
Vs. Federation of Pakistan.  
 
 
For the Petitioner(s)  : Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
 
   
On Court’s Notice  : Mr. Irfan Qadir, Attorney Ge neral  
   
For the ECP  : Mr. Muhammad Munir Paracha,  
Sr. ASC  
Syed Sher Afgan, DG (Election)  
   
For M/o Overseas  : Mr. Fayyaz Ahmed Malik, Dy Chief.  
Mr. Islam -ud-Din, Asstt. Chief  
 
   
For the OPF  : Raja Muhammad Farooq, ASC  
 
 
For NADRA:  : Mr. Afnan K arim Kundi, ASC  
Mr. Tariq Malik Chairman, NADRA  
   
For M/o Foreign 
Affairs  
  
: Syed Ibne Abbas.  
Date of hearing:  : 11.04.2013.  
 
 Cosnt. P No.39 -2011 etc  - 2 - 
ORDER  
 
 
  The learned Attorney General for Pakistan stated that the 
Election Commission of Pakistan ha d convened a meeting , which was 
attended by him and all other concerned functionaries of the 
Government of Pakistan and in the said deliberations it has been 
decided that subject t o completion of certain formalities including 
minor amendments in the relevant laws by means of exercising of 
powers of temporary legislation conferred by the Constitution upon the 
President  of Pakistan, the Overseas Citizens of Pakistan shall be 
allowed Right of Franchise . He further stated that initially ten countries 
have been selected , as a large number of Overseas Citizens of Pakistan 
are residing over there.  
2.  On behalf of the Election Commission of Pakistan, the 
Director General (Elections) has placed on record (CMA 
No.1973/2013) wherein the detail of the deliberation s submitted  in the 
meeting  convened by the Election Commission of Pakistan to achieve 
the object of allowing Right of Franchise to the Overseas Citizens of 
Pakistan under the title: - 
“PROPOSAL AS TO WORKABLE MECHANISM FOR 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RIGHT OF OVERSEAS 
PAKISTANIS TO CAST T HEIR VOTE FROM 
ABROAD”   
 
3.  In this report under the following headings deliberations 
took place  and the areas wherein certain steps are required to be taken 
have been highlighted  as follows :- Cosnt. P No.39 -2011 etc  - 3 - 
1. Eligibility of Overseas Voters  
2. Voter Registration  
3. Vote Castin g  
4. Pre-requisites  
 
4.  The following steps have been recommended for 
implementation of the plan for extending the Right of Franchise 
to the Overseas Citizens of Pakistan: - 
“Steps to be taken for implementation of above plan  
a. As per NADRA’s proposal, legisla tion is the first 
necessary ste p. Learned Attorney General during the 
meeting also endorsed the view that legislation is 
required and requested the ECP to prepare a draft 
proposal for issuance of an ordinance.  
 
b. According to NADRA’s proposal, an Overseas Pa kistani 
will have to first visit the embassy/mission etc. for the 
purpose of registration and second time he will visit the 
mission/polling station to cast his vote.  
 
c. As highlighted above, the major concentration of 
Overseas Pakistanis is in two Countries  namely Saudi 
Arabia and UAE which is 2.9 million and permission of 
the governments of these two countries is mandatory.  
 
d. Still one million NICOP holders of these countries do not 
have Machine Readable Passports and as MRP is a pre -
requisite for casting vo tes according to the NADRA’s 
proposal, steps will be taken to facilitate such persons to 
obtain MRP.  
 
e. Visa processing of officers and polling staff visiting these 
countries or other countries where polling of overseas is 
decided to be carried out may take some time.  
 Cosnt. P No.39 -2011 etc  - 4 - 
f. Permission to allow voting abroad is awaited from 
foreign governments.  
 
g. Steps are required to prepare voter 
education/information material and disseminations of 
such information to Overseas Pakistanis through 
community leaders, local TV channel s etc. to make 
voting process meaningful and inclusive. ”   
 
 
5.  In view of the deliberations and discussions , which 
have been taken place, we are confident that the Election 
Commission of Pakistan and all other functionaries shall 
implement the plan as ea rly as possible so that the procedure can 
be finalized for extending the facility to the Overseas Citizens of 
Pakistan enabling them to exercise their Right of Franchise in the 
forthcoming General Elections scheduled to be held on 11th May, 
2013 . As the El ection Commission of Pakistan and all other 
functionaries have already taken certain steps to ensure the 
implementation of the plan, therefore, we adjourn this case for a 
period of 10 days. In the meanwhile, further report in this behalf 
be prepared and pu t up for our perusal.      
       
            Chief Justice   
 
 
         Judge  
 
 
Islamabad, the        Judge  
11th April , 2013.  
 