IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Advisory Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
Mr. Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
Ms. Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
REFERENCE NO. 1 OF 2011  
[Reference by the President of Islamic Republic of Pakistan under Article 186 of the 
Constitution]  
 
In Attendance : 
 
On behalf of President:   Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan  assisted by  
Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
Additional Attorney -General , 
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains,  
Additional Attorney -General,  
Raja M. Shafqat Abbasi,  
Deputy Attorney -General and  
Ms. Marium Ali Abbasi, A dvocate.  
  
On Court Notice   : Mr. Khalid Ishaq, Advocate -General, Punjab , 
     assisted by Mr. Sanaullah Zahid, Addl. AG.  
Mr. Hassan Akbar, Advocate -General , Sindh  
assisted by Qazi M. Bashir, Addl. AG.  
Mr. Amir Javed, Advocate -General,  
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, assisted by  
Mr. Sultan Mazhar Sher Khan, Addl. AG.  
Mr. Asif Reki, Advocate -General, Balochistan  
assisted by Mr. M. Ayaz Swati,  Addl. AG. 
For the LRs of  the 
Late Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto  : Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC , assisted by  
     Messrs Iftikhar Shah and Sh eraz Shaukat  
     Rajpar, Advocates.  
     (on behalf of Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari)  
 
    : Mian Raza Rabbani, ASC, assisted by  
     Mr. Zeeshan Abdullah, Advocate.  
     (on behalf of Ms. Sanam Bhutto, Ms. Bakhtawar Bhutto  
and Ms. Aseefa Bhutto)  
 
    : Mr. Zahid F. Ibrahim, ASC, assisted by  
     Mr. Altamash Arab, Advocate.  
     (on behalf of Ms. Fatima Bhutto and Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto)  
 
Amicus Curiae  : Mr. Manzoor Ahmad Malik,  Reference No.1/2011    2 
 
Hon’ble former Judge , 
assisted by  Mr. Ansar Nawaz Mirza, ASC , 
Mr. Haider Rasul, ASC and  
Mr. Shahryar Riaz, Advocate High Court.  
 
     Mr. M. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC,  
     assisted by  Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC.  
 
     Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan , ASC . 
 
     Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC,  
     assisted by  Ms. Zunaira Fayyaz Siwia, Adv.  
     and Mr. Qaiser Nawaz, Advocate.  
 
     Mr. Assadullah Khan Chamkani, ASC , 
     assisted by  Mr. M. Tariq Khan Hoti, ASC.  
 
     Mr. Salahuddin Ahmed , ASC , 
     assisted by  Mr. Ehsan Malik and  
Mr. Aman Aftab, Advocates.  
 
Complainant   : Mr. Ahmed Raza Khan Kasuri, ASC.  
     (in person)  
 
For SCBA    : Mr. Ali Imran, ASC.  
 
Dates of Hearing   : 12.12.2023, 8.1. 2024 , 20.2.2024, 26.2.2024  
27.2.2024, 28.2.2024 and 4.3.2024 . 
 
Opinion  
In the course  of performing our core duty to administer justice ‘in 
accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and 
the law’, we (j udges) are bound to ‘do right to all manner of people, 
according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill -will.’1 There have  
been some cases in our ju dicial history that created a public perception 
that either fear or favour deterred the performance of our duty to 
administer justice in accordance with the law. We must , therefore, be 
willing to confront our past missteps and fallibilities with humility, in the 
spirit of self -accountability , and as a testament to our commitment to 
ensure that justice shall be served with unwavering in tegrity and fidelity to 
the law. We cannot correct ourselves and progress in the right direction 
until we acknowledge our past mistakes.  
2. The advisory jurisdiction, under Article 186 of the Constitution, 
requires this Court t o render an opinion on any question of law of public 
                                                             
1 Oath of Office for Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, prescribed under Articles 178 and 194 
in the Third Schedule to the Constitution  of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan .  Reference No.1/2011    3 
 
importance referred to by the President. To us,  the q uestion of law, in 
essence, is whether the requirements of due process and fair trial were 
complied with in the murder trial of Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto (“Mr. Bhutto”) , 
the former Prime Minister of Pakistan , by the trial court (the Lahore High 
Court) and th e appellate court (the Supreme Court) . This question we 
approach and answer considering whether the trial court and the appella te 
court attended to and dealt with the requirements of due process and fair 
trial.   
3. The reference filed by the President of Pakistan has provide d us an 
opportunity to reflect upon the proceedings of the trial, conviction and 
death sentence of Mr. Bhutto, under the regime of the military dictator 
General Zia Ul Haq. The reference was filed during the government of the 
political party fou nded by Mr. Bhutto but the successive governments of  
other major political parties carried forward this inquiry  and did not opt to 
withdraw the reference . This collective interest reflects  the widespread 
desire of the people of Pakistan to seek the opinion of this Court  on whether 
Mr. Bhutto was afforded a fair trial and due process for his trial for the 
murder  of Mr. Muhammad Ahmed Khan Kasuri.  
4. With the able assistance of the eminent legal minds of the country, 
we for the reasons to be recorded later and subject to amplification s and 
explanations made  therein, render an opinion on the referred questions in 
the following terms:  
Question (1)  
Whether the decision of the Lahore High Court as well as the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan in the murder trial against 
Shaheed  Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto meets the requirements of fundamental 
rights  as guaranteed under Article 4, sub -Articles (1) and (2)(a), 
Article 8, Article 9, Article 10A/due process, Article 14, Article 25 of 
the Constitution of the Islam ic Republic of Pakistan, 1973? If it does 
not, its effect and consequences ? 
Opinion  
(i)   The proceedings of the trial by the Lahore High Court and of the 
appeal by the Supreme Court of Pakistan do not meet the 
requirements of the Fundamental Right to a fa ir trial and due process 
enshrined in Articles 4 and 9 of the Constitution and later 
guaranteed as a separate and independent Fundamental Right under 
Article 10A of the Constitution.  
(ii)   The Constitution and the law do not provide a mechanism to set 
aside the judgment whereby Mr. Bhutto was convicted and 
sentenced; the said judgment attained finality after the dismissal of 
the review petition by this Court.  Reference No.1/2011    4 
 
Question (2 ) 
Whether the conviction leading to execution of Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali 
Bhutto could b e termed as a decision of the Supreme Court binding 
on all other courts being based upon or enunciating the principle of 
law in terms of Article 189 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973? If not, its effect and consequences?  
Opinion  
Referenced questions do not specify the principle of law enunciated 
by this Court in the Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto case  regarding which our 
opinion is sought. Therefore, it cannot be answered whether any 
principle of law enunciated in the  Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto ca se has already 
been dissented to or overruled.  
Questions (3 ) and (5)  
Whether in the peculiar circumstances of this case awarding and 
maintaining of the death sentence was justified or it could amount to 
deliberate murder keeping in view the glaring bias against Shaheed 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto?  
Whether on the basis of conclusions arrived at and inferences drawn 
from the evidence/material in the case an order for conviction and 
sentence against Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto could have been 
recorded?  
 
Opinion  
In its advisory jurisdiction under Article 186 of the Constitution, this 
Court cannot reappraise the evidence and undo the decision of the 
case. However, in our detailed reasons, we shall identify the major 
constitutional and legal lapses that had occurred  with respect to fair 
trial and due process.  
Question (4 ) 
Whether the decision in the case of murder trial against Shaheed 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto fulfils the requirements of Islamic laws as codified 
in the Holy Quran and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (SAW)? If so, 
whether present case is covered by doctrine of repentance specifically 
mentioned in the following Suras of Holy Quran:  
(a) Sura Al -Nisa, verses 17 and 18; Sura Al -
Baqara, verses 159, 160 and 222; Sura Al -
Maida, verse 39; Sura Al -Aaraaf, verse 153; Sura 
Al-Nahl, verse 119; Sura Al -Taha, verse 82; as 
well as (b) Sunan Ibn -e-Maaja, Chapter 171, 
Hadith No. 395 . 
What are effects and consequences of doctrine  – Re: Repentance  
Opinion  
We were not rendered any assistance on this question, therefore, it 
would  be inappropriate to render an opinion.  
  
 Reference No.1/2011    5 
 
 (Qazi Faez Isa)  
CJ. 
 (Sardar Tariq Masood)  
J. 
 (Syed Mansoor Ali Shah)  
J. 
 
 (Yahya Afridi)  
J. 
 (Amin -ud-Din Khan)  
J. 
 
 (Jamal Khan Mandokhail) 
J. (Muhammad Ali Mazhar) 
J. 
 (Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi)  
J. (Musarrat Hilali)  
J. 
Announced in open Court  
at Islamabad, on 6 March, 2024.  
 
    Chief Justice  
 
Approved for reporting  