IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
  Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi  
  Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 
 
SUO MOTO CASE NO.3 OF 2022  
(Re: Independent and Transparent Investigation into 
the Murder of Renowned Journalist, Mr. Arshad 
Sharif in Kenya).  
 
 
In attendance:  
 
 
Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, AGP  
Mr. Syrus Qazi, Spl. Secretary M/o Foreign Affairs  
 
Mr. Saad Umar Buttar, ASC 
(on behalf of Mrs. Javeria Siddique , wife of Arshad Sharif)  
Assisted by:  
Mr. Tahir Hussain Anchan  
Barrister Jamal  
 
Mr. Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, ASC  
(on behalf of  mother of Arshad Sharif ) 
Assisted by:  
Mr. Murad Siddiqui  
Hafiz Farmanullah  
 
Mr. Shahab, Dir  M/o Information  
Mr. Adil Aziz Qazi, ASC  
Mr. Sajid Kiyani, Dir IB  
Mr. Awais Malik, DIG ICT  
   
Date of Hearing:             13.06.2023    
 
ORDER  
    Today, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan has 
referred to two reports: one, an interim report filed by the Special 
Joint Investigation Team (“SJIT”) (CMA No.4411/2023)  and 
second, a report filed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( “MoFA” ) 
regarding the steps taken by it to expedite the investigation in 
Kenya and UAE (CMA No.4376/2023). The learned Attorney SMC 3 of 2022  2 
General also informed the Court that the Governments of Kenya 
and UAE, respectively are in the process of negotiating Mutual 
Legal Ass istance Agreements with the Federal Government. 
However, he stated that the execution of such agreements will take 
some time, therefore, an adjournment may be granted by the Court 
till the needful is done. The request appears reasonable and is 
allowed.  
2.   Next Mr. Saad Umar Buttar, learned counsel for the 
second wife of Mr. Arshad Sharif, gave the Court an account of the 
United Nation Rapporteurs and the United Nation Committees that 
are involved in investigating violations of human rights committed 
around the world. He stated that in case the Federal Government 
is unsuccessful in establishing direct communication with the 
Governments of Kenya and UAE then the said Rapporteurs and/or 
Committees may be approached for seeking their assistance into 
the inves tigation of the assassination of Mr. Arshad Sharif.  
3.   Lastly, Mr. Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui, learned counsel 
representing the mother of Mr. Arshad Sharif, referred to CMA 
No.4232/2023 filed on behalf of his client wherein he has shared 
the names of certain persons who his client suspects have 
knowledge regarding the conspirators and perpetrators involved in 
her son’s assassination. He requested the Court to direct the SJIT 
to examine the said persons. Having considered the request, the 
Court is of the considered view that the prayer of learned counsel 
is not maint ainable. The Court in the present Suo Motu is merely 
facilitating the investigation into the assassination of Mr. Arshad 
Sharif and it has no mandate to direct the course of investigation. 
Nevertheless, learned counsel may, if so inclined, approach the SMC 3 of 2022  3 
SJIT for the stated purpose. CMA No.4232/2023 is disposed of in 
the above terms.  
4.   Re-list in July, 2023 . 
 
 
 
    CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
  
 JUDGE  
 
 
  
 JUDGE  
 
 
  
Islamabad  
13.06.2023  
Naseer/Meher LC  JUDGE  
 
 