IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 PRESENT:  Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
 Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
 Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
 
Suo Moto Case No.18  of 2016 and C.M.As.No.7067,  
7587, 8198 & 8495 to 8498  of 2016, C.M.As.N o. 85, 142,  
363, 422, 423,424, 551, 773,945, 946 and 967  of 2017  
(Suo Moto Action Regarding Eligibility of Chairman 
and Members of Sindh Public Service Commission etc.)  
 
In Attendance:  
For Govt. of Sindh:   Mr. Zameer Hussain Ghumro, A.G.  
     Mr. Sohail Ahmed Qureshi,  
Additional Secretary, S & GAD, 
Government of Sindh  
      
For Sindh Public Service   Mr. Shafi Muhammad Shah,  
Commission  Secretary, Sindh Public Service 
Commission . 
      
For Applicants:     
(in CMA 142/17):    Ms. Asma Jahangir, Sr. ASC  
     Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR  
 
(in CMA 363/17):    Raja M.  Ibrahim Satti, Sr.  ASC 
     Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
(in CMA 7587/16):    Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, ASC  
     Mr. Ahmad Nawaz Chaudhry, AOR  
 
(in CMA 967/17):    Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC  
     Mr. Mehmood A. S heikh, AOR  
 
(in CMA 8498/16):    Muhammad Zulqurnain, In person  
(in CMA 424/17):    Dr. Shah Nawaz Mirani, In person  
(in CMA 945/17):    Asif Ali, In person  
(in CMA 946/17):    Masroor Ahmed, In person  
 
For NAB:     Mr. Nasir Mehmood Mughal,  
Special Prosecutor , NAB  
 
Date of Hearing:    February 22, 2017  
 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, J : A written application was received from Mr. 
Muhammad Junaid Farooq ui, a practicing Advocate of the High 
Court of Sindh, alleging that large scale illegalities were committed S.M.C.18/16 etc.   2
by the C hairman, Members and o fficers of the Sindh Public Service 
Commission (“ the Commission ”), constituted under the Sindh 
Public Service Commission Act, 1989 (“ the Act ”). Mr. Farooq ui 
alleged that t he Chairman and Members did not have the requisite 
qualificatio ns as mandated by the Act and that t he Chairman, 
Members and officers of the Commission had misus ed their official 
position s by indulging in nepotism and corruption  and not 
selecting persons on the basis of merit . The Commission selects 
candidates and recommend s them for appointment in the service 
of the Government of Sindh (“ the Government ”). It was further 
alleged that the best qualified persons were deprived and denied 
their due which also adversely affected the interest of the Province 
of Sindh (“the Pr ovince ”) and its people. Mr. Farooq ui stated that 
he h ad no personal interest in the matter and none of the 
applicant s were related to him and his only motivat ion was to serve 
the province and to bring forth the illegalities in the Commission’s 
workings . 
 
2. On September 16, 2016 the Chief Justice of Pakistan noted 
on Mr. Farooqui’s application that, “It may be treated as suo moto 
case and fixed at Islamabad on 28.9.2016 with notice to A .G. 
Sindh and the persons named at the bottom of this application” , 
who we re the Chairman, eight Members, one Director and one 
Deputy Controller  of the Commission (hereinafter collectively 
referred to as “the respondents ”). On September 28, 2016 the 
respondents entered an appearance and sought time to, “submit a 
reply  / concise statement” . Time was granted and i t was  directed S.M.C.18/16 etc.   3
that, the service profile s of the Chairman,  Mr. Muhammad Saleem 
Bhnour, and of the Members of the Commission, indicating their 
length of service in each pay scale, including their length of service 
in basic pay scale 20 , be produced to ascertain whether they had 
the requisite qualifications / experience  as stipulated in the Act . 
On November 3, 2016 the Advocate General Sindh (“AG”) 
submitted a written statement informing that the Chairman and 
five Members of the Commission had, “tendered their resignation 
to the Government of Sindh and as such Sindh Public Service 
Commission shall be reconstituted in accordance with the law”.  
 
3. When t he case came up on January 3, 2017 th is Court 
observed  that since the Commiss ion was created under Article 242 
of the Constitution it was a constitutional body which was 
responsible for recruit ing personnel in the public sector , therefore, 
every effort should be made to ensure that the Chairman and 
Members of the Commission are per sons of integrity and 
competence : 
“The Chairman/Memb ers of this constitutional body, 
who enjoy the constit utional protection, need to be 
selected from amongst noble individuals possessing 
incomparable competence, exalted caliber, 
unblemished track record, impeccable integrity and 
unquestionable impartiality. They should be the 
persons who can be entrusted with the responsibility 
of selecting the most deserving candidates who will 
be holding key positions in the public sector a 
decade down the path.  
 
13. The application of ultimate wisdom in 
selection of the Chairman and Members of the 
Commission is extremely important, as it should 
have been a symbol of excellence, which is at the 
brink of losing its traditional grace. We have also 
noticed the controversy re cently generated by the 
examinations/interviews and recommendations 
undertaken by the Commission headed by the S.M.C.18/16 etc.   4
Chairman namely Muhammad Saleem Bhanour, 
which was talk of the town.  
 
14. The appointment of the Chairman and 
Members of the Commission has far r eaching effects 
as observed by us hereinabove and the inherent 
disqualification that we have noticed in their 
appointments was willfully overlooked by the 
relevant forum, as there is no yardstick provided for 
scrutinizing the caliber of the persons before their 
appointment. The discretion of the competent 
authority in making the appointments of the 
Commission needs to be structured through the 
rules, which need to be framed by the Government in 
terms of Section 10, suggesting a high -powered 
permanent commit tee to examine the service profiles 
of the Chairman and Members to be selected under 
Section 3(3) and the qualifying standards provided 
therein. Likewise, the high -powered committee needs 
to scrutinize the eminence of the persons in the 
private sector befo re the selection as Member in 
consonance with the terms used in Section 3(4) of 
the Act. ” 
 
Reference was also made to the case s of Muhammad Yasin v 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 Supreme Court 132) and 
Muhammad Ashraf Tiwana v Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 1159) a nd the 
guidelines provided therein regarding the manner in which 
appointment s to public office  should be made : 
“These guidelines should be made basic criteria to 
the office of Chairman and Members of the 
commission. The proposed rules need to be framed 
in a manner where the selection to the posts of 
Chairman and Members should be transparent and 
confined to the persons who enjoy high standards of 
integrity and honesty. The rules should further 
provide that the proposed appointee has a clean 
service record w ithout any adverse entry in his 
P.E.Rs throughout his career.  
 
17. We, for the aforesaid reasons, direct the 
Government to immediately take steps to frame rules 
and thereafter appoint the Chairman and Members 
of the Commission against vacancies created by 
resignations of the Chairman/Members and by the 
order of this Court passed today. ”  
 
 S.M.C.18/16 etc.   5
4. With regard to the examinations  and interviews conducted 
by the Commission, on the basis of which recommend ations for 
appointment in civil service  were made, it was observed : 
“The next issued raised in these proceedings relates 
to the examinations  / interviews and 
recommendations made by the Commission for 
appointments of the candidates to different 
departments in the intervening period. The Advocate 
General Sindh and t he learned Counsel representing 
some of the recommendees shall make their 
submissions on the next date and appropriate orders 
shall be passed after hearing them. ” 
 
The persons in control of the affairs of the Commission 
however prevaricated  and did not mak e complete disclosure of the 
facts, as noted on January 24, 2017:  
“On the last date of hearing i.e. 18.01.2017, we 
directed the Advocate General, Sindh to place before 
us the original result sheet of the candidates who 
passed the written examination as wel l as the final 
result sheet inclusive of the marks assigned by the 
Commission to the candidates in viva-voce. This 
direction has not been complied with and instead a 
combined result has been placed before us signed by 
the then Chairman and two Members, whi ch does 
not mention the date against their signatures on any 
of its pages. We are informed by the Addl. Secretary, 
Sindh Public Service Commission (SPSC) that he had 
informed the Secretary, SPSC, to appear, in person, 
who refused on the ground that no noti ce has been 
issued to the Commission. We direct the Secretary of 
the Commission to be in attendance on the next date 
with explanation as to how can he refuse to appear 
in Court once the notice has been issued.  
 
3. The Secretary, SPSC, shall immediately 
transmit the entire original examination 
papers/record of the candidates who were declared 
successful in the written examination, the minutes of 
meetings held at times from the date of written 
examination till the finalization of the results and the 
original sheets of interviews giving marks to the 
different candidates in viva-voce (interviews) 
reflecting marks assigned to each candidate. The 
original record shall contain the names with the Roll 
Numbers allotted to the candidates. ” 
 S.M.C.18/16 etc.   6
5. It would be appropriate to set out some of the material facts. 
The Commission published an advertise ment invit ing applications 
for 182 posts in basic pay scale (BPS) 1 7 and 16; in BPS -17: 45 of 
Assistant Commissioners, 76 of Section Officers, 12 of Excise & 
Taxation Officers, 3 o f Assistant Directors Labour  and in BPS-16: 
24 posts of Mukhtiarkar, 18 posts of Labour Officers and 4 posts of 
District Food Controller/Storage & Enforcement Officers . The 
advertise d posts were to be filled-in on the basis of written tests 
and interview  results , designated as the Combined Competitive 
Examination (CCE) -2013 ( hereinafter referred to as “CCE-2013 ”). 
The stipulated “closing date” for receiving a pplications was August 
16, 2013 .  28,000 persons applied . A “screening test” comprising of 
multiple choice questions (or MCQs) was conducted on December 
28, 2014  and 3,375 applicants passed this test .  It was alleged 
that large scale illegalities commenced after Justice Agha 
Rafique Ahmed Khan, the former Chief Justice of the Federal 
Shariat Court, resig ned as its Chairman and when Mr. 
Saleem Mohammad  Bhnour  was appointed by the 
Government as Chairman . Though the reason for the 
resignation was not disclosed it is alleged that Justice Agha 
Rafique Ahmed Khan was not satisfied with the working of 
the Commis sion and the interference in its working from the 
outside.  However, w hen the screening test  was conducted 
and its results announced on January 8, 2015  Justice Agha 
Rafique Ahmed Khan held the position of the Commission’s 
Chairman . On January 15, 2015 Just ice Agha Rafique 
Ahmed Khan tendered his resignation which was accepted  by S.M.C.18/16 etc.   7
the Chief Minister, Sindh and in this regard the Government of 
Sindh issued notification dated January 20, 2015.  
 
6. After issuance of notices by this Court a number of 
application s were filed by those who had failed the written test s or 
the interview s alleging serious illegalities. Many alleged that the 
sanctity of the examination centre was violated by permitting 
candidates to use mobile phones  to get answers to questions. It 
was also alleged that curiously those who performed remarkably 
well in the written tests did poor ly in the interview  and not through 
a lack of ability, but because the examiners had intentionally giv en 
them a low score. It was likewise alleged that those who h ad barely 
passed the written tests did surprisingly well in the interview , 
receiv ing a disproportionately high score which raised their 
cumulative marks . In this regard specific instances were cited. 
Another discrepancy pointed out was in the ‘ Sindhi Essay  Writing ’ 
paper where the marks awarded weren ’t in keeping with the marks 
the same candidate received in the ‘Sindhi Literature ’ and ‘Sindhi 
General ’ papers. One candidate stated that he received a gold 
medal from the Board of Intermediate and Secondary Ed ucation, 
Hyderabad in 2001  for Sindhi Essay Writing , but in the  Sindhi 
Essay Writing test of the Commission he failed , getting only 16 
marks . This inconsistency becomes all the more incredible when 
the same candidate, in the Sindhi Literature test of the 
Commission , was awarded 88% marks and in the Sindhi General 
paper  80% marks . 2,813 candidates participated in t he written 
tests which were conducted in April, 2015 , out of which 664 were S.M.C.18/16 etc.   8
declared successful on March 16, 2016 , after approximately a year . 
When the written tests were conducted and their results declared 
Mr. Muhammad Saleem Bhnour was the Chairman of the 
Commission.  
 
7. In the written comments filed by t he Secretary of the 
Commission it is disclosed that the Commission “received about 
250 applicati ons / Complaints in connection with Recounting and 
Retotalling of marks in different subject papers”  and by attending 
to the complaints the viva voce / interview  was thereby delayed 
and so  was eventually held from April 25, 2016 to August 11, 
2016 .  The in terview results were announced on August 19, 2016 . 
227 persons were declared successful. On August 31, 2016 the 
Commission sent its recommendations  to the Government 
recommending the appointment of successful candidates  to some 
of the advertised posts  (hereinafter the “ successful candidates ”), 
but “as no suitable candidates were found , 25 posts pertaining to 
urban area were left vacant which will be re -advertised in due 
course of time” .  The Commission gave no reason why in respect of 
urban areas “suitable candidates”  could not be found even after a 
protracted selection process.    
 
8. After receipt of the Commission’s recommendations t he 
Government of Sindh issued offer letters to the successful 
candidates, a specimen of one such letter dated October 19, 2016 
is reproduced hereunder:  S.M.C.18/16 etc.   9
“Subject: - OFFER OF APPOINTMENT AS 
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER (BS -17) 
IN Ex -PCS CADRE  
 
On your selection by Sindh Public Service 
Commission, you are hereby offered a post of 
Assistant Commissioner (BS -17) in Ex -PCS Cadre, 
on following t erms and conditions: - 
 
i. Your appointment  will be subject to certificate 
of physical fitness by the Medical Board and 
verification of your character and antecedents.  
 
ii. You will undergo training at the Service 
Academy or any other institution and will p ass 
the Assistant Collector’s Departmental 
Examination (Part -I & II) within fifteen months 
of the date of your appointment.  
 
iii. You will be on probation for a period of 02 
years with effect from the date of joining 
extendable by order either before or af ter its 
termination by a further period not exceeding 
two years provided that if no order has been 
made by the day following the termination of 
either of the aforementioned probationary 
periods, the appointment shall be deemed to 
be held until further orde r. 
 
iv. You will be governed by West Pakistan Civil 
Service (now Sindh) (Executive Branch) Rules 
1964 as amended from time to time, the 
instructions in force relating to the service and 
the Sindh Civil Services Act, 1973 and the 
rules made there under.  
 
v. Your seniority will be counted in the cadre of 
PSS from the date of your regular 
appointment.  
 
2. If you accept the offer on the above terms and 
conditions, please communicate your acceptance to 
the undersigned within 14 days of receipt of this 
letter, fa iling which this offer shall stand cancelled. ” 
 
However, none of the successful candidates undertook the 
prescribed training as restraining orders were passed by this Court  
on October 17, 2016 , consequently, those who were offered 
employment could not be i nducted into service. 
 S.M.C.18/16 etc.   10
9. Ms. Asma Jehangir, learned Senior Advocate Supreme Court  
(“ASC”), filed CMA No. 142/2017  and represents one hundred and 
seventy -seven successful candidates , Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, 
learned ASC, filed CMA No. 7587/2016  and represents thirty -three  
successful candidates , Raja Muhammad Ibrahim Satti, learned 
Senior  ASC, filed CMA No.363/2017  and represents three  
successful candidates , Mr. Shah Khawar, learned ASC, filed CMA 
No. 967/2017 and represents one successful candidate and t wo, 
namely Asif Ali filed CMA No. 945/2017 and Masroor Ahmed filed 
CMA No. 946/2017 , elected to plead their own cases .  Through t he 
referred to applications the successful candidates wanted to be 
implead ed as parties and hear d. All sides agreed that the ca se 
should be urgently decided , consequently , we didn’t want to delay 
the matter by first allowing the applications and then hearing the 
affected parties , but instead permitted everyone to make their 
submissions .  Accordingly , the learned counsel  representi ng the 
successful candidates , successful candidates themselves , and the 
applicants who had failed were heard .  
 
10. The primary  contention of the learned counsel representing 
the successful candidates is that, Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
is not attr acted  as in this case there is no question of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement of any Fundamental 
Rights mentioned in the Constitution , therefore, the application of 
Mr. Farooq ui should not have been entertained nor proceed ed with 
as a suo moto  case under Article 184(3) . It was further contended 
that, admittedly , Mr. Farooq ui was neither an aggrieved p erson  nor S.M.C.18/16 etc.   11
could be considered to be so even if the definition of an aggrieved 
person  is extended to cover one whose relative may have had a  
grievance with regard to the tests and  selection process. As regards 
the purported disqualification of the Chairman and Member s of the 
Commission , the learned counsel submitted, that no one had 
questioned the credentials or qualifications of the Chairman and 
Members and the successful candidates should not be penalized 
even if the Chairman and Members were not qualified to be 
appointed . It was urged that the process started in August 2013 
and that the successful candidates had cleared the screening test s, 
the written tests and finally the interview s, and were found to be 
medically fit , but this smooth process was thwarted by the 
restraining orders of this Court , which should be vacated . The 
successful candidates had acquired a vested right or a legitimate 
expectancy to be appointed , which had crystallized when the offer 
letter s were issued to them by the Government , the learned 
counsel added . They also referred to the cases of Farzand Ali v 
Province of West Pakistan  (PLD 1970 Supreme Court 98), Mehram 
Ali v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 Supreme Court 1445), Asad 
Ali v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 Supreme Court 161), 
Mahmood Khan Achakzai v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1997 
Supreme Court 426), Muhammad Rafi v Federation of Pakistan  
(2016 SCMR 2146), Gove rnment of the Punjab v Aamir Junaid  
(2015 SCMR 74), Sindh High Court Bar Association v Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2009 Supreme Court 879), Province of Punjab v 
Zulfiqar Ali  (2006 SCMR 678)  and Secretary to Govt. of N.W.F.P. v 
Sadullah Khan  (1996 SCMR 413 ). S.M.C.18/16 etc.   12
 
11. Those supporting Mr. Farooqui’s application contended that 
the constitution of the Commission was not in accordance with the 
Act as its Chairman and Members were not qualified , which fact 
was conceded by the Chairman and five Members when they 
resigned upon receipt of notices , and that the learned AG on behalf 
of the Government had not disputed this fact . It was next 
contended that the previous Chairman of the Commission, Justice 
Agha Rafique Ahmed Khan , had resigned as he was not prepared 
to be part  of an unfair selection process. No questions were raised 
when under his Chairmanship screening test s were conducted . 
When Mr. Mohammad Saleem Bhnour took over as Chairman the 
written tests and interviews were conducted  and it is with regard to 
these that there were misgivings . The 664 candidates  who passed 
the written tests were interviewed by those who admittedly were 
not qualified . The details of the interview  was also not disclosed , 
including , how the 250 marks allocated for the interview were 
apportion ed amongst the three interviewers,  the marks awarded by 
each interviewer and the dates on which interview results were 
compiled. Reference was also made to the discrepancies between 
the marks obtained in written tests and in interview s (as noted 
above) for  which n o explanation was offered .  The fact that 25 
posts pertaining to urban areas were left vacant was yet another 
illegality and one indicative of bias  and prejudice  when no reason 
is given why 25 posts all of urban areas were left vacant.   
 S.M.C.18/16 etc.   13
12. Mr. Zameer  Hussain Gh umro, the learned A G, did not 
controvert the fact that those who had resigned from their 
position s of Chairman and Members of the Commission were not 
qualified to be appointed , but instead stated that , mere ly because 
they were not qualified would not undermine the integrity of the 
selection process which was otherwise transparent.  He also stated 
that the present case did not come within the domain of cases 
wherein this Court could invoke Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
and with regard to this and other matters adopted the arguments 
of the learned counsel for the successful candidates . 
 
13. The first question to be determined is whether this Court 
could entertain  Mr. Farooq ui’s application  under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution and particularly wh ether the matter is one of 
public importance  involving the enforcement of Fundamental 
Rights conferred by Chapter 1  of Part II of the Constitution.  But 
before attending to this issue the laws governing the Commission, 
selection of candidates  by it and their appointment s by the 
Government need to be mentioned . Article 242 of the Constitution 
of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“ the Constitution ”) 
mandates the establishment and constitution of public service 
commissions for the Federation and the provi nces:  
“242. (1) Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  in relation to 
the affairs of the Federation, and the Provincial 
Assembly of a Province in relation to affairs of a 
Province, may, by law, provide for the establishment 
and constitution of a Public Service Commi ssion.  
 
(1A) The Chairman of the Public Service 
Commission constituted in relation to the affairs of 
the Federation shall be appointed by the President  
on the advice of the Prime Minister . S.M.C.18/16 etc.   14
 
(1B) The Chairman of the Public Service 
Commission constituted in relation to affairs of a 
Province shall be appointed by the Governor on 
advice of the Chief Minister.  
 
(2) A Public Service Commission shall perform 
such functions as may be prescribed by law. ” 
 
The Sindh Public Service Commission Act, 1989  establishes 
the Commission, prescribes its composition  and qualification of its 
Chairman and Members, their terms and conditions of service, the 
manner in which they may be removed and the functions that the 
Commission  perform s. The Government has been empowered 
under se ction 10 of the Act to, “make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act” and in exercise of powers under section 11  
the Commission , “may frame regulations for performance of 
functions and transacting business assigned to it by or under this 
Act”. The  functions of the Commission include , conducting “tests 
and examinations for recruitment for initial appointment” (clause 
(i) of section 7 of the Act).  
The law regulating appointment of persons in the Province of 
Sindh is the Sindh Civil Servants Act, 197 3 and those appointed 
are “civil servants” employed in the “civil service of the Province”. 
The Sindh Civil Servants Act  prescribes how initial appointment s 
(that is not by promotion or transfer) are to be made and stipulat es 
that such appointments are to be made in the prescribed manner 
(section 5) and the Commission is designated as “selection 
authority” (clause (i) of section 2). The appointments made under 
the Civil Servants Act also designated as “service of Pakistan”.  
Article 260 of the Constitution  defines “ service of Pakistan ” as “any S.M.C.18/16 etc.   15
service, post or office in connection with the affairs of the 
Federation or of a Province”.  The civil service , whether of a 
province or the Federation , provides the foundation on which good 
governance is built. The Civ il Service enables government in its 
most essential way. A robust and efficient system, allows for 
smooth governance. A weak and corrupt system disables 
government. Without a properly functioning Civil Service, even the 
most basic functions and workings of  the government become an 
enormous task.    
 
14. It wa s correctly pointed out by the learned counsel that this 
Court’s jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitution can 
only be invoked in respect of a matter of public importance  “with 
reference to the enforcement of Fundamental Rights ”. It would 
therefore be appropriate to consider some of the precedents 
wherein this Court dilated on the term public importance  and 
Fundamental Rights with reference to Article 184(3) and whether 
an individual could invoke  this jurisdiction if he /she was not 
personally affected , that is , was not an aggrieved party  or 
aggrieved person .  
In the case of Benazir Bhutto v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
1988 Supreme Court 416) the Co-Chairperson of a political party 
had challenged c ertain amendments made to the Political Parties 
Act, 1962 , by filing a petition under Article 184(3) directly before 
this Court .  During the dictatorship of General Zia -ul-Haq, the law 
was amended which the petitioner alleged infringed on the 
Fundamental R ight to the “Freedom of Association ” guaranteed by S.M.C.18/16 etc.   16
Article 17 of the Constitution.  The Attorney General for Pakistan 
opposed the petition on a number of grounds, including that there 
was “no actual proof of discriminatory treatment”, however, this 
content ion was repelled by an eleven member Bench of this Court 
which held, that the, “provisions were ex facie discriminatory” (per 
Muhammad Haleem, CJ, page 485E). The Attorney General’s 
objection that the petitioner could not invoke the jurisdiction of 
this Co urt under Article 184(3) because she was not an “aggrieved 
party” was also rejected; “The plain language of Article 184(3) 
shows that it is open ended” and that “I would not read such 
constraint in it” (per Muhammad Haleem, CJ, pages 488 and 491).  
With re gard to t he matter of public importance  it was held that, “it 
will be for the Supreme Court to consider in each case whether the 
element of ‘public importance’ is involved” (per Muhammad 
Haleem, CJ, page 492L) and that “this provision is open -ended, the 
proceedings could either be maintained by an individual whose  
fundamental rights are infracted or by a person bona fide alleging 
infraction of the fundamental rights  of a class or a group of 
persons…”  (per Muhammad Haleem, CJ, page 493M). The 
objection of th e Attorney General that , since the power of the 
Supreme Court “under Article 184(3) being discretionary and co -
terminus with that of Article 199 of the Constitution should not be 
exercised by the Supreme Court when similar matters on facts and 
law are pend ing adjudication before the High Courts, inter alia, for 
the reason that the appeals lie from the decisions of the High Court 
in those petitions to the Supreme Court” (third paragraph , page 
493), was discarded , as “there was a denial of justice as a result  of S.M.C.18/16 etc.   17
the proceedings [in the High Courts] being dilatory” (per 
Muhammad Haleem, CJ, page 496P).  
In the case of Al-Jehad Trust v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
1996 S upreme Court 324) this Court assumed jurisdiction under 
Article 1 84(3) with regard to the mode and manner of the 
appointment of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and judges of the 
superior judiciary , even though this was not a specific 
Fundamental Right, because all Fundamental Rights would 
“become meaningless if there is no independent Judiciary availa ble 
in the country” (per Ajmal Mian, J, page 419VV).  The petition was 
filed by an advocate  who was not personally aggrieved , but this 
was not an impediment to invoke Article 184(3); “even a member of 
the public is entitled to see that the three limbs of St ate, namely, 
the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary act not in violation 
of any provision of the Constitution” (per Ajmal Mian J, page 
419UU). The “question of locus standi” is not relevant “in the 
Supreme Court when jurisdiction is invoked under  Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution” (per Sajjad Ali Shah, CJ, page 372 T).  
The view taken in the Al-Jehad Trust  case, regarding 
maintainability of a petition under Article 184(3), was followed in 
the case of Asad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 S upreme 
Court  161), which was a unanimous judgment of ten judges of this 
Court. It was held that if the Chief Justice of Pakistan was not 
appointed in accordance with the Constitution than it, “would give 
rise to infringement of the right of a citizen to hav e free, fair and 
equal access to an independent and impartial Court/Tribunal, S.M.C.18/16 etc.   18
thus violating the rights guaranteed under Articles 9 and 25 of the 
Constitution”  (per Saiduzzaman Siddiqui, J, page 189A).  
 The powers of this Court under Article 184(3) were ag ain 
elaborated upon in the case of the Sindh High Court Bar 
Association v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2009 Supreme Court 
879), and, after considering the precedents of this Court  
(paragraph 170 , pages 1185 to 1198) , it was enunciated , “that it is 
a fundame ntal principle of our jurisprudence that Courts must 
always endeavour to exercise their jurisdiction so that the rights of 
the people are guarded against arbitrary violations by the 
executive”  (in paragraph 171 at page 1198) . This case was one 
where suo mo tu notice was taken by this Court of General Pervez 
Musharraf’s November 3, 2007 actions , whereby , he attempted to 
subjugat e the superior judiciary of Pakistan to his personal whims .  
The exercise of suo motu  powers stopped another military dictator 
from causing havoc  and inflicting permanent harm on the State 
and its people by attempting to dismember the judicial arm of the 
State  and replacing it with a compliant prosthetic one .  
Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2013 S upreme Court 413) was a petition filed by the petitioner 
under Article 184(3) seeking directions to ensure free and fair 
elections. This Court held that the petitioner’s holding of a 
Canadian nationality did not prevent him from filing such a 
petition under Article 184(3),  but as the petitioner lacked bona 
fides and none of the Fundamental Rights were shown to have 
been infringed  the petition was dismissed . In dismissing his 
petition it was observed that entertaining a petition under Article S.M.C.18/16 etc.   19
184(3) is , “subject to discretio n of the Court as the words ‘ if it 
considers ’ have been prefaced” with public importance  and 
enforcement  of Fundamental Rights  [in Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution] (per Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ, page 424D).  
The judgment also mentioned the cases w here Article 184(3) had 
been invoked.  
In Baz Muhammad Kakar v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 
2012 Supreme Court 923) the vires of the Contempt of Court Act, 
2012 was challenged on the ground that it violat ed Fundamental 
Rights.   The Attorney General objected  that, none of the petitioners 
were personally aggrieved  nor were their Fundamental Right s 
infringed .  He further objected that the matter should be first 
attended to by the High Courts .  The objections of the Attorney 
General were overruled  by a five memb er Bench of this Court  and 
it was held that, Article 184(3) does not only prescribe that a 
person who is personally aggrieved can have recourse thereto ; it “is 
open ended and nowhere mandates that resort to Article 199 in the 
first instance is a pre -requis ite”. As regards whether this Court 
should itself entertain  when the matter could also be attended to 
by the High Courts it was held that, a petition “is to be decided by 
the [Supreme] Court considering the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of a particular case”  (per Iftikhar Muhammad 
Chaudhry, CJ, page 1022) . With regard to the matter of public 
importance , after referring to the Benazir Bhutto  (above) and other 
cases , it was held, that, “The Courts are obliged to exercise their 
powers and jurisdiction to se cure the rights of the citizens against 
arbitrary violations. While protecting and enforcing the S.M.C.18/16 etc.   20
Fundamental Rights of the people, the courts may also determine 
the legality of a executive action or a legislative act” (per Iftikhar 
Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ, p aragraph 107, page 1022).  
 
15. The importance of the civil service  can be gauged from the 
fact that the Constitution itself mandates (Article 242) that 
induction into the civil service  be undertaken by an independent 
commission and provides for Federal and pr ovincial public service 
commissions. Appointments in the civil service must be made in 
accordance with the Constitution. A serious challenge to the 
selection and appointment process is clearly , therefore , a matter of 
public importance . To be appointed as a  civil servant  is a matter of 
great prestige and positions in the civil service  are coveted. The 
present case itself demonstrates this, for 182 advertised posts 
28,000 applications were received in effect 154 applicants per post.   
We now need to consider w hether this matter pertains to the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights.  
 
16. If through a discriminatory selection process civil servants 
are selected and appointed it would infringe  Article 27 of the 
Constitution which states that, “No citizen other wise qualified for 
appointment in the service of Pakistan shall be discriminated 
against.” Article 25 , prescrib ing the equality of citizens , is another 
Fundamental Right which is attracted if all those who are tested 
and interview ed are not treated equal ly. The present matter also 
involves the contraven tion of the Fundamental Right in Article 18 S.M.C.18/16 etc.   21
which mandates , that, “every citizen shall have the right to enter 
upon any lawful profession or occupation”.    
 
17. The Constitution makers specifically incorporated A rticle 
184(3) which confers jurisdiction upon the Supreme Court .  
Jurisdiction under Article 184(3) is not exercised by this Court 
arbitrarily or because it yearns to , but because this power to 
ensure the enforcement of Fundamental Rights has been conferre d 
upon it by the Constitution . In this case , serious allegations have 
been leveled about the manner in which tests and interviews were 
conducted , that those under whose aegis the whole process was 
conducted were themselves not qualified and there is suffic ient 
material to support such allegations . The two preconditions 
stipulated in Article 184(3), of public importance  and of the 
enforcement of Fundamental Rights, are met. Therefore, Mr. 
Farooqui ’s application was rightly entertained  as a petition under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution.  
 
18. After the issuance of notices by this Court a number of 
illegalities in the affairs of the Commission have already been 
redressed . Chairman of the Commission, Mr. Muhammad Saleem 
Bhnour, and five Members of the Commis sion resigned as  they 
could not justify that they met the stipulated statutory conditions 
for appointment to the said positions . On January 3, 2017 it was 
noted that certain individuals may be working illegally in the 
Commission . This Court in another case  set out the principle s 
governing the place where a civil servant may work , and if a civil S.M.C.18/16 etc.   22
servant was found to be working at another place , in contravention 
of the applicable law , he was to be repatriated to the concerned or 
his/her parent department.  On e such person was Mr. Juma Khan 
Chandio , who was found working as the Deputy Controller of 
Examinations in the Commission despite being an employee of the 
Education Department. T he learned AG informed us (on February 
22, 2017) that notification for his repatriat ion to the Education 
Department  will be issued in three days.   
 
19. An important aspect , with regard to the appointment of the 
Chairman of the Commission , has escaped the attention of all 
concerned . The Chairman has to be appointed “by the Governor on 
advice of the Chief Minister” (Clause 1(B) of A rticle 242 of the 
Constitution), but they are being appointed by the Government. In 
this regard the Constitution and the Act have been amended, 
therefore, the history of the applicable Constitutional provis ions 
and those in the Act need mentioning. Article 242 of the 
Constitution as it was originally enacted (PLD 1973 Central 
Statutes 313)  is reproduced : 
“242. (1) Parliament in relation to the affairs of the 
Federation, and the Provincial Assembly of a 
Provi nce in relation to the affairs of the Province, 
may, by law, provide for the establishment and 
constitution of a Public Service Commission.  
 
(2) A Public Service Commission shall perform 
such functions as may be prescribed by law. ” 
 
Through t he “Revival of  the Constitution of 1973 Order, 
1985 ” (PLD 1985 Central Statutes 457) after clause (1) of Article 
242 a new clause (1A)  was inserted , which is reproduced:  S.M.C.18/16 etc.   23
“(1A) The Chairman of the Public Service 
Commission constituted in relation to the affairs of 
the Fe deration shall be appointed by the President in 
his discretion. ” 
 
Article 242 underwent another change when another clause 
(1B) was inserted vide Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 
2010 (PLD 2010 Federal Statutes 1) , which is reproduced:  
“(1B) The Ch airman of the Public Service 
Commission constituted in relation to affairs of a 
Province shall be appointed by the Governor on 
advice of the Chief Minister. ” 
 
 
20. The Act  provide s that, “The Chairman and Members shall be 
appointed by the Government ” (sub-section (1) of section 4) , 
however, even before Article 242 of the Constitution was amended  
(as mentioned in the foregoing paragraph) , the Act had been 
changed, vide Sindh Public Service Commission (Second 
Amendment) Ordinance, 1998 (Sindh Ordinance No.XII of 1998) , 
by substitut ing the word “Government” with the word “Governor” 
in sub-section  (1) of section 4 . The Second Amendment Ordinance , 
1998  and the amendments made by it lapsed/stood repealed 
(Article 128 of the Constitution), therefore, the Sindh Public 
Service Commission (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999 (Sindh 
Ordinance No.  VI of 1999 ) was promulgated on March 27, 1999 
and once again the Governor was given the power to appoint the 
Chairman .  The Governor ’s power in this regard was maintained by 
the Sindh Publi c Service Commission (Amendment) Ordinance, 
2001 (Sindh Ordinance No.  XXXIX of 2001) , which was 
promulgated on December 8, 2001 .  
 S.M.C.18/16 etc.   24
21. Article 270AA of the Constitution states that all ordinances 
enacted between October 14, 1999 and December 31, 2003, 
subject to the provisions of the Constitution (Eighteenth 
Amendment) Act, 2010 , shall be saved and not lapse or stand 
repealed . The Eighteenth Amendment Act  inserted clause (1B) in 
Article 242 of the Constitution , and the Governor was given the 
power to appoint th e Chairman of the Commission , but on the 
advice of the Chief Minister . However, the Sindh Public Service 
Commission (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act I of 2008) (PLD 
Unreported Statutes, Federal and Provincial Statues 2004 -2009, 
Part-III, Sindh Statutes 612) purported to substitute the word 
“Governor ” with the word “Government ” throughout the Act 
(section 3). This amendment to the extent that it states that the 
Chairman shall be appointed by the Government contraven es 
clause (1B) of Article 242 , which mandates tha t the Chairman of 
the Commission “shall be appointed by the Governor on advice of 
the Chief Minister” . We may add that this point was not raised 
before us by any counsel or party even though in this case the 
question of the Chairman’s appointment has been raised.  Since 
the language of the said Constitutional provision is clear, it does 
not give rise to a possible alternative interpretation and as this 
matter does not require any detailed examination issuance of a 
specific notice to the AG Sindh , who is already on notice, is 
required n or for that matter to the Attorney General.  Moreover, this 
point was observed when judgment in this case was being written 
and all parties would be prejudiced if this matter were delayed any 
further.  S.M.C.18/16 etc.   25
 
22. Great emphasis was placed  by the learned counsel that if 
illegalities have been committed by either the Commission or the 
Government the successful candidates couldn’t be blame d or made 
to suffer as a consequence thereof. This is not simply a case of the 
purported rights or expect ations of the successful candidates ; 
there is much more at stake .  It would not be an exaggeration to 
categorize this case as the future of the civil service  and good 
governance in the Province of Sindh.   Grade 1 6 and 1 7 officers 
selected pursuant to CCE -2013 may in due course of time rise to 
the highest echelons of Government.  By only focusing on the so 
called plight of the successful candidates whilst disregarding the 
interest of the people, the Government and the Province would be 
losing sight of the final goals .  It may be added that , if indeed the 
successful candidates were selected on merit than they should 
have no apprehension on taking the tests and interviews again .  
We are , however , aware that there are various other aspects which 
also need to be c onsidered. Many of those who sat for the written 
tests may have crossed the maximum prescribed age mentioned in 
the advertisement for CCE -2013 ; if they have to again submit 
applications because the process commence s afresh then they 
would be required to ma ke payment  of the requisite fee/charges  
again which may not be possible .  Moreover, if all those who did 
not participat e in written tests of CCE-2013 were now allowed to 
do so it would place all those who did at a disadvantage . These 
legitimate concerns ca n be easily safeguarded , but before doing so S.M.C.18/16 etc.   26
it needs to be considered whether the written tests and interview 
conducted by the Commission were free, fair and transparent.  
 
23. The following illegalities and discrepancies were committed 
in the written tests a nd interviews of CCE -2013 : 
a. Written test s were conducted in April 2015 and results 
were announced almost a year later , in March 2016;  
b. Those who did remarkably well in the written tests got 
very low marks in the interview , therefore were 
excluded ;  
c. Those who  barely passed in the written tests got very 
high marks in the interview , therefore, were included ;  
d. 250 marks was allocated for the interview part of the 
CCE-2013 , but no disclos ure was made about the 
marks allocated to each of the three interviewer s nor 
the marks respectively awarded by them ; 
e. Two out of  the three Members  who conducted the 
interviews , admittedly , were not qualified  to be 
Members of the Commission ; 
f. 250 complaints were received by the Commission;  
g. Marks  of candidates  as per their respective r oll 
numbers  obtained in different tests and interviews 
were not publicly displayed ; 
h. In the results compiled by the Commission , against 
the names of many successful candidates is written 
“not qualified” for no discernible reason ;  S.M.C.18/16 etc.   27
i. Of the 73 posts in respect  of “urban ” areas 25 posts, 
that is about 35% , were “left vacant ” and in  the 
absence of any explanation it can be presumed that 
these posts were left vacant because of bias, prejudice 
and / or for ulterior motives ; and 
j. Written tests were conducted in April  2015, results 
announced in March 2016  and final results  were 
announced on August 19, 2016 .  Such an 
unreasonable delay of approximately sixteen months 
raises legitimate misgivings and undermin es the 
integrity of the entire process . 
These large scale illegalities and discrepancies cannot be 
categorized as innocent mistakes or coincidences  and it becomes 
difficult, if not impossible, to overlook or condone them .  No one 
has, however , faulted the screening tests and the results  of the 
screening tests.   Incide ntally, Justice Agha Rafique Ahmad Khan 
was the Chairman of the Commission at this stage. Upon his 
resignation Mr. Muhammd Saleem Bhnour was appointed , by the 
Government , as Chairman  of the Commission , even though neither 
he nor five other Members were qua lified to be so appointed  as 
they did not have the prescribed qualifications. When notices were 
issued to them they elected to resign .  
 
24. The Commission and the Government are obliged to ensure 
complete transparency in the process of selection and appoi ntment 
respectively and anything less is unacceptable. If qualified and 
competent individuals are appointed their performance and work S.M.C.18/16 etc.   28
would be far superior to the inept allowed in through the back door 
of nepotism and/ or corruption . Those who have earned the 
privilege  yearn to serve the nation and the people, unlike those 
whose loadstar is nepotism or corruption. Since tax payers are 
paying dearly to be served by the best they are entitled to get the 
best.  If the incompetent or the corrupt ingratiate them selves into 
the civil service , citizens are deprived of the ir due.   The hapless 
taxpayers foot a never ending bill which includes the salaries and 
other emoluments of civil servants till they retire , and after their 
retirement their pension s and other bene fits. And they are denied 
the benefit of competent and honest individuals . Appointments 
which disregard merit , perpetuate bad governance , and drain the 
public exchequer;  such appointments also erode the credibility of 
the Commission and the Government . The  performance of the 
Government is also adversely affected , the consequences of which 
is borne by the public. Those given the responsibility to select the 
best candidates must acquit themselves of the trust  reposed in 
them  to the best of their ability and , needless to state, without any 
fear or favour.  
 
25. There is another matter which has incidentally come before 
us. The prescribed functions of the Commission under the Act 
stipulate that it shall, “conduct tests and examinations for 
recruitment for initial  appointment” to posts connected with the 
affairs of the Province of Sindh and also to posts in corporations, 
autonomous bodies and organizations that have been set up by the 
Government ( section 7 of the Act). We , however , learnt that the S.M.C.18/16 etc.   29
Commission is not  holding annual tests and examinations. There 
have been many years when competitive examinations have not 
been held by the Commission. The Secretary of the Commission 
informed us that since the Act was enacted in the year 1989 
combined competitive examinat ions have been held only for the 
years 1992, 1995, 1998, 2003, 2008 and 2013, that is only in six 
out of the twenty eight years  since the Commission came into 
existence pursuant to the Act . When the Commission does not 
conduct annual competitive examinatio ns then initial 
appointments are made through non -prescribed methods. The 
Government should submit a list of vacancies that exist or may 
become due in the foreseeable fut ure to the Commission to enable 
it to conduct examinations, but neither the Government  does so 
nor the Commission calls upon it to do so. Arbitrariness and 
adhocism prevails. The importance given by the Constitution and 
the Act to the manner in which induction into the civil service is to 
be made is being undermined. The Commission is not f ulfilling its 
constitutional and legal mandate. Consequently, the pool of 
competent officers in the Government is shrinking, the public is 
being denied good governance and qualified and competent young 
men and women of the Province deprived of opportunitie s to enter 
into the civil service . If the Federal Public Service Commission can 
take examinations annually, including those of the central superior 
services (“CSS”) and the provincial public service commissions of 
some provinces can also manage to have competitive examinations 
every year then there is no reason that the Sindh Commission 
cannot do so too.   S.M.C.18/16 etc.   30
 
26. Having determined that the petition was maintainable under 
Article 184(3) and that the results of written tests and the 
interviews were not free, fa ir or transparent it remains to be 
considered what should be done and how the interest of all those 
who participated in the written test s and interviews, including the 
successful candidates, can be protected. Those who participated 
cannot be blamed for the  fault of the Government and the 
Commission. It would also not be fair to give those who never 
applied in CCE -2013 or did not take the written tests an 
opportunity to do so now. We are also mindful of the fact that the  
inordinate delay by the Commission in finalizing matters may have 
caused some to exceed the maximum age thereby preventing them 
from apply ing again for another competitive examination that is 
advertised and many may also be financially constrained to bear 
additional fee/charges .  At the same time those who obtained an 
illegal advantage cannot be permitted to retain it. Therefore, 
balancing the lawful and genuine concerns of all concerned , 
safeguarding the legitimate concerns of the successful candidates , 
ensuring the credibility of the Commiss ion and the integrity of the 
selection process we dispose of this matter by issuing the following 
directions:  
(1) A person of integrity and competence who meets the 
stipulated qualification for appointment as Chairman 
of the Commission be appointed in terms o f Article 
242 (1B) of the Constitution  within two weeks from 
the date of the announcement of this judgment ; S.M.C.18/16 etc.   31
(2) It should be ensured that all Members of the 
Commission meet the prescribed qualifications;  
(3) Persons of integrity and competence possessing the 
presc ribed qualifications should be appointed to the 
vacant positions of Members of the Commission  
within four weeks of the announcement of this 
judgment ; 
(4) In view of the large scale illegalities / discrepancies 
committed in the written tests and interviews of 
CCE-2013 the same are set aside and cancelled .  It 
is, however , clarified that the screening tests results 
are not cancelled/set aside ; 
(5) Fresh written tests for CCE -2013 for the posts as 
advertised be held as soon as possible after the 
appointment  of the Cha irman and Members of the 
Commission and after the verification of the 
credentials of the existing / remaining Members ; 
(6) Only the 2,813 candidates who had earlier taken the 
written tests of CCE -2013 for the 182 posts be 
permitted to take the  fresh  written te sts even if in the 
meanwhile they have crossed the stipulated upper 
age, and without requiring payment of any additional 
fee / charge;  
(7) When the papers of the written tests are sent for 
checking/marking the identity of the candidates 
must be kept anonymous/ secret ; S.M.C.18/16 etc.   32
(8) The marks of the written test s should be publicly 
displayed on the Commission’s website , on the notice 
board in its premises and in one Urdu, English and 
Sindhi newspaper ; disclosure should be made of the 
marks obtained in each subject as well as t he 
cumulative total against the candidates ’ roll 
number s; 
(9) All those who obtain the prescribed minimum pass 
mark s in the written tests must be invited for  the 
interview ; 
(10) The marks allocated for the interview  must be 
allocated to the interviewers equally , however, to 
avoid a fraction the Chairman , or in his/her absence , 
the senior most Member shall have the higher mark 
rounded off to avoid a fraction ;  
(11) The Commission shall keep a separate record of the 
marks awarded by each interviewer and each 
interviewer should sign and date the same as well as 
the combined results ; 
(12) The results of the interview should be displayed in 
the same manner as mentioned above in point (8) 
with respect to written tests ; 
(13) The written tests, their checking/marking, interview s 
and displa y of results be completed as soon as is 
practicabl e since the matter pertains to CCE -2013;  S.M.C.18/16 etc.   33
(14) Candidates should be selected for a ll the advertised 
posts , unless they don’t pass the written tests and 
the interview; and  
(15) The candidates who are selected by the C ommission 
should be offered appointment by the Government as 
per applicable law, and if any candidate declines the 
candidate who is next o n the merit list be offered the 
same.  
(16) That in the future the Government should provide a 
list of existing vacancies, which should include a list 
of posts that may become vacant in the foreseeable 
future and a list of new posts to the Commission 
every year and by a specified date. Upon receipt of 
such lists the Commission should start making 
arrangements for holding of co mpetitive 
examinations ; for the current year 2017 the said lists 
should be provided by the Government to the 
Commission within sixty days , upon receipt whereof 
the Commission should invit e applications from 
interested individuals  by placing advertisements , 
which  should also clearly stipulate the legally 
mandated reserved seats, including those for women 
and persons having physical disabilities.  It is 
clarified that the direction contained in this 
paragraph is not applicable to the examinations for 
CCE-2013 in respect whereof separate directions 
hereinabove have been issued.     S.M.C.18/16 etc.   34
 
27. In conclusion we want to record our appreciation for the 
assistance provided by all the learned counsel. We also 
acknowledge the effort of the petitioner, Mr. Muhammad Junaid 
Farooqui , who took it upon himself to invoke the jurisdiction of 
this Court and dr aw its attention to a matter that may have gone 
undetected and unattended , with attendant grave consequences;  
the petitioner had no personal interest and it is commendable that 
he was motivated with the spirit to serve the people and the 
Province of Sindh.  
The office is directed to return to the Commission the test 
papers / results and any other material that was submitted to the 
Court.  
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
 
March  ___, 2017  
(Farrukh ) 
 
 Announced in open Court at Islamabad on  March ___, 2017.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
Approved for Reporting  
 