IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No s.100-K & 101 -K of 2020   
(Against the order dated 31.01.2020 passe d by the High Court of 
Sindh in Crl. A. Nos. S-11 & 12 /2019) 
 
 
Ghaffar Mahesar  
(in both cases)  
  …..Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State through P.G. Sindh and others  
(in both cases)  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Abdul Baqi Jan Kakar, ASC  
        
For the State :              Mr. Saleem Mangrio,  
 Addl. P.G. Sindh  
 
For the Complainant :              In person  
  
Date of Hearing           26.01.2022. 
 
ORDER  
 
         Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Saddar -ud-Din, 
28/29, was shot dead  at 11:30 a.m. on 18.5. 2018  within the 
precincts of Police Station Tharo Shah District Noshahro Feroz; 
incident was reported by his father Ali Nawaz (PW-1) at 2:00 
p.m; the petitioner , Lakhmir @ Lakhoo  and an unknown person 
were arrayed as suspects in the crime report . Petitione r’s 
displease over deceased’s marriage with daughter of one Arbab 
Mehsar is cited as motive for the crime.  Even dated a utopsy 
confirmed  receipt of four shots , jointly fired by the petitioner and 
Lakhmir co -accused , proved collectively fatal;  petitioner was  
arrested on 20.5.2018  and pursuant to a disclosure, led to the 
recovery of a .30 caliber pistol  found wedded with the casings 
secured from the spot ; Lakhmir co -accused is still away from 
law whereas prosecution is clueless about the third assailant till 
date. The learned Sessions Judge, Naushahro Feroze returned a 
guilty verdict  vide judgment dated 22.1.2019  whereunder the 
petitioner stood convicted  under clause (b) of section 302 of the 
Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 ; he was sentenced to imprisonment for Criminal Petition No. 100-K & 101 -K of 2020  
life; for recovered weapon being illicit, he was additionally convicted 
and sentenced , both upheld by  a learned Judge -in-Chamber of the 
High Court of Sindh  at Sukkur , vide impugned judgment dated 
31.1.2020 , leave to appeal wherefrom is being prayed for on the 
ground s that there was no occasion for the learned trial Judge to 
convict the petitioner on capital charge in the absence of “proof beyond 
doubt ” , an error  repeated by the High Court ; it is next argued that  
statements of the witnesses being discrepant were  not worthy of 
reliance  and that the ballistic report relied by the prosecution being 
inherently flawed was liable to be excluded from consideration . With a 
vague and non -specific motive,  fraught with doubts,  petitioner’s 
conviction  could not be maintained  without  potential risk of error , 
concluded the learned counsel. The learned Law Officer contrarily 
defended the impugned judgment.   
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Occurrence is a daylight affair ; Ali Nawaz (PW -1), Sher 
Muhammad (PW -2) and Abdul Raheem (P W-3) unanimously pointed 
their finger upon the petitioner as being one of the assassins; Ali Nawaz 
(PW-1) being father of the deceased is certainly not expected to 
substitute the real assassin of his son with a proxy . We have gone 
through their statements  to find them in a comfortable unison  on all 
the salient aspects of the case  as well as details collateral thereto . Being 
from the same neighbourhood , their presence at the crime scene cannot 
be viewed with suspicion . Medical evidence is consistent with the  
timeline  of the occurrence as well as injuries suffered b y the deceased . 
Preponderance of evidence  undoubtedly constitute “proof beyond doubt ” 
and, thus, can be relied upon without a demur  to hold the petitioner 
guilty of the crime, particularly,  in the f ace of a bald denial with reticent 
support of his real brother , clamouring innocence. Petitions fail. Leave 
declined.   
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
26th January , 2022  
Azmat/- 