IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Irfan Saadat Khan  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
 
Constitution Petition No. 7 of 2024  
 
 
All Public Universities BPS Teachers Association  
(APUBTA) through its President.     … Petitioner  
     Versus  
The Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Federal Education  
and Professional Training, Islamabad and others.   … Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioner :   Mr. Umer Ijaz Gilani, ASC.  
     Mr. Mehmood A . Sheikh, AOR.  
 
For Respondents  No.1-2: Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
Mr. Abdul Sattar Khokhar,  
Sr. Joint Secretary, M/o F.E & P.T.  
Dr. Agha Haider, Deputy Director, (Legal),  
M/o F.E & P.T.  
 
For Respondent No. 3:   Mr. M. Nazir Jawwad, ASC.  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR.  
Mr. Nazeer Hussain,  
     Director -General, Coordination H.E.C.  
     Mr. Ahad Mehmood Raza,  
Assistant Director (Law), H.E.C.  
 
For Respondent No. 4:   Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Punjab.  
     Mr. Abdul Re hman Ch.,  
     Sr. Law Officer, HED, Lahore.  
 
For Respondent No. 5:   Mr. Shah Faisal Ilyas,  
     Additional Advocate -General, KP.  
     Mr. Ghulam Saeed, Special Secretary,  
     HED, KP.  
     Asif Khan, Litigation Officer, HED, KP.  
 
For Respondent No. 6:   Ch. Wasim Akhtar,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Sindh.  
 
For Respondent No. 7:   Mr. M uhammad  Ayaz Swati,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Balochistan.  
 
Date of Hearing:    15.05.2024 . Constitution Petition No. 7 /2024  
 
 2
ORDER  
1. Notices were issued on 1 April 2024 to the respondents who were 
called upon to submit their comments with regard to the public sector 
universities within their respective jurisdiction, including identifying the 
public sector universities in which the posit ion of Vice -Chancellor and other 
tenure based positions are lying vacant and /or the same are held on acting 
charge basis . It was further ordered that the comments should also disclose 
the statutory requirements regarding the periodic holding of meetings 
stipulated in their respective laws and whether the universities are 
compliant therewith.  
 
2. Federation : The learned Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan 
seeks time to file comments on behalf of the Federation of Pakistan. Forty -
five days was more than  sufficient time to have filed comments . Mr. Abdul 
Sattar Khokhar, Senior Joint Secretary  of the Ministry of Federa l Education 
and Professional Training , is in attendance and states that since they had 
not received information from three universities , the comments were not 
filed. This is hardly a justifiable reason for not complying with the order of 
this Court . If the complete information was not available the remaining 
information could have been filed . In any case  the information which was 
sought about p ublic sector universit ies should have been available with the 
Ministry. If they do not have keep such information they should start to do 
so now to ensure that the universities are compliant with the laws  
governing them . The matter is serious and involves the violation of laws by 
public sector universities ; yet it is not taken with the seriousness it 
deserves.  Mr. Khokhar also informed us that some universities are not 
governed by the Ministry of Education, but by other ministries. The Federal 
Government is  directed to also provide the same information about such 
universities too.   
 
3. Balochistan : The learned Additional Advocate -General, Balochistan 
referred to CMA No. 2144/2024 which he states are the comments  filed in 
response to the Court queries . The c omments attach a list show ing that 
there are 11 public sector universities in the Province and in 5 of them 
Vice-Chancellors are functioning  on acting charge basis . With regard to 2 
universities , reference is made to order s of the Balochistan High Court bu t 
the same ha ve not been attached ; in any event , the comments do not state Constitution Petition No. 7 /2024  
 
 3
that the Balochistan High Court had restrained the appointment of Vice- 
Chancellors.  The comments that ha ve been filed do not disclose the 
statutory requirements of holding of meetings nor whether the universities 
are compliant therewith.   
 
4. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa : The learned Additional Advocate -General, 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , states that there are 34 public sector universities in 
the Province and 19 of them are functi oning under acting Vice -Chancellors. 
He states that search committee s had selected eligible candidates  for 
appointment as Vice- Chancellors , but they have not been appointed yet. 
Therefore , we asked him to refer to the said recommendations and he said 
that such information has not been filed as it is required to be kept secret, 
which surprises us and raises the question why people of the Province are 
not entitled to know this.  Public sector universities are paid by taxpayers, 
who are entitled to know where and how their monies are spent. Freedom of 
information is also now enshrined as a Fundamental Right in Article 19A of 
the Constitution. The learned AAG states that the manner of selection and 
appointment of Vice -Chancellors, Pro  Vice-Chancellors and Deans of 
Faculties is provided for in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Universities Act, 2012 
and submits that all such vacant positions will be filled in accordance 
therewith. We expect the said vacant positions to be filled-in as soon as 
practicable. The learned AAG has also referred to some orders passed by 
court s restrain ing appointment s from being made, and that the orders did 
not given any reason for the interim injunction.  Since the law requires that 
these positions should not remain vacant, there fore, we expect that if such 
matters are agitated before courts and that the same shall be decided 
expeditiously .  
 
5. Punjab : The learned Additional Advocate -General, Punjab states that 
the government of the Punjab has filed CMA No. 438/2024 stat ing that 
there are 34 public sector universities in the Province and in 25 the 
positions of Vice -Chancellors are lying vacant. He further states that the 
process of appointments was initiated during the period when there was a 
caretaker government , when writ petiti ons were filed and judges of the High 
Court , by placing reliance upon section 230 of the Elections Act , 2017 , had 
restrained appointments to be made during the subsistence of the 
caretaker government , and that against such orders intra court appeals Constitution Petition No. 7 /2024  
 
 4
were filed, which  have now become  infructuous , as elections have been 
held. This raises the question whether section 230 of the Elections Act, 
2017 prevail s over the law governing universities requiring that the 
appointments be made , and whether appointment of Vice-Chancellors and 
others selected by search committees, are those actions that cannot be 
undertaken are valid questions. However, elections have since been held  
and the learned AAG states that the process for making appointments is 
underway and it is expected to be completed within a period of two months. 
The comments filed also state that the positions of the Registrars are also 
lying vacant. The information regarding Heads of Department and Deans of 
Faculties is not mentioned.  
 
6. Sindh : The Additional Advo cate-General, Sindh states that the 
Education Department of Sindh has not filed comments, but the same have 
been filed by the Sindh Higher Education Commission . The comments of 
the Commission state that there are 27 public sector universitie s in the 
Province out of which in 7 the positions of Vice -Chancellors are vacant. 
However, it is sated that the process for appointment has commenced and 
shall be completed within a reasonable time.  
 
7. The posts of Vice-Chancellors, Pro Vice -Chancellors, Rectors, 
Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Registrars , Heads of Faculties and 
Departments, Controller of Examination , Director Finance which are 
mentioned in the applicable law s, wherever lying vacant , should be filled -in 
as soon as practicable and this be done  in accordance with the applicable 
law.  
 
8. Mr. Nazeer Hussain, Director -General Coordination, Higher 
Education Commission is in attendance and states that the Higher 
Education Commission has issued standard s prescrib ing that non-
academic staff in univers ities should not exceed faculty by more than one 
and a half  times ; however, nearly all public sector universities are in 
violation the same and non-academic staff continue s to be increased. 
Public sector universities financial viability is being eroded bec ause of 
excessive non-academic staff. The respondents are directed to submit 
information regarding the number of non-academic staff and faculty, the 
ratio thereof and if the university is not compliant with the standards 
issued by the Higher Education Commission  the reason for such non -Constitution Petition No. 7 /2024  
 
 5
compliance . The public sector universities should also disclose the amount 
that they generate themselves through fees, etc., and to what extent they 
are dependent on funds from the public exchequer. Comprehensive reports 
to be submitted within one month under the signatures of Federal and 
Provincial Secretaries of the relevant Ministries/Departments. And, a senior 
representative from each, who is well conversant with facts  should be in 
attendance on the next date of hearin g.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
15.05.2024  
(M. Tauseef)  