IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal Appeal No. 319-L/2017  
(Against the judgment dated 26.10.2016 
passed by the Lahore High Court , Lahore in 
Criminal Appeal No. 608/2015)  
 
Qari Muhammad Ishaq Ghazi  
  
…Appellant (s) 
 
VERSUS  
The State       
…Respondent(s)  
  
For the Appellant (s):  Rai Bashir Ahmad , ASC  
    
For the State :  Ch. Muhammad Mustafa, DP G 
   
Date of Hearing :  27.6.2019.  
 
JUDGMENT  
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.- Surprised on 
21.1.2015 by a contingent of Police Station  A-Division Okara, Qari 
Muhammad Ishaq Ghazi , appellant herein, was found  in 
possession of pamphlets, fraught with  incendiary  contents , 
calculated to incite hatred towards  a particular sect ; indicted 
before an Anti Terrorism Court at Lahore , he was  convicted  under 
Section 9 of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997  and sentenced to 5 -years 
RI with fine of Rs.100,000/ -, to be recovered as arrears of land 
revenue with benefit of Section 382-B of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898  vide judgment dated 24 -3-2015 ; his appeal in the 
High Court met with no better fate on 26 -10-2016  vires whereof 
are being impugned through lea ve of the Court.  The appeal came 
up before the Court after appellant's release in the wake of 
completion of sentence, however,  the learned counsel has opted to 
argue the case at full length  with a view to  vindicate his position .  
2.  A multipronged tirade  includes submissions, both on 
factual as we ll as legal aspects of the case; it ranges from denial, 
non-association of public witnesses as well as  prosecution's failure 
to establish distribution of impugned material  in the public , a sine Criminal Appeal No.319 -L/2017  
      2 
 
qua non , according  to the learned counsel to attract the mischief of 
Section 9 ibid. 
3.  Contents of the impugned pamphlets are repugnant and 
abhorrent to say the least ; too nauseatic  to be reproduced ; capable 
of causing most grievous offence ; these contravene  all the limits of 
decency , an obligation  sanctimoniously upheld by every faith.  
The argument  that mere possession of the impugned material  by 
itself would not attract the mischief of the section ibid, without 
actual distribution,  is naively beside the mark . A plain reading of 
Section 9, unambiguously, suggests that possession of the 
inflammatory material  by itself is an offence even before it is 
distributed ; the legislature intended to nip the evil in the bud  and 
rightly so given the inflammatory potential o f the crime .  Arrested 
red-handed , objection over  non-association of public witnesses to 
confirm the possession does not hold water either. Police officials, 
being functionaries of the State , are no less credible  witnesses  to 
drive home the charge in a milieu of  pervasive apathy  towards civic 
responsibilities ; people prefer to recuse behind safety instead of 
coming forward in aid of justice. The officials who testified in the 
witness -box had seemingly  no axe to grind, other wise, found by us 
in a comfortable unison  with one another . Police officials are as 
good witnesses  as any other and their evide nce is subject to same 
standard  of proof and  principles  of scrutiny  as applicable to any  
other  category of witnesses ; in the absence of any  animus,  
infirmity or flaw in their depositions, their statements can be relied 
without demur . View taken by the Courts below , well within the 
remit of law , calls for no interference. Criminal Appeal fails. 
Dismissed . 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
Lahore , the 
27th of June, 2019  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat Ali /* JUDGE  
 