IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 201 7  
(On appeal from  the judgment dated  
22.04.2014 passed by the Lahore High 
Court, Lahore  in Crimina l Appeals  
No.1098 & 1116  of 200 9, Murder 
Reference No.291 of 2009  and Criminal 
Revision No.866 of 20 09). 
 
 
Tariq Mehmood  …Appellant(s)  
 
VERSUS  
The State, etc.  …Respondent(s)  
  
For the Appellant(s)  : Mr. Munir Ahmed Bhatti , ASC  
   
For the Complainant(s)  : Mr. Azam Nazeer Tarar, ASC  
   
For the State  : Mr. Mazhar Sher Awan,  
Additional Prosecutor General  
   
Date of Hearing  : 09.05.2019  
 
 
JUDGMENT  
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J Tariq Mehmood, 
appellant was tried alongside Wasee m Saj jad, Amjad Sar dar, Israr 
Ahmad, Ghulam Ali, Si kandar Hayat and Mst. M ehnaz Akhtar by a 
learned Additional Sessions Judge at Mandi Baha -ud-din for 
committing qatl-e-amd of Saif -ur-Rehman , deceased in addition to 
murderous assau lt on Farhan, PW and abduction of Mst. Tehmina 
Akram, PW ; of them Ghulam Ali, Sikandar Hayat, Israr Ahmad and 
Mst. Mehnaz Akram were acquitted from the charge , whereas  the 
appellant, Was eem Sajjad and Amjad Sa rdar were returned a guilty 
verdict. For homici de, the appellant was sentenced to death under 
clause (b) of Section 302 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860, 
whereas Was eem Sajjad and Amjad Sa rdar to imprisonment for life  
for being in the community of intention along  with compensation of Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 2017 .      2 
 
Rs.100,000/ - each;  for murderous assault , the accused were 
sentenced to ten years R.I. each with fine of Rs.10 ,000/ - and for 
abduction each was sentenced to seven years R.I.  with fine of 
Rs.20 ,000/ -; sentences were ordered to run concurrently with 
benefit of Section 382-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 . 
A learned Division Bench of Lahore High Court vide impugned 
judgment dated 22.04.2014 dismissed convicts’ appeals; a revision 
for enhancement of sentences met the same fate.  It would be 
pertinent to point out that du ring pendency of the appeal , Waseem 
Sajjad, convict  was released on bail by way of execution of 
sentence  on 30.11.2011 ; the release warrant  was however  
inadvertently in favour of Amjad Sardar, convict as well, in 
pursuance whereto both of them  were enlarg ed on bail ; they are 
away from law ever since . The learned High Court  dismissed their 
appeal, however without reference to their departure from the 
array.  
2.  Prosecution ’s case is structured upon statemen t of 
Muhammad Na uman, PW -4; according to him , durin g the fateful 
night at 8:15 p.m. the appellant along with co -accused , differently 
armed , trespassed into his home; they attempted to forcibly take 
away Samina Akram; upon family ’s resistance, Was eem Sajjad,  co-
accused made a fire shot on Muhammad Farhan, P W on his right 
flank ; as complainant and Saif -ur-Rehman attempted to rescue the 
girl the appellant fired upon Saif-ur-Rehman , deceased followed by 
a fire shot by Amjad  Sardar; former , twice  hit by the both, one by 
one; accused decamped with Samina Akram wi thin witnesses’ 
view, recovered unscathed by the police after twenty days of the 
occurrence . The assailants avenged a  suspected liaison between 
Muhammad Usman , PW with appellant’s cousin . Dissatisfied with 
investigation, the complainant preferred to prosec ute the case 
through a private complaint.  
3.  Ocular account furnished by Muhammad Nau man, 
Muhammad Farhan and Mst. Tehmina  Akram , PWs constitutes 
prosecution ’s mainstay . Of them  Muhammad Farhan sustained  
injury , substantially extensive in nature.  Occurre nce took place 
inside a residential premises. First sight cannot escape  Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 2017 .      3 
 
preponderance of evidence, however on a closer view, emerges a 
picture in compatible  with the events , narrated in the crime report . 
The a ccused mounted assault , as per prosecution ’s own  case to 
settle score with Muhammad Usman, PW  for his alleged affair with 
the lady related to the appellant; it is disgrace that brought the 
assailants, face to face, with Muhammad Usman, PW , well within 
their view and reach  it is astonishing that while be ing merciless 
without restraint  upon others they spared prime target of assault . 
There can be no other inference  that either Muhammad Usman 
was not present at the scene or the occurrence took place in a 
backdrop  other than asserted in the crime report . More intriguing 
is recovery of Mst. Tehmina Akram, PW ; according to her, she 
remained in captivity for twenty days , the poor soul was taken 
away  to settle score for what her brother had done to a lady of 
assailants , a conduct repugnant , by all means , nonethel ess, no 
one laid a finger upon the girl despite being at their mercy ; she 
returned  unharmed . It is mind boggling that after having shed so 
much blood  why the lady was kept under immunity. Such superior 
conduct is not expected from the accused when the enti re exercise 
was calculated to disgrace the family . Statement of Mst. Tehmina 
Akram is contradicted by Rana Muhammad Aslam, Inspector, CW -
1, the investigating officer ; according to him, Mst. Tehmina Akram 
rejoined the family on her own  without intervention of the police . 
In the witness box, she was confronted with her previous 
statement wherein she had blamed one Farooq alias Farooqi 
Thabal  as primarily responsible for the crime  though she denied, 
this fact was recorded by investigating officer in her previo us 
statement.  The investigating officer  categorically stated in his 
examination -in-chief that the aforesaid Farooq alias Farooqi 
Thabal was principally responsible for the crime; a hired assassin , 
subsequently killed in a police encounter . Occurrence , stat edly, 
took place  on 20.1.20 05 at 8.15 p.m. however autopsy  was 
conducted following day at 11.45 a.m .; interregnum space s the 
hypothesis of consultations/deliberations. What actually happened 
during the fateful night is left to our imagination.  Even the lea rned 
trial Judge has not believed prosecution evidence qua majority of 
the accused . Once we have found the genesis o f prosecution case Criminal Appeal No. 75-L of 2017 .      4 
 
as inherently suspect , loss of life notwithstanding , we consider it 
grievously unsafe to maintain the conviction s in a case fraught 
with improbabilities  and positions, each self destructive . Criminal 
appeal is allowed, impugned judgment is set aside.  The appellant 
shall be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.  
     
 
 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
Lahore , the 
09th of May, 2019  
Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE  
 