IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT :  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR  
 
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.1777 OF 2020  
(Against Order judgment  24.04.2020  passed 
by the Peshawar High Court , Peshawar  in 
W.P.No. 4181 -P/2018) 
 
Fida Hussain                                                      …Petitioner  
 
    Versus  
 
 
Chief Secretary, Khyber Pakhtunk hwa, Civil Secretariat,  
and others                                 ... Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioner:   In person  
 
For the Respondent s: Mr. Asif Hameed Qureshi, ASC  
    Respondent  No. in person  
 
 
Date of Hearing :  07.04.2023  
 
 
    JUDGMENT  
 
 
MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR, J: -  This Civil Petition for leave to appeal 
is directed against the judgment  dated 24.04.2020 passed by the 
Peshawar High Court in W.P.No.4181 -P/2018  whereby the writ 
petition filed by the respondent No.7 was allowed . 
   
2. The transient facts of the case are that the respondent No. 07 was 
appointed as Patwari on Adhoc basis on 14.09.1988 by respondent No. 
06 with the condition that the appointment would be made regular 
after qualify ing the Patwar Training Course from a Patwar Training 
School . According to the petitione r, the respondent No.7 appeared  in 
the Patwar Course Examination in November, 1996, without 
possessing the Intermediate Qualification , whereas the petitioner was 
appointed as Patwari on regular basis on 21.07.1996.  Actually, the 
dispute cropped up between the petitioner and respondent No. 07  with 
regard to the inter -se seniority as Patwari. The petitioner fi led Service 
Appeal No. 603/2017  before the learned K hyber Pakhtunkhwa Service 
Tribunal,  Peshawar (“ Tribunal ”) which was allowed vide its Judgment 
dated 26.11.2019. During the pendency of the Appeal, the petitioner 
on the basis of some documents came to discover  some irregularities  
in the appointment of respondent No. 07 , therefore, he filed a 
complaint to the Chief Secretary, KPK, Peshawar . A fact f inding  inquiry C.P. No .1777 /2020 
 2
was conducted and as a result thereof, the Inquiry Officer found the 
appointment of respondent No. 07 illegal and recommended 
disciplinary action . The report was forward ed to the respondent No. 06 
but, after due consideration, no action was initia ted and the 
respondent No.6 filed the Inquiry Report on the basis that the matter 
of inter -se seniority between the parties was pending adjudication 
before the learned Tribunal.  The r espondent No. 2 directed the 
respondent No. 6 to comply with recommendation of the Inquiry 
Officer  and conduct de novo  inquiry. The respondent No. 07 , being 
aggrieved of the order of conducting de novo  inquiry , filed Writ Petition 
No. 4181 -P/2018  in the learned Peshawar High Court  which was 
allowed vide impugned Judgment dated 24.04.2020  with the 
observation that direction of conducting de novo inquiry resulted in  a 
miscarriage of justice.  
 
3. The petitioner in person argued that the High Court has wrongly 
held that the petitio ner filed the first application dated  21.03.2018 , 
and the second application on the same facts , but as a matter of fact, 
the petitioner in his service appeal before the Tribunal only questioned 
the seniority list published in 2017 , whereas the second applicat ion 
was for the implementation of the fact finding inquiry report. The 
administrative order passed by the respondent No. 02 for conducting 
the fact finding i nquiry was in accordance with law. In the revenue 
hierarchy the ultimate authority is the Senior Me mber of the Board of 
Revenue  (“BOR”), then come the  Members BOR, the Director (Land 
Record Manual ), the Commissioners and the D eputy  Commissioners in 
their respective capacities as provided in the Land Revenue Act , 1967 . 
He further argued that the respo ndent No.06 was not justified in filing 
the Fact  Finding Inquiry Report  instead of taking action on it.   
 
4. Heard the arguments. In fact the bone of contention  in the matter 
was with regard to the eligibility of respondent No.7 to be appointed  as 
a Patwari . The fact finding inquiry was conducted but the competent 
authority  was dissatisfied  with the outcome of the inquiry , hence it 
was filed . After the filing of the report, another application was 
submitted to the respondent No.2, whereby the respondent No. 6 was 
directed to take action in view of the recommendation s made by t he 
Inquiry Officer. The respondent No .7 (petitioner before the High Court) , 
being aggrieved by the  initiation of the  second round  of disciplinary  
action, challenged it in the High Court. The predominant disagreement 
between the petitioner  and respondent No.7  was in essence C.P. No .1777 /2020 
 3
intertwined with the fixation of inter se seniority  which is also reflected 
in the impugned  judgment , that w hen the recommendation s of the 
Inquiry Officer were  submitted to the Deputy Commissioner , he 
concluded that the claim of Fida Hussain , Patwari (present petitioner) 
is not sustainable, and  may be filed because he and the other Patwaris 
have filed service appeals which are pendi ng in the Tribunal . The High 
Court further observed in the impugned  judgment that the order of 
filing the I nquiry was passed on 03.07.2018 by the Deputy 
Commissioner which was never challenged by the respondent No.7  
(petitioner before the High Court ), but on 17.07.2018  he moved 
another application before the  respondent No.2  with the same 
allegations  and, on his application, vide office order dated 08.08.2018, 
the respondent No.6 was directed to initiate further step s in the light 
of the recommendations of the Inquiry O fficer.  The competent 
authority was not bound to accept the recommendations  of the Inquiry 
Officer and the respondent No.6 , after considering the facts and 
circumstances  of the case and providing an opportunity of hearing , 
filed the report . The Authorized officer could not impose any condition 
or issue directions  to the competent authority to decide the matter in a 
particular manne r, therefore the direction of proposed de novo  inquiry 
was rightly not approved by the High Court.  In our view also, the 
holding of i nquiry under Civil  Servant Laws on the allegation  of 
misconduct is  a routine affair and a common phenomenon  which is 
triggered  after the issuance of a  show cause notice and statement of 
allegations , and when Inquiry R eport is submitted to t he competent 
authority  then it is their domain , with proper sense of duty , to impose 
the penalty  keeping in mind the gravity of charges , if proved , during 
the i nquiry. It is not mandatory that, in all circumstances, the 
competent authority should agree with the recommendations of the 
Inquiry Officer or Inquiry C ommittee , but in case  the competent  
authority decides to impose a  penalty greater than that recommend ed 
by the Inquiry O fficer , then obv iously  some reasons are to be assigned 
with proper application of mind , after providing a right of personal 
hearing to the accused,  and in case  the competent authori ty decides to 
file the Inquiry R eport without taking any action  thereon,  with proper 
reason ing, then obviously in this second limb  there would be no 
justification to expect a de novo  inquiry to start from scratch  in each 
and every case without any lawful justification.  
 
5. The respondent No.7 has  also filed C.M.A. No .5231/2022, which 
reflects that the petitioner had filed Execution Petition No.57/2020 in C.P. No .1777 /2020 
 4
his Service Appeal No.603/2017 before the Tribunal for the 
implementation of the order , which was disposed of on 15. 07.2022 
with the observation that , in the Tribunal ’s judgment dated 
26.11.2019, the impugned seniority list of the year 2014 -15 was set 
aside and the respondents were directed to draw a fresh seniority list 
and, as a cons equence thereof, the respondent -department , while 
following the procedure laid down i n Section 8 of the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Civil Servants Act, 1973 read with Rule 17 of the 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion & 
Transfer) Rules, 1989, issued the  seniority list on 18.01.2022 with  
which the petitioner was not satisfied a t all. The learned Tribunal held 
that the judgment  dated 26.11.2019 has been implemented by the 
respondents according to its spirit and if the petitioner  is aggrieved by 
the seniority list dated 18.01.2022, it gives a fresh cause of action to 
the petitione r, who is at liberty to approach the competent forum, if he 
is so advised.  
 
6. After arguing at some length , the petitioner admitted that his 
Service Appeal No.1184/2022 is pending before the Tribunal with 
regard to the fixation of inter se seniority , so he submits  that he would 
be satisfied if some directions  are issued to the learned  Tribunal to 
decide his pending appeal expeditiously  to which the respondent No.7 
and his learned counsel  also concede.  
 
7. In the wake of the above discussion, although we do not find any 
irregularity or perversity in the impugned judgment passed by the 
learned High Court , but at the same time we fee l it is appropriate to 
dispose of this Ci vil Petition with the direction  to the learned Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa Service Tribunal to decide the pending appeal of the 
petitioner within a period of two months after receiving  a copy of this 
judgment . The petition is disposed of accordingly.  
 
 
 
           Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
    Judge  
 
Islamabad , the  
7th April, 2023  
Khalid  
Approved for reporting  