in THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Appeal No. 585 of 2020  
(Against the judgment dated 06.05.2015 passed b y the Lahore High Court 
Multan Bench in Jail Cr.A. No. 606 /2003) 
 
 
Shaukat Hussain  
  …Appellant (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Appellant (s): Mr. Aftab Alam Yasir, ASC  
 Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
    
For the State : Mirza Abid Majeed ,  
 Deputy Prosecutor General Punjab   
 
Date of Hearing:  14.02.2022.  
 
ORDER  
 
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. :- Through leave of 
the Court impugned herein is judgment dated 06.05.2015 by a 
learned Judge -in-Chamber of the Lahore High Court Multan Bench 
Multan  whereby guilty verdict returned by a learned Additional 
Sessions Judge at Rajanpur  in a case of homicide vide judgment 
dated 30.06.2003 was maintained . 
 It is alleged that the appellant , suspecting illicit liaison,  
strangulated Afshan Batool , no other tha n his better half,  inside his 
home,  at 10:00 p.m. on 15.11.2000 . Incident was reported  shortly 
after midnight  by deceased’s paternal uncle  Ghulam Shabbir (PW -7); 
according to him, the deceased , in the backdrop of above acrimony, 
was staying with her parent s wherefrom the appellant  after 
mediation  took her to his home ; complainant  and his companion 
followed him  and allegedly witnessed  the assault at 10:00 p.m; it is 
their case that the appellant  along with his brother Mushtaq 
Hussain, since acquitted,  placed  a noose around the neck  with Crl. Appeal No.585 -2020                                     2 
 
Dopatta  (P-7) and  wire (P -8) and it is through constriction that the 
deceased  was done to death  within their view .  
2.  Learned counsel for the appellant contends that 
prosecution case on the face of it is extremely improbable  inasmuch 
as not only the father of the deceased abstained from the witness 
box but medical  evidence is also inconsistent with the ocular 
account . Arrival of the witnesses exactly at  the fateful  point of time 
when the deceased was allegedly being strangula ted is a coincidence 
that seldom occur, argued the learned counsel . According to him , 
the position taken by the appellant sounds more convincing  so as to 
let off  him, particularly after prosecution’s failure qua identically 
placed co -accused . The learned L aw Officer has faithfully defended 
the impugned judgment.  
3.  Heard. Record perused.  
4.  In incidents of domestic violence more so  in the event of 
homicidal death of a wife in the house of her husband  a heavy onus 
is cast upon the latter to satisfactorily  explain circumstances  leading 
to the tragedy. See Article 122 of the Qanun -i-Shahadat Order, 
1984 . However, in the present case , explanation furnished by the 
appellant , when juxtaposed with the prosecution evidence , warrants 
a serious reconsideration; acc ording to him, the deceased had 
happily rejoined him, albeit to the annoyance of the complainant 
who otherwise harboured a grudge  and desired  to see the marriage 
on the rocks; in the nutshell, he shifted the blame on the 
complainant.  What puts us on cautio n is absence of deceased’s 
father  from the scene ; he neither joined the investigative process nor 
opted to be in the witness -box; he  would have been prosecution’s 
best choice to prove both desertion as well as calamity that struck 
her daughter; his silence  is most intriguing, lending support , in 
retrospect , to the position taken by the appellant.  Prosecution story 
is further negated by the autopsy report  wherein on the neck a 
ligature mark is conspicuous by its absence ; there is one bruise 
accompanied by fo ur abrasion marks  with an intact hyoid bone ; 
though t he death is opined as asphyxial, nonetheless, it does not 
appear to have occurred in the manner suggested in the crime 
report . It is also hard to believe that the witnesses four in number 
could not have intervened to rescue the deceased , statedly struggling  
to resist the assault within the ir view, close distanced  at the crime Crl. Appeal No.585 -2020                                     3 
 
scene . Acquittal of co -accused, without challenge, is yet another 
predicament confronting the prosecution. Fraught with doubts , 
position taken by the appellant cannot be dismissed without being 
imprudent. Appeal is allowed; impugned judgment dated 06.05.2015 
is set aside; the appellant is acquitted from the charge and shall be 
released forthwith if not required to be detained.  
       
       
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
14th February , 2022  
Azmat /- 