IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
MR. JUSTICE MUSHIR ALAM  
 
S.M.C. NO. 16 OF 2011 ETCETERA  
(Suo moto action regarding law and order 
situation in Karachi)  
(Implementation)  
 
In Attendance:  Mr. Fateh Mohammad Malik, Advocate 
General, Sindh  
 Mr. Maqsood Ahmed, SP (R)  
 Lt. Commander Muhammad Afzal, 
Director Legal, Pak Maritime Security  
 Mr. Sher M.K. Sh, P.G. Sindh  
 Mr. Muhammad Yousaf Leghari, ASC (In 
CMA 297 -K/2014)  
 Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC  
 Mr. Muhammad Arif Khan, ASC (In CMA 
No. 444 -K/2013)  
 Mr. Zia ul Haq Makhdoom, ASC  
 Dr. Muhammad Nawaz Sh, SP  
 Major Shahzad Saleem, D.A. JAG Branch  
 Mr. Z.K. Jatoi, ASC  
 Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG Legal  
 Mr. Bashir Memon, in person  
 Mr. Mazher Ali B. Chohan, AOR  
 Mr. Iftikhar Ahmed, Addl. Collector 
Customs Karachi  
 Mr. Arshad Ali, in person  
 Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi, ASC  
 Mr. Abdul Kader Jaffer, in person  
 Mr. Aftab Memon, Member, BOR  
 Malik I srar Hussain, Sr. Membe r, BOR  
 Mr. Arif Aziz, SP  
  
Date of Hearing:   23.06.2014  
 
ORDER  
 
C.M.A. NO. 282 -K/2014  IN C.M.A. NO. 114 -K/2014  
  Learned counsel for the applicant submits that this 
Court had taken suo moto notice of a news item dated 8.1.2013 
published in Express Tribune  to the effect that Mr. Bashir Memon, 
DIG, then posted in Karachi had been transferred on account of 
the statement made by him before this Court. Adds that by virtue SMC No. 16/2011 etc  2
of the said transfer order, the services of the applicant were placed 
at the disposal of t he Federal Government. Notwithstanding the 
passage of 1 & 1/2 years, he further added, applicant is without 
posting either in the Federal Government or in the Provincial 
Government.  
2.  The grievance being voiced by the applicant appears to 
be genuine. Th e order of this Court was passed in a certain context 
and its continuation is not called for. In the afore -referred 
circumstances, we are persuaded to recall the earlier order with 
the observation that the Competent Authority  in the Provincial 
Government o r in the Federal Government would be free to post 
the applicant at any place of the choice of the Authority. Disposed 
of.  
C.M.A. NO. 114 -K/2014  (ABDULLAH SHAH GHAZI’S SHRINE)  
3.  Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG (Legal) Sindh submits that 
the security arrangeme nts at the shrine of Abdullah Shah Ghazi 
have been beefed up and there is no complaint whatsoever in this 
regard. In view of this candid statement made, this CMA is 
disposed of as having been fructified.  
LAW AND ORDER SITUATION IN KARACHI  
4.  AIG (Legal) h as also placed on record through CMA No. 
300-K/2014 the latest report of the targeted operation in Karachi. 
He, however, requests for a short adjournment to give further 
details of the accused arrested and challaned . Let him do so within 
10 days.   
REGARDI NG LAND ALLOTMENT / LEASES  
5.  Learned Advocate General, Sindh, submits that the 
order of this Court regarding stay of allotments, mutations, SMC No. 16/2011 etc  3
transfer and conversion of any state land is being complied with in 
letter and spirit.  
6.  We may at this stage clarify that this order staying the 
allotment / grant of long leases was meant to ensure that the land is 
not either leased out or allotted for reasons other than bona fide  and 
to land grabbers and this would not prevent the competent authority 
in the Feder al or Government of Sindh to allot or lease out land for a 
project approved by the concerned authority which is directed 
towards establishment of any industry or automotive plant or power 
generating plant or any other initiative in public interest and in 
accordance with law and the relevant rules. The learned Advocate 
General , Sindh, shall convey this order to the Chief Secretary and all 
the provincial secretaries  to ensure that the earlier order is not 
misconstrued and no such project is held up on that ac count .  
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 84/2013  IN C.M.A. NO. 
1145/2013 (REGARDING SERVICE PROFILE OF MR. RAO 
ANWAR AHMED, SSP MALIR)  
 
7.  The issue regarding Rao Anwar Ahmed, SSP Malir 
cannot be taken up as his learned counsel Mr. Abid Zubairi is on 
genera l adjournment. To come up on the next date.  
C.M.A. NO. 297 -K/2014  
8.  Notice to the Senior Member, Board of Revenue. 
Learned Advocate General, Sindh, shall assist after seeking 
instructions from the provincial government.  
C.M.A. NO. 3969/2013  
9.  Mr. Sal ah-ud-Din Siddiqui, Chief Executive Officer of 
M/s Razi Sons (Pvt) Ltd submits that the land measuring 10 acres 
was allotted on a long lease for the construction of automotive 
parts industry; that the requisite payment of Rs. 2 cror e SMC No. 16/2011 etc  4
approximately was made  as required but despite a lapse of all 
these years possession has not been given on account of which the 
industry has not been established. Adds that only yesterday since 
the case was fixed by this Court today, the Deputy Commissioner, 
Malir, Kazi Jan Moh ammad sent possession letter along with a site 
plan but there is no access to the said land.  
10.  Let a photo copy of the letter be placed on record as 
Mark ‘A’. The manner in which a potential / prospective investor is 
being treated by the Revenue Board in Sindh is not a flattering 
commentary on the working of the Institution and is also a pointer 
as to why the industrial development in the Province is not being 
picked up.  
11.  In the afore -referred circumstances, we are persuaded 
to direct the Deputy Co mmissioner , Malir, to personally appear 
tomorrow i.e. 24.06.2014 along with the record. Mr. Aftab Memon, 
Member, Board of Revenue, present in Court, shall convey this 
order and he shall also be present tomorrow. To this extent the 
case is adjourned for tom orrow i.e. 24.06.2014.  
C.M.A. NO 257 -K/2014  
12.  It has been brought to our notice by the applicant that 
a huge chunk of land measuring 1446 acres was encroached upon 
by various people; that pursuant to the order of this Court, the 
said encroachment was re moved and on 4.5.2013 the Deputy 
Commissioner, Hyderabad, submitted a report, which is to the 
following effect: - 
 “In compliance with the orders passed by the 
Honorable Supreme Court of Pakistan on 17.4.2013 in Suo -
Moto case No. 16/2011 (CMA 164 -K of 2013)  regarding 
removal of encroachment from Forest Land, Deh Shah 
Bukhari, Taluka Qassimabad, the encroachment has been SMC No. 16/2011 etc  5
removed from Forest Land on 4.5.2013. The following 
departments took part in this operation:  
 i) Revenue Department, Hyderabad  
 ii) Police D epartment, Hyderabad  
 iii) Qassim Rangers, Hyderabad  
 iv) Forest Department, Hyderabad  
 v) Anti-Encroachment Force, Hyderabad  
 vi) H.M.C. Hyderabad  
 
 The vacant possession of above land has been 
handed over to the Forest Department after removal of all 
structure from the above land on 4.5.2013. ” 
 
13.  The allegation being leveled by the applicant is that 
notwithstanding the afore -referred report, the area in question has 
again been occupied and construction has been raised. We have 
called Mr. Aftab Memon, M ember, Board of Revenue, who was 
present in Court in connection with some other case. He is directed 
to find out the factual position and cause the appearance of 
Conservator Forest and Deputy Commissioner, Hyderabad, to 
explain the factual position. To thi s extent the case is adjourned 
for tomorrow i.e. 24.06.2014.  
C.M.A. NO. 164 -K/2013  
14.  In this CMA, serious allegations have been leveled 
against certain private individuals and revenue officials for having 
allotted valuable state land in a clandestine ma nner to their own 
kith and kin and thereby caused huge loss to the public 
exchequer. Through CMA No. 2034/2013 Mr. Abdul Waheed 
Soomro, who has been a Member of the National Assembly , has  
denied the allegations leveled and along with the application he 
has filed an affidavit.  
15.  In view of the serious allegations leveled, we are 
persuaded to refer this matter to the learned Chief Justice of the 
High Court of Sindh, Karachi, to depute a senior District & 
Sessions Judge of his own choice to inquire into th e matter and SMC No. 16/2011 etc  6
submit a report within three weeks. The case shall be listed 
thereafter.  
 
CMA NO. 206 -K/2014  (REGARDING RETRIEVAL OF 
ENCROACHED LAND)  
 
16.  We have seen the report submitted by the Board of 
Revenue regarding the total land retrieved from encr oachers and it 
comes to 2864 acres, 16.2 ghuntas  and 2500 sq. yards. However, 
the report is silent as to what is the total acreage of the encroached 
land in the Province of Sindh. Confronted with this, learned 
Member, Board of Revenue, Malik Israr Hussain in all fairness 
could not deny that the report submitted in this CMA is deficient 
in this respect. He has been directed to find out the actual position 
today and submit the report tomorrow i.e. 24.06.2014.  
CMA NO. 2664/2013  
17.  Learned counsel for the app licant requests for a short 
adjournment to further document the petition with a view to 
demonstrate applicant’s bona fide  in launching / undertaking a 
housing scheme for which 150 acres of land was leased out to the 
applicant. He will do so within a week  and the case be listed 
thereafter.  
CMA NO. 487/2013  
18.  Through this application the grievance being made is 
that in Sindh, Police appointments have been made against the 
rules. This Court has already dealt with such issue in a judgment 
reported at Contemp t proceedings against Chief Secretary, Sindh 
and others  (2013 SCMR 1752) . The applicant has been told to go 
through the judgment and if he has a grievance, he may file a fresh 
CMA. With this observation, this CMA is disposed of.  SMC No. 16/2011 etc  7
CMA NO. 3827/2014  
19.  Learned counsel appearing for Karachi Port Trust 
submit that the latter organization is under the administrative 
control of the Federal Government and there was some issue 
pending between the Federal Government and the Provincial 
Government in which the KPT w as also involved. However, lately 
there has been an overall settlement in those issues between those 
Governments and all the issues are being resolved in terms of the 
proposed compromise. Prays that the notices sent by this Court 
were either premature or w ere uncalled for.  
20.  In view of the candid statement made by the learned 
counsel for the KPT, the notices sent to the KPT are recalled.  
Disposed of.   
CMA NO. 340/2013  & CMA NO. 49/2013  
21.  CMA No. 49/2013 is an anonymous application but 
nevertheless t he respondent against whom some allegations were 
leveled has filed a detailed reply vide CMA NO. 340/2013 in which 
not only the allegations have been controverted but it has also 
been averred that on most of the allegations the inquiries were 
conducted and  the respondent was exonerated. In this view of the 
matter and as there is no one to dispute the averments made in 
the afore -mentioned CMA, CMA No. 49/2013 is disposed of as 
having frivolous. CMA No. 340/2013 is also disposed of.  
CMA NO. 2968/2013  
22.  Learned counsel for the applicant submits that Nizam 
Akbar Ali was leased out 12 acres of land for housing purposes but 
it was subsequently found that it was no go area and the 
construction could not be carried out. Adds that in the meanwhile SMC No. 16/2011 etc  8
pursuant to the  proceedings initiated the land was cancelled 
notwithstanding the fact that applicant had applied for extension 
of grace period for initiating the construction.  
23.  We would not like to comment on the veracity of the 
submissions being made and leave it t o the competent authority to 
decide the application for extension, if any, under the rules under 
intimation to the Assistant Registrar (Karachi) of this Court for 
information. With this observation, the notice sent to the applicant 
is discharged. Disposed of.  
CMA NO. 179 -K/2013  (APPLICATION BY MUHAMMAD ISMAIL 
SHAHEEDI)  
 
24.  We are not minded to give any further direction for 
early hearing of the suit pending before the High Court of Sindh as 
applicant has the remedy of filing an appropriate application be fore 
the concerned Court. Disposed of.  
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
Karachi, the  
23rd of June, 2014  
Khurram  
 