IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
MR. JUSTICE MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED  
 
Criminal Petition No. 30-P of 2014  
(Against the judgment dated  20.02.2014  passed by the 
Peshawar High Court  Peshawar  in Cr. A. No. 78-P/2013)  
 
State through A.G. KP, Peshawar  
 …Petitioner  
Versus  
 
Amanat Khan, etc.  
..Respondent  
     
 
For the  Petitioner(s) : Mr. Muhammad Nisar , Addl. A.G. KP  
 
For the Respondent (s): N.R. 
 
Date of hearing:   06.7.2021  
 
ORDER  
 
 Qazi M uhammad Amin Ahmed , J-. In broad daylight , Javed 
Ali Shah, 40, was shot dead within the precincts of Police Station Lahore 
District Swabi ; First Information Report was lodged by his uncle Syed 
Sardar Shah  (PW-3) wherein he blamed the respondent , a previous  convict,  
as the sole  culprit , in the backdrop of a previous altercation. Autopsy 
conducted at 1: 05 p.m. confirmed four entry wounds with corresponding 
exits. Respondent stayed away from the law  and was finally spotted in a 
prison at Takhat Bhai wherefrom he was transposed as an accused in the 
present case ; pursuant to a disclosure , he led to the recovery of a .30 
caliber pistol , however, incompatible with the casings secured from the 
spot. A learned Additional Sessions Judge  vide judgment dated 31.01.2013  
convicted him under clause (b) of Section 302 of the Pakistan Penal Code, 
1860  with the sentence of death alongside a direction to pay compensation, 
overturned  by a Division Bench of Peshawar High Court Peshawar vide 
impugned judgment dated 20.02.2014 , vires whereof, are being assailed on 
the ground s that in the face of overwhelming evidence furnished by natural 
witnesses having no axe to grind , there was no occasion for the High Court 
to acquit the respondent from the charge , squarely structured on ‘proof 
beyond doubt ’. It is next argued that the impugned view of the High Court , 
seemingly based upon various circumstances , considered  by it as suspect , 
mostly relate  to peripheral or investigative flaws, with no bearing  upon the Cr.P.30-P/2014  2
preponderance of ocular account  furnished by the witnesses  who had 
satisfactorily  explained their presence at the spot ; they do not seem to have 
an axe to grind  by substituting an innocent with the guilty. It is lastly 
argued that in the wake of respondent’s absconsion , a negative foren sic 
report did not adversely effect the prosecution’s case  nor non -mentioning of 
specific caliber of the weapon could destroy the intrinsic value of the 
testimony that successfully withstood the test of cross -examination , 
particularly having regard to the formidable past, hounding the respondent . 
Leave is granted to reappraise the entire evidence with a view to secure the 
ends of justice. Send for the respondent through bailable warrant of arrest 
in the sum of Rs.200,000/ - with one surety in the like amount , returnable 
to the Assistant Registrar of this Court at Peshawar, to be executed through 
Station House Officer, within a fortnight.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Peshawar ,  
6th July, 2021  
Azmat /- 
‘Not approved for reporting’   Cr.P.30-P/2014  3
 