IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
        (Appellate/ Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
   Present  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
   Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
    
CONST.P.NO.77/2010 & CMA NOs.42 -43/2012  
AND HRC NO.13 124-P & 40303 OF 2011  
 
President, Balochistan High Court     vs.  Fed. Of Pakistan and others.  
Bar Association  
    AND  
CMA NO.431/2012 IN CONST. P. 77 OF 2010.  
(Gruesome & Sensational Murder of wife and daughter  
of Mir Bakhtiar Domki at Karachi on 30.01.2 012) 
   
For the Petitioners  : Hadi Shakeel Ahmed, ASC.  
 
For Fed. of Pakistan  : Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, AGP.  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Amanullah Kanarani, AG.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh  : Mr. Abdul Fateh Mali k, AG .   
     Advocate General Sindh.  
     Mr. Mu shtaq Ahmed Shah,  
Inspector General of Police Sindh.  
Mr. Niaz Ahmed Khosa, SSP.  
Mr. Arshad Kamal Kayane, SP.  
Mr. Anwar Subhani,  
Legal Consultant for IGP Sindh.    
 
For IB    : Ms. Naveeda Noor, AD (Legal)  
 
Date of hearing   : 06.02. 2012.  
    O R D E R  
  In pursuance of our earlier order dated 27.01.2012, 
learned Advocate General Balochistan has submitted a daily 
situation report; he claims no privilege/confidentiality for the Const.P.77/2010, etc.  
 2 
 same. Learned Attorney General for Pakistan states that he could 
not procure r eports from the MI & ISI regarding the situation 
prevailing in the Province of Balochistan; however, he requests 
for some time to do the needful.  
2.  It may be noted that on 3 0.01.2012, an untoward/  
unfortunate incident took place in the area of Clifton B lock-9, 
Karachi , in which female family members of MPA -Mir Bukhtiar 
Domki along with Driver were killed. The said incident resulted 
in unrest in the whole Province of Balochistan as the general 
masses/public observed stern strike in the Province and there was 
complete shutter down. There w ere hues and cries for the reasons 
that innocent female family members of Mir Bakhtiar Domki 
have been murdered.  
3.  In above view of the matter, instant proceedings have 
been initiated, keeping in view the situation prev ailing in the 
Province of Balochistan;  therefore, notices were issued to the 
Inspector General of Police Sindh and the Advocate General 
Sindh to appear and explain the situation.  
4.  In response to notices, a report has been filed; perusal 
whereof indicat es that so far no effective progress has been made 
by the Police to cause arrest of the culprits involved in the 
commission of the crime. As it has been pointed out herein above 
that it is one of the most sensitive incident , having its own Const.P.77/2010, etc.  
 3 
 repercussions on the situation prevailing in the Province of 
Balochistan, which is becoming worsen day-by-day. In our view, 
the Inspector General of Police Sindh should have taken all 
necessary steps in tracing the offen ders and causing their arrest .  
5.  The Inspector Ge neral of Police Sindh, present in 
Court states that extensive efforts are being made by him and he 
is confident that he will succeed in arresting the culprits involved 
in the crime ; however, he requests that he needs some time to do 
the needful .  
 Adjourne d to 10.02.2012 . The Advocate General 
Sindh and the Inspector General of Police Sindh are directed to 
appear in -person on the next date of hearing.  
 
             CJ. 
 
 
        J. 
 
 
        J. 
Islamabad,  
06.02.2012.  
Irshad Hussain /*  
 