SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
(Original Jurisdiction)
PRESENT:
Mr. Justice Gulzas Ahmed, CJ
Mr. Justice Ma.zh gr Alam Khan Miankhel
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.4821 OF 2018[For implementation of the judgment in Suo Moto No.1 of 2014]
IN
S.M,C NO. J, OF 2014
Human Rights Commission of Pakistanthrough Chairperson, Dr. Mehdi Hasan
and others.
Versus
Federation of Pakistan through Ministry
Of Education and others.Applicant(s)
.Responclent(s)
iiaten.dance 	Mr. Shumafi Ahmed Butt, AdvocateGeneral, KP
Mimi Shafaqat Jan, Additional
Advocate General, K?
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, AdditionalAdvocate General, KP
Moazan-i Jan Ansari, I. K?
Ikram lJllah Khan, Sectary Home,K?
Muhammad Javed, Commissioner,Kohat
Shafi Ullah Khan, DPO, Kohat
Tahir Ayub Khan, RPO, Kohat
Mr. Shoaib Suddle, Chairman, One
man Commission
Dr. Ramesh Kutnar, MNA
Rohir Kumar, Deputy
Administrator, Karak Mandar fromHindu Community
Samual Payar ,Chairman, IMRFMuhammad Saqib Jillani, Member
of One man Commission(via video link from Lahore)
Date of Hearing 	 : 13.10.2021
ORDER
The matter regarding desecration; damaging and
destroying the Hindu Samaadhj at Teri was firstly addressed by1
*
CM&4821 of 2018
-2.-
this Court vide its order dated 05.01.2021 and in para-6 of the
said order, the Court has specifically noted and also directed the
I
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Government to recover the cost of the
rehabilitation of Samaadhi at Ted from those who are responsible
in causing its destruction. Although criminal cases have been
registered against those miscreants/ accused but through an
agreement with the Hindu Community and with the consent of the
-- Hindu Community all the miscreants/ accused have been granted
bail in the criminal cases, however, so far no recovery seems to
have been effected from them.
2.	 Learned Advocate General, KP states that the recovery
can be made after the amount is adjudicated against the
miscreants/ accused. We are informed that there are 123 persons
identified and charged for causing of desecration and destruction
of Hindu Samaadhi at Teri and a cost of Rs.33.0569 million has
been incurred in restoration and reconstruction of the Samaadhi
at Ten. All this costs would have not been incurred by the Khyber
Pakhtunithwa Government had the Samaadhj not been desecrated
and destructed by the miscreants/ accused. As the
miscreants/ accused have been well identified and also been
charged and there is a possibility that they might again create
issues with the Hindu Community, they are to be burdened with
the cost of reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Samaadhi and
thus, the Chief Secretary, Government of KP is directed to recover
from all the miscreants/accused the above amount of Rs.33.0569
million, dividing the said amount on each of the
miscreants/accused and recover it as the arrears of Land Revenue
of 2018
-.3-
from them. Such recovered amount from 
the miscreants/accusdshallbe utilized for the fute maintenance and Up-keep of the
Samaaahj This shall be done by the
Chief Secreta ry, Governmentof KP Within a period of One month from today.
3.	Adjourned to a date after One month.
CH 	H
B en cli -I
Islarnabad
13.10.2021
'NOT APPROVED JUDGE
E°flEPORTJNG
c
