SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
Criminal Petition  for Leave to Appeal  No.1359  of 2023  
[Against the order  dated 10.11.2023 passed by the  Islamabad  High Court , 
Islamabad  in Crl. Misc. No. 1627 -B/2023 ] 
 
 
Zubair Saeed Sabri/ Sain Zubair Shah  …Petitioner  
Versus  
The State thr. A.G. Islamabad and another  …Respondent s 
 
For the Petitioner  : Mr. Muhammad Ilyas Siddiqui, ASC  
   
For the State  : Raja M Shafa qat Abbasi, DAG  
M/s Masood Bangash, SSP 
(Investigation ) and Rukhsar Mehdi, SP 
(Investigation ), Islamabad  
Ch. M. Rafaqat Khokhar, Law Officer  
Mr. Muhammad Hanif, Inspector/IO  
   
For the Complainant:  : In-person  
   
Date of Hearing  : 14 February 2024  
   
O R D E R  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . The petitioner seeks bail in case arising out of 
FIR No.153/2023 registered at Police Station Hummak, Islamabad, 
on 23 July 2023. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits 
that as per FIR itself, no offence as envisaged u nder section 295 -C 
of the Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (‘ PPC’), is made out and the 
complainant later himself submitted an application requiring that 
the petitioner be charge d with sections 295-A and 298 -B of the 
PPC. He, h owever, submits that the allegation which the 
complainant levelled does not attract even these offences. He 
further submits that the FIR was registered with a delay of twenty -
eight hours and the investigation was not undertaken by a 
Superintendent of Police (‘ SP’) as required by section 156 -A of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (‘ the Code ’).  
 
2. The complainant alleg ed (as per FIR) that he went to the 
petitioner , who was a Pir, to get dum and in his house he saw a Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 2 - 
   panafl ex banner on which there were photographs, allegedly, of the 
Prophet  and 12 Imams. The complainant does not disclose w hat 
took place between him and the petitioner in the petitioner’s 
house.  The complainant then went to the police station and asked 
the police to accompan y him, and the y entered into the petitioner’s 
house , removed the panaflex from the wall and took it into 
possession.  
 
3. Since proper assistance was not provided by the Law Officer 
and the Investigation Offic er, a junior official , we sent for the 
concerned SP  and the Deputy Attorney -General. The Senior 
Super intendent of Police (‘ SSP’) accompanied them . We inquired 
from the SSP and the SP whether a search warrant was obtained 
before entering the petitioner ’s house and they stated that a 
warrant was not obtained. Since section 295 -C of the PPC was 
mentioned as the only offence in the FIR w e inquired whether the 
matter had been investigated by an off icer of the rank of SP , as 
required by section  156-A of the Code , and were told that this too 
was not done.  
 
4. An offence under section 295 -C of the PPC must be 
investigated by an officer not below the rank of SP, as stipulated by 
section 156A of the Code, which is reproduced hereunder:  
 
‘156A. Investigation of offence under section 295C, 
Pakistan Penal Code. - Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Code, no polic e officer below the rank 
of a Superintendent of Police shall investigate the 
offence against any person alleged to have been 
committed by him under section 295C of the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860)’  
 
 Article 4 (1) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) mandates that individuals must be 
treated in accordance with law,  which includes section 156A of the 
Code. And, Article 4(2)(a) states that ‘no action detrimental to the 
life, liberty, body, reputation or p roperty of any person shall be 
taken except in accordance with law ’. 
 
5. The police were required to obtain a search warrant before 
enter ing the house of the petitioner , but did not do so.  The privacy Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 3 - 
   of home shall be inviolable  mandates Article  14(1) of t he 
Constitution, reproduced hereunder:  
 
‘14(1). The dignity of man and, subject to law, the 
privacy of h ome, shall be inviolable.’  
 
 Without obtaining a search warrant the privacy of the 
petitioner’s home was violated. Article 8 of the Constitution gives 
paramountcy  to the Fundamental Rights (including Article 14) , 
which cannot be abridge d, and if any law is made in contravention 
thereof  it states that it shall to such extent be void.  
 
6. Since we are dealing with offences under chapter XV of the 
PPC, that  is, offences  relating to religion , in this case relating to 
Islam, it would be appropriate to also consider relevant Islamic 
injunctions. Verse 27, chapter 24 ( An-Nur) of the Holy Qur’an 
requires, that:  
ﯾَٰٓﺄَﯾﱡﮭَﺎ  ٱﻟﱠﺬِﯾﻦَ  ءَاﻣَﻨُﻮاْ  ﻻَ  ﺗَﺪۡﺧُﻠُﻮاْ  ﺑُﯿُﻮﺗًﺎ ﻏَﯿۡﺮَ  ﺑُﯿُﻮﺗِﻜُﻢۡ  ﺣَﺘﱠﻰٰ  ﺗَﺴۡﺘَﺄۡﻧِﺴُﻮاْ  وَﺗُﺴَﻠِّﻤُﻮاْ  ﻋَﻠَﻰٰٓ  
أَھۡﻠِﮭَﺎۚ  1 
‘Believers do not enter houses other than your own 
until you have asked permission…’  
 
 In this case the requisite perm ission  was the search warrant , 
which was not obtained.  
 
7. When the police itself do not abide by the law it is a matter  of 
grave concern . And all the more so  when a citizen’s liberty is 
involved. It is noted that i n such cases the complainant , rather 
than the police , takes the lead, and also effectively take s over the 
investigation . This is done  in complete derogation of the law and 
the Constitution. The SSP state d that he will ensure that in future 
the law is strictly followed. He further states that he w ill be 
examining whether disciplinary action is required to be initiated 
against the delinquent policemen . 
 
8.  Since the alleged offence is against religion matters have to 
be examined in that context. Article 2 of the Constitution 
stipulates that, ‘ Islam  shall be the S tate religion of Pakistan ’ and 
Article 227(1) of the Constitution requires that:  
                                                
1 Holy Qur’an, An-Noor (24), verse 27.  Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 4 - 
   ‘227. (1)  All existing laws shall be brought in 
conformity with the Injunctions of Islam as laid down 
in the Holy Quran and Sunnah, in this part referred to 
as the Injunctions of Islam, and no law shall be 
enacted which is repugnant to such Injunctions.’  
 
 Mention may also be made of Article 31(1) of the Principles of 
Policy  chapter of the Constitution which requires that Muslims be 
enabled to lead an Islamic w ay of life : 
‘31. (1)  Steps shall be taken to enable the 
Muslims of Pakistan, individually and collectively, to 
order their lives in accordance with the fundamental 
principles and basic concepts of Islam and to provide 
facilities whereby they may be enable d to understand 
the meaning of life according to the Holy Quran and 
Sunnah. ’ 
 
 No less a person than a rightly guided Caliph, Hazrat Umar 
bin Khattab (may Allah be pleased with him) , dropped the charge 
of alcohol being consumed by Muslims in their house be cause the 
house was not legally entered.2 And, ‘To promote unity and the 
observance of the Islamic moral standards ’ is prescribed by Article 
31(2) (b) of the Constitution . The police , in enter ing the petitioner’s 
house without a search warrant, violated the  law, Islamic 
Injunctions and moral standard s. 
 
9.  Every Muslim should aspire to the moral standard s of 
Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him) , 
the last Messenger of Almighty Allah . The Holy Qur’an itself 
testifies to his great moral character:  
 وَإِﻧﱠﻚَ  ﻟَﻌَﻠَﻰٰ  ﺧُﻠُﻖٍ  ﻋَﻈِﯿﻢٖ  3 
‘And you have an excellent character. ’  
 
10. In Pakistan, which is an Islamic Republic, unfortunately at 
times for profit, vendetta or personal publicity Islamic Injunctions 
                                                
2 Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad bin Ahmad al -Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li -Ahkam al -Qur’an  
(Beirut: Mu’assasat al -Risalah, 2006 ), vol. 19, pp. 400 -401.  
3 Holy Qur’an, Al-Qalam  (68), verse 4.  Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 5 - 
   are negated. The Holy Qur’an requires Muslims to emulate the 
exemplary character of the Messenger of Allah:  
 ﻟﱠﻘَﺪۡ  ﻛَﺎنَ  ﻟَﻜُﻢۡ  ﻓِﻲ رَﺳُﻮلِ  ٱﱠِ ๡  أُﺳۡﻮَةٌ  ﺣَﺴَﻨَﺔٞ  4 
‘You have indeed in the Messenger of Allah a n example 
of beautiful conduct. ’ 
 ‘Allama Ibn ‘Abidin al -Shami ,5 a renowned Hanafi juris t, 
went to great lengths to state that Muslims should emulate the 
Prophet’s example by follow ing his teachings, and should not try 
hard to find wrongdoing. We must also strive  to protect the 
excellent reputation  of the Last Messenger of Almighty Allah and 
abide by what he did, accept ing the repentance of one who repents:  
‘It is not for us to impose punishments and other 
means of deterrence on the basis of our personal 
inclinations. Rather, we are bound to act on what 
appears to be the law of our Prophet (peace and 
blessings of Allah be upon him)…  We cannot say that 
our love for the Prophet  (peace and blessings of Allah 
be upon him)  demands of us to kill the one who used 
foul language against him even after he repents since 
the foremost prerequisite of love i s to follow, not to 
innovate. We fear that on the Day of Resurrection the 
Prophet  (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him)  
might be the first one to ask about the murder of such 
a person. Therefore, after the accused repents, we 
must refrain from punishi ng him and to leave his 
matter to his Master who knows all that lies in his 
heart, as the Prophet  (peace and blessings of Allah be 
upon him)  would accept from people their outward 
embracing of Islam and would leave their decision to 
the One Who knows all s ecrets.’6  
 
11. Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be upon 
him) was not just a great blessing for Muslims  but also for all 
creatures:  
                                                
4 Holy Qur’an, Al-Ahzab  (33), verse 2 1.  
5 1198 AH/1783 CE – 1252AH/1836 CE.  
6 Muhammad Amin Ibn ‘Abidin al -Shami, Tanbih al -Wulah wa al -Hukkam  (Cairo: 
Dar al -Athar, 2007), p. 90.  Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 6 - 
    وَﻣَﺎٓ أَرۡﺳَﻠۡﻨَٰﻚَ إِﻻﱠ رَﺣۡﻤَﺔٗ ﻟِّﻠۡﻌَٰﻠَﻤِﯿﻦَ  7 
‘We sent you not, but as a Mercy for all creatures. ’ 
 
He called upon his followers to emulate the Kindness of the 
Creator:  
 ﱠَ ဃ إِنﱠ  ﯾُﺤِﺐﱡ   اﻟﺮِّﻓْﻖَ  ﻓِﻲ اﻷَْﻣْﺮِ  ﻛُﻠِّﮫِ  8  
‘Allah loves kindnes s in all matters.’  
 إِنﱠ ﷲَ رَﻓِﯿﻖٌ  ﯾُﺤِﺐﱡ   اﻟﺮِّﻓْﻖَ،  وَﯾُﻌْﻄِﻲ  ﻋَﻠَﻰ اﻟﺮِّﻓْﻖِ  ﻣَﺎ ﻻ ﯾُﻌْﻄِﻲ ﻋَﻠَﻰ اﻟْﻌُﻨْﻒِ   9 
‘Allah is kind, He loves kindness, and He rewards 
kindness , but does not reward harshness .’ 
 
12. When the believers were in a very small  minority and the 
Prophet and his companions were persecuted in Mecca they 
sought safety in Madina .10 Mecca was conquered11 but this was 
done without spilling a drop of blood . The Prophet issued a 
general amnesty to all, including his oppress ors and to Islam ’s 
enemies.12 
 
13.  At the Battle of Badr13 some of the bitterest enemies  of 
Prophet Muhammad (peace and blessings of Allah be upon him)  
were captured . The Prophet showed mercy and clemency to all, 
even to Suhayl bin ‘Amr who had vociferously denounc ed him. A 
companion  suggested that a few of his teeth be pulled out to 
teach him a lesson . Ibn Ishaq , the first biographer of the Prophet, 
recorded the Prophet’s response:  
 ﺎ. إﻧﱠﮫُ ﻋَﺴَﻰ أَنْ ﯾَﻘُﻮمَ ̒ﱠُ ﺑِﻲ وَإِنْ ﻛُﻨْﺖُ ﻧَﺒِﯿ ဃ ﻻَ أُﻣَﺜِّﻞُ ﺑِﮫِ ﻓَﯿُﻤَﺜِّﻞُ  ﻣَﻘَﺎﻣًﺎ ﻻَ ﺗَﺬُﻣﱡﮫُ. 14  
‘Were I to do this, Allah would do the same to me, 
although I am His messenger.  He may one day attain 
such a status that you will no longer condemn him .’ 
 
The kindness and sagacity of the Prophet was proved right ; Suhayl 
bin ‘Amr helped conclud e the peace treaty of Hudaybiyah  at a time 
                                                
7 Holy Qur’an, Al-Anbiya’  (21), verse 107.  
8 Sahih al -Bukhari, Kitab Istitabat al -Murtaddin, Hadith No. 6528.  
9 Sahih Muslim, Kitab al -Birr wa al -Silah wa al -Adab, Hadith No. 2593.  
10 27 Safar, 14th Year of the Prophethood/12 September 622 CE.  
11 17 Ramadan 8 AH/8 January 630 CE.  
12 ‘Abd al -Malik Ibn Hisham al -Himyari, as-Sirah an -Nabawiyyah  (Cairo:Mustafa 
al-Babi, 1 955), vol. 2, p. 412.  
13 17 Ramadan 2 AH/13 March 624 CE . 
14 As reported by Ibn Ishaq’s disciple Ibn Hisham. Ibid.  Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 7 - 
   when he had not converted to Islam. After he embraced Islam he 
participated in many battles defending Muslims.15 
 
14. Undoubtedly, it was the excelle nt character of the Prophet, 
emulated by the early Muslims that ensured Islam spreading 
throughout the world in a very short time. The miracle of its 
success lay in the conduct of its adherents; their honesty, love and 
empathy for all humanity. The ignorant and those inimical to Islam 
astounded by Islam’s success retorted (without proof) that it was 
spread by the sword. Unlike the Christian European Empires the 
Muslim Ottoman Empire lasted the longest, for 600 years. The 
principle at its core and one which sustained it was inclusivity and 
tolerance ; strict adherence to the Qur’anic command - ‘there is no 
compulsion in religion ’ – 16  ﻻَٓ  إِﻛۡﺮَاهَ  ﻓِﻲ ٱﻟﺪِّﯾﻦِ  – . Hatred , bitterness and 
violence rarely, if ever, brought anyone into Islam – the abode of 
peace  – nor brought deviants on to the straight path  - اﻟﺼِّ ﺮاطَ  اﻟُ ﻤﺴﺘَ ﻘِ ﯿﻢ. 17 
Instead all it does is to strengthen the resolve of Isla m’s detractors 
and those inimical towards Muslims.  
 
15.  Section 295 -C of the PPC, for which the petitioner was 
initially charged, is a capital offence. If the complainant’s 
allegations were accepted in their entirety, even then this offence 
was not made o ut. It is, therefore, surprising that the police 
mentioned this offence in the FIR, which can only mean that they 
did so under pressure of the complainant or for ulterior purposes. 
The only other explanation could be their gross incompetence. In 
all offenc es against religion the particulars of the offence must be 
clearly stated. Merely levelling such a cha rge attracts great odium 
because even if the accused is subsequently found to be not guilty , 
becomes inconsequential as his life has already been destroye d. 
 
16. The offence s levelled against the petitioner are those relating 
to the religion  of Islam , therefore, it was necessary to consider 
some relevant Islamic injunctions. We now proceed to determine 
                                                
15 Abu al -Hasan ‘Ali al -Jazari, Usd al -Ghabah  (Beirut: Dar al -Kutub al -‘Ilmiyyah, 
1993), vol. 2, p. 585.   
16 Holy Qur’an, Al-Baqarah  (2), verse  256. 
17 The phrase ‘straight path’ appears in many verses of the Holy Qur’an, 
including the following: Al-Fatiha  (1), verse 5; Al-Hajj (22), verse 54; Ash-Shoora  
(42), verse 52.  Crl.P.L.A.1359 of 2023.doc  - 8 - 
   whether the petitioner should be given bail. The police entered  the 
petitioner’s house  but did so without first obtaining a warrant; 
which is all the more surprising as the police was not rushing to 
prevent a murder or apprehend a suspect from fleeing. The illegal 
entry of the police into the petitio ner’s house also brings into 
question anything recovered by the police from his house , which is 
another legal transgression.  
 
17. In this case the charge was also amended to section s 295-A 
and 298 -B of the PPC . The petitioner has remained incarcerated 
for over seven months but his trial is nowhere near conclusion . 
 
18. All th e aforesaid factors entitle the petitioner to bail.  
Accordingly, the petitioner is admitted to bail in the subject case 
on furnishing bail bond and one surety in the sum of fifty 
thousa nd rupees to the satisfaction of the Trial Court. This petition 
is converted into an appeal and allowed by setting aside the 
impugned order in the se terms.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
14 February 202 4 
Syed Farhan Shah  
Approved for Reporting  
 
 