 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:   
MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
MR. JUSTICE SHAHID WAHEED  
MR. JUSTICE IRFAN SAADAT KHAN  
 
 
 
 
C.P.L.A s.210 and 212 of 2024  
(On appeal a gainst judgment s dated 
16.01.2024 passed by the Lahore Hig h 
Court, Lahore in W.P s. No.  2610  and 
2620 /2024  respectively ) 
 
 
 
Umar Farooq  … Petitioner  in 
both  
Vs 
Sajjad Ahmad Qamar and others  … Respondents  in 
both 
 
   
For the  petitioner(s)  
In both cases  
 : Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukat, ASC  
 
   
For Respon dent No.1  
 : Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, ASC  
(via V ideo-Link, Lahore ) 
   
For ECP  :
` Mr. Khurram Shehzad, Addl. DG. Law  
And Mr. Falak Sher, Legal Consultant  
   
Date of Hearing  : 30.01.202 4 
   
ORDER  
   
Munib Akhtar, J.:  We have heard learned counsel for the 
petitioner as also the learned Additional DG (La w) and learned 
Legal Consultant and also learned counsel appearing for the 
private respondent.   
2. For detailed reasons to be recorded later and subject to such 
amplification and/or explanation therein as  may b e deemed 
appropriate, these  leave petition s are  converted into appeal s and 
allowed. The impugned judgment s of the learned High Court are 
set aside with the result that the nomination papers of the 
petitioner, now appellant, for NA -99 (Faisalabad) are deeme d 
accepted and his name is deemed included in the final list of C.P.L.A s.210 and 212 /2024  
 
 -:2:-
candidates for the General Elections of 2024. This candidate shall 
immediately and forthwith, and it shall be the duty of the Election 
Commission to ensure that this is done, be allocated an e lection 
symbol. (We may note that for this constituency the petitioner, now 
appellant, had filed two sets of nomination papers, both of which 
were dealt with in the same terms and the writ petitions filed in 
this regard in the High Court by the private res pondent were 
allowed vide impugned judgments, which are identical in all 
material respects.)  
3. The name of the candidate and his election symbol must 
appear on the ballot papers used in and for the general election to 
the constituency aforementioned and t he said election for this 
constituency must be held on 08.02.2024, as scheduled.  
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the 
30th January, 2024  
Naveed /*   Not approved for reporting  