IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 PRESENT:  Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
   Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
 
Suo Moto Case No. 4/2021  
 
In Attendance :  Mr. Abdul Qayyum Siddiqui and  
    Mr. Asad Toor, Journalists  
    (Applicants)  
 
Date of hearing:   20.08.2021  
 
ORDER  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, J . An application has been submitted in Court by 
five working journalists , including the President of the Press 
Association of the Supreme Court and the former President of the 
said Association alleging large scale  violation s of Fundamental 
Rights  enshrined in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’) and that the government and/or 
organizations/agencies under its control are primarily violating 
these Fundamental Rights.  
 
2. The applicants state that journalists are harassed, 
intimidated, attacked and shot at and there are no consequences 
for the perpetrato rs and , it is further alleged , that those who 
should be protecting journalists and ensuring the freedom of the 
press , guara nteed under Article 19 of the Constitution , are 
involved.  
 
3. Reference is also made to a ‘Press Release ’, attached with the 
application, which is issued by the Federal Investigation Agency 
(‘FIA’) stating that criminal cases ha ve been registered against 
some journalists because they report against the judiciary . 
However, the said P ress Release does not disclose what was said 
against the judiciary.  
 
4. Judges of the superior Courts are mandated by the 
Constitution to ensure that Fundamental Rights are at al l times 
guaranteed and enforced. The said Press Release creates an SMC No. 4/2021  2
impression that criminal cases were registered  at the behest of the 
judiciary , and in doing so it portray s the judiciary to be inimical to 
the guaranteed F undamental Right of a free press. The FIA appears 
to have overstepped its legal mandate and to have undermined the 
peoples’ confidence in the judiciary which is the guarantor of the 
Fundamental Rights. By such tactics, the respect, regard and 
confidence of the people in the judiciary may b e undermined and 
the judiciary may also be disrespected and portrayed as standing 
with FIA. The Director General of FIA (‘DG’) without whose 
authorization the P ress Release may not have been issued  or who 
till date has not retracted  it, be issued notice to  disclose who 
authorized the issuance of the Press Release and to submit his 
personal written explanation wh y he permitted its issuance 
mentioning the judiciary and if it was not issued by him then why 
did he not withdraw it . The DG , FIA  is also directed t o be present 
in-person in Court along  with the entire original record of the cases 
against journalists in respect of whom the Press Release was 
issued  and is further directed to submit a complete list of cases 
filed against journalists , and such list shoul d specify the actual  
conte nt, that is transcript  of the text, which FIA deemed to 
constitute an offence.  
 
5. The application also complains that journalists are not 
allowed to work freely and pursue their careers , which is a 
violation of Article 18 of the Constitution that guarantees right to 
enter upon any lawful ‘ profession or occupation ’. Therefore, if a 
media house/television c hannel is prevailed upon to sack any 
journalist because of his/her independent reporting it appears to 
violate Article 18 of the  Constitution. Therefore, notice be issued to 
the Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (‘ PEMRA ’) 
through its Chairman , who is directed to submit his written 
response disclosing action taken against the media 
houses/television channels which resor t to such tactics. PEMRA  
should also disclose its role in ensuring that press freedom is 
ensured and that all political parties, both in the government and 
in opposition, receive the same broadcast time in compliance with SMC No. 4/2021  3
the reported judgments in the case s of Fatehyab Ali Khan and 
Muhammad Aslam Saleemi . 
 
6. The ever so frequent attacks on journalists and their 
abductions , including in the Federal Capital Territory , Islamabad , 
is another violation of Fundamental Rights which has been raised 
in the applicat ion. It is stated that the Constitution in its Article 9 
guarantees the right to one’s liberty  and Article 10 of the 
Constitution safeguards illegal arrests and detention . This matter 
becomes a matter of concern when the perpetrators are not 
arrested and , all the more so , when it happens under the cameras 
of the Safe City Project, Islamabad. Inability  in this regard may 
suggest incompetence , which may constitute dereliction of duty , or 
far worse abetment , which is an offence . Therefore, notice be also 
issue d to the Inspector General of Police of the Islamabad Capital 
Territory and the Ministry of Interior, Government of Pakistan, 
Islamabad through its Secretary to separately submit their written 
replies under their respective signatures listing the number of  
attacks on journalists, the progress made in the investigation of 
the FIRs, including identifying the attackers , and whether the 
recording s from the cameras of the Safe City Project were used to 
trace out the perpetrators . The amount spent on the Safe City 
Project be also disclosed.  
 
7. Allegations have also been made that pliant media 
houses/television channels which agree to project a particular 
political narrative and suppress a contrary one benefit financial ly 
by misusing public exchequer funds as they  are given 
advertisements and other benefits whil e others are depriv ed. 
Therefore, notice be also issued to the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad through its 
Secretary , who is directed to provide details of the amo unts 
paid/ disbursed  on account of advertisements in the last financial 
year, till date , and the criteria, if any, used in determining the 
beneficiaries. Other benefits that may have been given, including 
foreign trips be also disclosed . The Secretary, Mini stry of 
Information and Broadcasting, Government  of Pakistan, Islamabad SMC No. 4/2021  4
is further directed to disclose the Ministry’s annual budget and the 
work that it does.  
 
8. The founder of the country, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, as 
Member of the legislative council had hi ghlighted the freedom and 
independence of the press at a time when the subcontinent was 
under direct British occupation  and rule . He expressed that a 
vibrant press, which pointed out wrong doing and highlighted 
public issues, serves the people and the coun try’s interest. The 
question arises whether the expec tations that the Quaid had for 
Pakistan have been achieved , because the applicants have referred 
to reports which point out that press freedom in Pakistan is at an 
abysmal level.  
 
9. Reference in the app lication is also made to Islam. Article 
227 of the Constitution mandates abiding by the injunctions of 
Islam. Propagating the truth is an obligation stipulated in the Holy 
Qur’an. The Prophet (peace and blessing be upon him) stated that 
to speak against in justices and tyranny constitutes jihad -e-akbar , 
the greater jihad . Therefore, let notice be also issued to the 
Ministry of Religious Affairs and Inter -faith Harmony, Government 
of Pakistan, Islamabad through its Secretary, who is directed to 
submit if the Ministry has done anything to ensure that the 
speaking and broadcasting of the truth is encouraged.  
 
10. Since this is also a matter pertaining to the work which the 
Ministry of Human Rights, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad 
should be doing, let it, throu gh its Secretary, submit what, if 
anything, it has done with regard to the matters complained of in 
the application and to state if the allegations which have been 
leveled are true and, if so, who in its opinion is violating the stated 
Fundamental Rights.  
 
11. We have decided to treat this application as one under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution because it demonstrates that 
matters of public importance  have been raised  with reference to the 
enforcement  of Fundamental Rights, including Articles 9, 11, 13,  SMC No. 4/2021  5
14(1), 14(2), 15, 18, 19, 19A, 23, 24(1) and 25A and as such it 
meets the stipulated criteria prescribed in Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution. Moreover, if the allegations which have been leveled 
are true then it would be a grave transgression of the Con stitution 
requiring urgent redressal.  
 
12. Notices be also issued to the representative bodies of the 
press , who we are informed are the Pakistan Broadcasters 
Association (PBA), the Council of Pakistan Newspaper Editors 
(CPNE), the All Pakistan Newspaper S ociety (APNS) and the 
Pakistan Federal Union of Journalists (PFUJ) to state whether the 
allegations made in the application are correct or otherwise. 
Notice s to be also issued to the public sector Pakistan Television 
Corporation  (PTC)  and Pakistan  Broadcas ting Corporation (PBC)  
through their respective Managing Directors/Heads, who are 
directed to submit in writing whether they are abiding by the 
guaranteed F undamental Right of a free press and are complying 
with the decisions in the above mentioned judgmen ts. The Attorney 
General for Pakistan and the Advocate Generals of the four 
provinces and the Islamabad Capital Territory to be issued notices 
under Order XVII A of the Code of Civil Procedure.  
 
13. The o ffice is directed to number this petition and to array the 
Press Association of the Supreme Court  as petitioner No. 1 and the 
other signatories as petitioner Nos. 2 to 5. And, to array the 
aforementioned Ministries , FIA, PEMRA, IG Police Islamabad, PTC 
and PBC as respondents. Adjourned to 26 August 2021  by or 
before which date all replies should be filed. Since this Bench of 
the Supreme Court has taken notice pursuant to Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution and has heard the applicants at some length let 
this case be fixed before the same Bench.  
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Bench -II 
ISLAMABAD  
20.08.2021  
(Farrukh)  