IN THE SUPREME COURT  OF PAKISTAN  
           (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
   Present  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
   Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
 
 
CONST. PETITION NO. 77 OF 2010 &  
H.R.C. NOs.13124 -P, 40303 -P, 40220 -G AND  
43103 -B OF 2011 AND C.M.A NO.42 -43 OF 2012.  
 
 
President Balochistan High  
Court Bar Association    … .. Petitioner.  
    Versus  
Federation of Pakistan and others  … … Respondents.  
 
 
 
For the petitioner   : Nemo.   
 
 
On Court Notice   : Mr. Sh afi M. Chandio, DAG.  
 
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Amanullah Kanarani, AG.  
     Muhammad Tariq, SP City Quetta.  
 
 
For M/o Defence, FC & IB:  Nemo.  
 
 
Date of hearing   : 17.04.2012.   
    O R D E R  
  On 06.04.2012,  it was brought to the notice of the 
Bench  of this Court functioning at Quetta by one Ms. Rukhsana Const.P.77/2010  2 
Baloch that his brother Dr. Naseer Ahmed and his friends namely 
Akhtar Lango o and Abdul Hafeez Rodiani  are missing since 
03.04.2012 . Accordingly, the IGP/PPO Balochistan was directed 
to recover these  persons and produce them before the Court. The 
IGP promised for their production in Court on 10.04.2012 but he 
failed to do so; however, stringent directions were issued by this 
Court to the IGP as well as the Acting SP Operations, Quetta for 
recovery and  production  of above named persons .  
 We may point out here that this Court is prima facie  of the 
view that without identification by the Police and Levies Force or 
any other such like source, it is not possible for any of the 
agencies, if at all they want  to pickup a person;  
2.  However, today Mr. Amanullah Kanarani, learned 
Advocate General Balochistan has appeared along with  
Mr. Muhammad Tariq, Acting SP Operations, Quetta City and 
states  that in compliance of directions  of this Court , all the three 
persons i.e. Dr. Naseer Ahmed, Akhtar Langoo and Abdul 
Hafeez Rodiani have been recovered as they at their own had 
reached to their houses; according to him in this behalf they have 
also got recorded their statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. 
recorded by SHO , Police Station Jinnah Town, Quetta; copies of 
the same ha ve been placed on record; all these statement s are Const.P.77/2010  3 
stereo type in nature, however,  one of the same is reproduced 
hereinbelow for the sake of convenience: - 
 
The above version could not be accepted to be true unless it is 
testified by the Police authorities  because it remains prima facie  
duty of the Police and Levies  to provide protection to the life and 
security to the citizens in urban and rural areas in terms of Article 
9 of the Constitution  of Is lamic Republic of Pakistan .  
3.  Similarly, on the last date of hearing seven persons 
were found missing from the area of Saryab (Quetta); however, 
they have also been recovered by the police and it is alleged that 
they were picked up by the agencies but t o establish this Const.P.77/2010  4 
assertion, no evidence/proof has been furnished no r anybody is 
willing to disclose the name of the agencies because we have 
enquired from the police but they, as usual, express their inability  
in this regard. Be that as it may, the Advocat e General 
Balochistan is directed to produce these persons in Court on the 
next date of hearing at Quetta.  
4.  The learned Advocate General further states that 
remaining directions issued by this Court on 5th and 6th April, 
2012 and subsequent thereto shal l be complied with; therefore, 
some time be  allowed  to do the needful before the next date of 
hearing.  
We may reiterate here that it is the duty of the Provincial as 
well as Federal Government to maintain law and order and to 
provide security to the life and property of the citizen being 
subject of the Constitution. The situation, which is prevailing in 
the Province of Balochistan, as already explained in our earlier 
orders, needs special interest and attention of both the 
Governments i.e. Provincial and F ederal. Copies of the orders 
dated 5th and 6th April, 2012 have already been sent to both the 
Governments but no response so far has been received either 
from the Federal Government or the Provincial Government; 
however, since the learned Advocate General has requested for 
time to comply with  the directions contained in the said orders, Const.P.77/2010  5 
therefore, the case is adjourned to 30.04.2012 . Copy of this order 
be also sent to all concern as per directions contained in order 
dated 13.04.2012  (para -7). 
               CJ. 
 
 
        J. 
 
 
        J. 
Islamabad,  
17.04.2012.  
Irshad Hussain /*  
 
 
 