IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR   
 
 
CIVIL PETITION NO.3455 OF 20 20  
(Against the judgment dated 12.10.2020 
Islamabad High Court, Islamabad  in 
W.P.No.3200/2013)  
 
  
 
Capital Development Authority through its 
Chairman, Islamabad and others.   
 …Petitioners  
 
                                        VERSUS  
 
Shabir Hussain and others   
 …Respondents  
  
For the Petitioners : Hafiz Arfat Ahmad, ASC  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR   
  
For Respondent s:  N.R 
  
Date of Hearing:  01.12.2 021 
 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
 
MUHAMMAD ALI MAZHAR, J.- This Civil Petition is brought to 
challenge the judgment dated 12.10.2020, passed by learned Islamabad 
High Court in Writ Petition No.3200 of 2020 , whereby the writ petition 
was allowed and the impugned order dated 02.08.2013 issued by CDA 
for cancelling/withdrawing the promotion s of the respondents was set 
aside .  
 
2. The transient facts of the case are that the respondents No.1 to 7  are 
the regular employees of CDA. On recommendation  of DPC, t hey were 
promoted to the post of Assistant Director  (BS-17) in Engineering Cadre 
on acting charge basis vide order dated 13.02.2012. However vide order 
dated 14.3.2013, they were promoted on reg ular basis but after some CP.No.3455 /2020  -2- 
 
time, the order of promotion was withdrawn vide office order dated 
02.08.2013 . Being aggrieved, the respondents filed a Writ Petition in the 
Islamabad High Court which was allowed and impugned  order was set 
aside.  
 
3. The learned  counsel for the petitioner s argued that the learned High 
Court failed to consider that the promotion of the respondents was not 
legal as the posts were to be filled through direct recruitment after 
written test and interviews and not through promotion and when the 
competent authority came to know about the illegal promotion s, the 
same was withdrawn /cancelled. The learned counsel for the CDA in 
support of his contention also cited a judgment rendered by this Court in 
the case of Maula Bux Shaikh and others Vs. Chief Minister Sindh and 
others  (2018 SCMR 2098) and argued that the petitioner s are in process 
of amending their service rules /regulations  commensurate to the law laid 
down in the above case .  
 
4. Heard the arguments. Consistent with Section 51 of the Capital 
Development Authority Ordinance, 1960, the Authority may make 
Regulations and publish it in the Official Gazette. Section 37 of the  
aforesaid Ordinance germane to powers of the Authority to appoint 
officers, experts or consultant s on such terms and conditions as it may 
deem fit, whereas under Section 38, it is the responsibility of the 
Authority to lay down the procedure for the appointment of its officers, 
servants, experts and consultants and terms and conditions of their 
servic es. In exercise of aforesaid powers  conferred on the Authority , the 
Capital Development Authority Employees  (Service) Regulations 19 92 
were enacted . It is distinctively visible from Regulation No. 4.03 that it 
stipulates three methods of appointment  such as (a) by initial 
appointment in accordance with Part -II; (b) by promotion in accordance 
with Part -III; and  (c) by transfer in accordance with Part -IV. In order to 
appraise  and dwell on the cases of nominated persons for promotion and 
forwarding recommendations  to the competent authority, t he 
Departmental Selection Committees/ Departmental Promotion 
Committees are constituted under Regulation No.4.04 with its 
composition as described and enunciated in Regulation No.4.05 . Part-III 
of the Regulation s, encapsulate s “Appointment by Promotion ” in different CP.No.3455 /2020  -3- 
 
Basic Pay Scales (BPS) and the procedure for promotion is set forth 
under Regulation No.4.17 . In unison, Regulation No.4.18 , commands 
that an employee possessing such minimum qualification and length of 
service and fulfilling other conditions specified shall be eligible for 
promotion to a higher post . So far as the yardstick or touchstone to fulfill  
the condition of length  of service , Regulation No.4.20  spells out in simple 
terms that no promotion shall be made to the post in BPS -18 and above 
unless the employee has completed minimum length of service for such 
promotion and according to the table jot down in this Regulation for 
promotion to the post in BPS -18, five years of service  in BPS -17 was 
required; whereas for promotion to a post in BPS -19, the threshold of 
twelve years of service in BPS -17 and above was to be completed and for 
promotion to the post in BPS -20, seventeen years of service was required 
in BPS -17 and above . 
 
5. Undoubtedly , the respondents are regular employees of CDA . They 
were considered for promotion on the basis of their seniority . Their 
promotion  to the post of Assistant Directors in BS -17 was recommended  
by DPC after due consideration of credentials and ACRs  and the 
Competent Authority , vide office order dated 13.02.2012 , approve d the 
promotion of respondents  to the p ost of Assistant Director (BS -17) in  
Engineering Cadre on acting charge basis  with immediate effect . The 
record reflects that the promotion of the respondents was actualized vide 
office order dated 14.03.2013  but the said office order was 
withdrawn/cancelled vide another office order dated 02.08.2013  without 
assigning any reason or notice.  
 
6. As a rule, the Departmental Pr omotion Committee  is constituted by 
the Competent Authority to consider promotion and making 
recommendations. The promotions of employees/civil servants are 
generally decided on the basis of recommendations made by the 
Departmental Promotion Committee whic h is entrusted an onerous and 
arduous task to judge the suitability of officers for  promotions to 
selection and or non-selection posts  after assessment of performance, 
conduct , aptness and qualification with certain guidelines to standardize 
and synchroni ze the assessment  benchmarks of all contenders in a fair, 
unbiased and transparent manner keeping in view the “dossier”  (detailed 
record and information with regard to an officer; a collection CP.No.3455 /2020  -4- 
 
of documents  concerning a particular person or matter) or working paper 
including ACRs  of every individual  officer/employee .  
 
7. This was not the case that some illegality was committed by DPC 
members or they did not consider the credentials  or antecedents  of the 
each contender  prudently and forwarded the recommendation  in a 
slipshod manner  for approval . Once the recommendations  of DPC were 
acted upon and respondents were promot ed, a vested right was created 
in their favour  which could not have withdrawn in such a inconsiderate 
and casual manner. In the case of  Chairman, Central Board of Revenue 
and another  vs. Muhammad Malook and 11 others   (1999 SCMR 1540 ), 
this Court in nutshell held that once a person was recommended for 
promotion by the Departmental Promotion Committee after having found 
him fit and the recommendation of the D.P.C. was accepted by the 
competent Authority, a right was created in his favour.  Similarly,  in the 
case of Province of Sindh through A.G., Sindh, Karachi.  vs. Kazi Siraj 
Ahmad.  (2002 SCMR 862) , again  this court  held that the  Departmental 
Promotion Committee recommended the case of the respondent for 
promotion and Senior Member, Board of Revenue being the competent 
authority issued the notification which was not in violation of any rules , 
so the Service Tribunal had rightly considered the case of the respondent 
while allowing the appeal. In the instant case, on the face of it, neither 
any fault or  defect of respondents was pointed out by CDA nor any 
oversight or error on the part of DPC members or its composition or  
jurisdiction which could result  an unceremonious withdrawal  of 
promotion order after considerable  period.  In these set of circumstanc es, 
the doctrine of vested right is quite applicable which conserves  that once 
a right is lawfully created, its existence should be recognized  and 
acknowledged , therefore  the benefit of promotion s earned on DPC 
recommendations  have become an undeniable and incontrovertible  right 
of the respondents  which could not  be cancelled or withdrawn . Another 
shortcoming and unlawfulness is that no prior notice or justification was 
even shown in the cancellation letter which is flagrant violation of well 
settled principle of natural justice which is firmly established  and deep 
rooted in the judicial conscience to be entrenched and embedded in every 
decision making function either judicial, quasi -judicial or administrative 
which is a fundamental rule of law that no decision must be taken 
affecting the right of any person without first being informed of the case CP.No.3455 /2020  -5- 
 
and affording  an ample opportunity of defence. In the likewise context 
and perception , due process  is also a prerequisite th at needs to be 
respected at all stratums. In our Constitution, right to fair trial is a 
fundamental right  under Article  10-A which constitutional reassurance 
envisaged the standards that courts must uphold in order to protect 
peoples  fundamental rights of fair trial and due process of law . This 
Court in the case of Warid Telecom (Pvt.) Limited  vs. Pakistan 
Telecommunication Authority , (2015 SCMR 338)  has held that whenever 
adverse action was being contemplated against a person a notice and/or 
opportunity of hearing was to be given to such person. Said principle is a 
fundamental right under Article 10 -A in the Constitution. However, both 
the requirements of a notice a nd providing an opportunity of a hearing 
may also be dispensed with in certain type of cases e.g. where such 
requirement would cause "more injustice than justice" or it was not in 
the "public interest". The Indian Supreme Court in the case of Karnataka 
Public Service Commission  vs. B. M. Vijaya Shankar  (AIR 1992 Supreme 
Court 952)  stated that, when meeting the requirement of notice and 
providing an opportunity of hearing will cause "more injustice than 
justice" or it is not in the "public interest" the same  may be withheld. In 
the case of Muhammad Amin Muhammad Bashir Limited  vs. Government 
of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of Finance, Central Secretariat, 
Islamabad and others  (2015 SCMR 630) , this Court   held that  the 
exercise of any discretionary power must be rational and have a nexus 
with the objective of underlying legislation. Section 24A of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897, reiterates the principle that statutory power is to be 
exercised reasonably, fairly, justly  and for the advancement of the 
purposes of the enactment and further clarifies that an executive 
authority must give reasons for its decision. Any action by an executive 
authority which is violative of these principles is liable to be struck down.  
 
8. The existing Rules or Regulation if amended and notified by CDA will 
obviously come into field prospectively and not retrospectively . No such 
ground or reason was assigned in the withdrawal /cancellation order, 
albeit , the alleged intention or idea to amend t he rules or regulation 
could not justify to undo or withdraw  the promotion orders of the 
respondents under the garb of future amendments  of rules/regulation 
which are non est . Even the rules are amended, the CDA would not be CP.No.3455 /2020  -6- 
 
able to upset or disturb the pa st and closed transaction.  It is not the 
case of CDA that promotion was accorded  to the respondents due to 
some misunderstanding, error, misconception of law or without sanction 
of competent authority  therefore, the principle of l ocus poenitentiae  is 
also attracted  to ameliorate and ventilate the sufferings of the 
respondents.  
 
9. Though the learned counsel for the petitioner s also articulated that 
the promotion was withdrawn in view of the judgment of Maula Bux 
Shaikh and others  vs. Chief Minister  Sindh and others  (ibid).  In the above 
case, the petitioner Maula Bux Shaikh in Service Appeal challenged a 
Notification to be ultra vires to the Pakistan Engineering Council Act, 
1976  (PEC Act ) on the ground that  his chance for promotion as Executive 
Engineer BS -18 was diminished for the reason that said notification 
provided 13% promotion quota to Diploma holders and 7% promotion 
quota to B.Tech (Hons.) Degree holders for the post of Executive Engineer 
BS-18. This  Court held that it is exclusively within the domain of the 
Government to decide whether a particular qualification will be 
considered sufficient for promotion from a particular Grade to a higher 
Grade and it is also within the domain of the Government to change the 
above policy from time to time as nobody can claim any vested right in 
the policy. Though the petition was dismissed but with a note of caution 
that Government shall not allow or permit any person to perform 
professional engineering work as defined in the PEC Act, who does not 
possess accredited engineering qualification from the accredited 
engineering institution and his name is not registered as a registered 
engineer or professional engineer under the PEC Act.  The judgment in 
the Maula Bux Shaikh ’s case  (supra) d oes not suggest or permit in any 
way to withdraw promotion orders unceremoniously as done by CDA in 
this case but the premise of the case was altogether  different and does 
not support the contention  of CDA in this case. As a matter o f fact  the 
above  petition was dismissed with a note of caution in the larger public 
interest  that Government shall not allow or permit any person to perform 
professional engineering work unless he possess accredited engineering 
qualification and registered  as engineer or professional engineer under 
the PEC Act.  
 CP.No.3455 /2020  -7- 
 
10. In view of what has been discussed above, we are not persuaded to 
take a view different from the one taken by the learned High Court. 
Accordingly, this Civil P etition is dismissed and leave refused.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD  
1st, December , 2021  
Approved for reporting   
  