IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Faisal Arab  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 1145 -L of 2019  
(Against the order dated 11.9.2019 passed 
by the Lahore Hi gh Court Lahore in  
Crl. Misc. No.49695 -B of 2019)  
 
 
Saima Ashiq Javed  
  …Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
 
 
The State  through  Attorney General of Pakistan, 
Lahore  & another   
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner(s):  Mr. Zafar Mehmood Chaudhry, ASC  
 along with S aima Ashiq Javed, petitioner  
    
For the  State : Mr. Khurram Saeed,  
 Additional Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
For Respondent No.2:  N.R. 
 
Date of hearing:  02.06.2020.  
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J .- Muhammad Awais 
Rashid and Muhammad Adeel , Junior Auditors  in the Accountant 
General Office Punjab , were the principal architects behind a financial 
scam that cost public exchequer Rs.57.6 million , misappropriated 
through bogus pensionary payments  to the fake claimants ; as the 
Federal  Investigation Agenc y probed the heist, the petitioner was 
found to have provided space to the embezzled amount s in her bank 
account  that reflected various transactions  comprising deposit  by one 
of the accused as well as  withdrawal s thereof; attempt to secure bail in 
anticipa tion to her arrest failed before the trial Judge on 17.4.2018  
whereafter she applied for judicial protection  in the High Court  in the 
year 2019 , on issuance of proclamation of absconsion ; failure  brings Criminal Petition No. 1145 -L of 2019  2
her to this Court . Mr. Zafar Mahmood Chaudhry, learne d ASC,  while 
disputing the accusation, craftily pressed into service petitioner ’s 
gender to argue that her remission into custody would perennially  
embarrass  not only the petitioner  but the family as well , an avoidable 
option inasmuch as  no investigative b enefit  would accrue  to the 
prosecution at the given stage of the case. Learned Additional Attorney 
General for Pakistan has contested the plea; according to him, the 
prosecution still expects disclosures  from the petitioner, likely to be 
helpful to drive h ome the charge.  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  It would be less than expedient to comment upon the 
arguments assailing evidence , comprising documented transactions 
involving bank accounts  including one operated by the petitioner ; her 
denials /explanations  is a business  to be best attended by the trial 
Court . Despite a generous opportunity, learned counsel has not been 
able to point out any mala fide  lurking behind the intended arrest . Law 
does not confer immunity  on the petitioner  on account of her gender 
and as such she is required to make out a case for judicial protection ; 
a prima facie  nexus  compound ed by  a conduct far from being enviable . 
Petition fails. Leave declined.    
    
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
2nd June , 2020  
Not approved for repo rting 
Azmat /- 