IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
                  (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Mr. Justice Anwar Zaheer Jamali  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 35 OF 2013  
(Multi Billion Scam in the EOBI)  
 
 
Applicants    : Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka, ASC.  
     (In CMA No. 4855/2013)   
    
    : Nemo.  
     (In CMA No. 4870/2013)    
 
    : Mr. Muhammad Saleem, In -person.  
     (In CMA No. 4873/2013)    
 
    : Mr. Khalid Rashid, In -person.  
     (In CMA No. 4968/ 2013)    
 
    : Mr. Mohammad Naveed  
     (In CMA No. 5537/2013)    
 
On Courts call   : Mr. Nasir Iqbal,  
     Staff Report, Daily DAWN.  
 
On Court notice     
 
For Federation of Pak  : Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG.  
 
For M/o OP&HRD  : Nemo.  
 
For EOBI    : Mr. M. Bilal Sr. ASC.  
     Mr. Babar Bilal, ASC.  
     Mr. Muhammad Ayub, Chairman.  
     Mr. Javed Iqbal, DG HR&GAD  
     Mr. Abdul Latif, Director (Law)  
     Mr. Ahad Ahmed, AD (Estate)  
 
For FIA    : Mr. Saud Ahmed Mirza, DG.  
     Mr. Qudratullah Khan, Director.   
     Mr. Javaid Ahmed, Director FIA.  
     Mr. Basharat Shehzad, Addl. Dir.  
     Mr. Javaid Hussain, Addl. Dir.  
     Mr. Aftab Bhatti, AD FIA  Const. P.35/2013  2  
 
 
 
     Ch. Zulfiqar Ali, DD Law.  
     Mr. Qaiser Masood, DD Law.  
 
For DHA    : Mr. Irfan Qadir, ASC.  
 
For Pa k Arab Housing  : Mr. Ali Sibtain Fazli, ASC.  
Scheme & M/s Vital   Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR.  
Enterprises (Pvt)  Ltd.  
   
For Vision Developer  : Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC.  
(Pvt)  Ltd.   
 
For Eden Housing  : Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC.  
(Pvt) Ltd.     Mr. Atif Amin, ASC.  
     Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR.  
 
For the CDA , Islamabad  : Ms. Misbah Gulnar Sharif, ASC.  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR.  
 
For the Dimen Associates:  Syed Iftikhar H. Gillani, Sr. ASC.  
 
Date of hearing   : 28.08.2013.  
 
    O R D E R  
  In the c ontext of various directions contained in the 
earlier order dated 01.08.2013, we have noticed that today there is 
no representation on behalf of GEO TV nor there is any reply from 
their side in the context of directions issued to them in para -2 of the 
said order , whereby the Chief Executive of the GEO TV was 
directed to produce CD/DVD of the said program along with its 
complete transcript before the next date of hearing. Let a show 
cause notice be issued to the Chief Executive of the GEO TV to 
explain his p osition as to why due to his failure in making 
compliance of directions of this Court, appropriate action may not 
be taken against him.  Const. P.35/2013  3  
 
2.  In terms of para -3 of the order dated 01.08.2013, Mr. 
Nasir Iqbal, Staff Reporter , Daily “DAWN ” was directed to sub mit 
the policy , if any , regarding publication of articles in the editorial 
of DAWN  when there is conflict of interest . He is present in Court 
and states that vide CMA No. 5364 of 2013, compliance of such 
direction  has been made .  
3.  Mr. Irfan Qadir, learn ed ASC for DHA has invited our 
attention to CMA No. 5382 of 2013 , which contains the prayer for 
release of further funds from the frozen bank account s of DHA. 
When we have confronted him with the earlier direction s of this 
Court, which were issued by this Court at the time of passing order 
in CMA No. 505 of 2013  for furnishing of statement of balance , he 
has candidly stated that as yet no such statement could be filed. In 
such circumstances, we are not inclined to pass any order on CMA 
No. 5382 of 2013, whi ch will be considered only after compliance of 
order dated 01.08.2013 by DHA.  
4.  Mr. Tariq Mehmood, Sr. ASC representing Eden 
Housing  (Pvt)  Ltd., when confronted with the contents of para -7 of 
the order, states that despite deposit of Rs.97,60,00,000/ - by his 
client with the Registrar of this Court, four properties in various 
housing scheme s of his client at Lahore have not been released and 
for this reason, they have not been able to make compliance as 
regard s deposit of remaining sum of Rs.90,00,00,000/ -, and needs 
more time.  He further submits that Eden Housing (Pvt.)  Ltd. are 
being penalized twice for the reason that on the one hand, they had Const. P.35/2013  4  
 
been directed to deposit the whole amount which they had 
received towards sale consideration of various plots i n their four 
housing schemes in Lahore from EOBI and on the other hand these 
properties are still retained by the EOBI. In these circumstances, he 
submits that the representative of the EOBI may be directed to 
make a definite statement in Court before the next date of hearing 
as to whether they intend to retain all the five properties , including 
the one situated at Faisalabad or they want to surrender these 
properties in favour of Eden Housing (Pvt)  Ltd., and if they do not 
want to retain the se properties, the payment of whole sale 
consideration amount, received from the EOBI will be made to 
them so that his client s may be free to deal with these properti es in 
any other suitable manner. He also submits that despite fair 
conduct of his client  in these proceed ings, they are being harassed 
by FIA authorities on one pretext or the other , therefore, the FIA 
authorities may be directed not to cause harassment to the 
Management of the Eden Housing (Pvt)  Ltd. till further orders. 
Such request is acceded to in the man ner that till next date of 
hearing FIA shall not cause any illegal harassment to the 
Management of Eden Housing (Pvt) Ltd.  
5.  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, learned ASC for Vision 
Developer (Pvt)  Ltd. has also advanced similar arguments . He 
contends that two tra nsactions , total amounting to Rs.2.6 billion, 
were entered into between his client and EOBI; one in June, 2012 
and second in February, 2013. In case now EOBI is not interested in Const. P.35/2013  5  
 
retaining these two properties, his client is ready to make 
immediate payment  of Rs.60,00,00,000/ - to them while remaining 
balance will also be paid to them upon release of these properties  
so that thereafter they may sale these properties to some other 
prospective buyer  to liquidate their assets  for further payment . He 
also brough t to our notice lodging of two FIRs No.53 & 54 of 2013 
as on the basis of these FIRs, the Management of Vision Developers 
(Pvt)  Ltd is being harassed by FIA authorities. Keeping in view his 
submissions, the FIA authorities are directed not to take any 
further action against the Management of Vision Developers on the 
basis of these two FIRs, till the next date of hearing. This order will, 
however, not debar any aggrieved party from seeking legal redress 
before any appropriate forum.  
6.  Mr. Tariq Mehmood, l earned ASC has also invited our 
attention to CMA No. 5381 of 2013 and made similar complaint 
regarding harassment to his client by FIA authorities, although 
total sum relating to disputed transaction has already been 
deposited by them with the Registrar of  this Court. This being the 
position, the FIA authorities are directed not to  cause harassment 
to M/s Muhammad Yaqoob, Jagu Mal, Gurdas and Arjun Das, till 
the next date of haring.  
7.  Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, learned Deputy Attorney 
General state s that another interim report bearing CMA No. 5551 of 
2013 has been submitted  on behalf of FIA . He further requests for 
time to submit progress report/final report on behalf of FIA Const. P.35/2013  6  
 
relating to EOBI scam. Interim report filed on behalf of FIA is taken 
on record with  direction that final report be submitted in Court 
before the next date of hearing.  
8.  Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC, who is 
representing M/s Dimen Associates , has brought to our notice 
harassment caused to his client s by FIA authorities on the pretext 
of pendency of these proceedings. For this purpose he has referred 
to a report of NESPAK, available on record to show that his client s, 
who are evaluator of some properties sold to EOBI , have been 
exonerated from the charge of any wrong evaluation,  but still 
harassment to his client has not been stopped. The FIA  authorities , 
keeping in view his submission s, are directed not to cause any 
harassment to the officials of M/s Dimen Associates till the next 
date of hearing. The Chief Executive of the Dime n Associates, who 
is stated to be in custody, may seek appropriate legal remedy for 
his release before some appropriate forum.  
9.  Mr. Ali Sibtain Fazli, ASC for Pak -Arab Housing and 
M/s Vital Enterprises (Pvt)  Ltd. has brought to our notice lodging 
of FI R No.57 against the officials of his clients, which has been 
registered on 13.08.2013. In this regard as well, the FIA authorities 
are directed not to cause harassment to the officials of Pak -Arab 
Housing S ociety and M/s Vital Enterprises (Pvt)  Ltd. till t he next 
date of hearing.  
10.  Hearing of other Civil Misc. Applications is adjourned 
along with main case to 17.09.2013.  In the meantime, Mr. M. Bilal Const. P.35/2013  7  
 
Sr. ASC for EOBI may seek further instruction in the matter as 
regards various proposals noted above. Ot her concerned parties 
are also required to make compliance of various directions  
contained in this order and the earlier order of this Court.   
 
 
J. 
 
J. 
 
J. 
Islamabad.  
28.08.2013.  
Irshad Hussain/*  
    
 
 
 