IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa  
Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan  
Mr. Justice Ijaz Ahmed Chaudhry  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ather Saeed  
 
 
Criminal Miscellaneous Applicati on No. 486 of 2010 in 
Criminal Appeal No. 22 of 2002  
 
 
Adnan A. Khawaja       … Appellant  
 
versus  
 
The State              … Respondent  
 
 
Suo Mot u Case No. 4 of 2010 , Civil Miscellaneous Application 
No. 1080 of 2010 , Civil Miscellaneous Applications No. 123 8 
and 1239 of 2010  and Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 129 
of 2012  
(Suo Mot u action regarding appointment of convicted person 
namely Ahmed Riaz Sheikh (NRO Beneficiary), as Additional 
Director General, Federal Investigation Agency ) 
 
 
Civil Miscellaneou s Application No. 1253 of 2010 in Suo Mot u 
Case No. 4 of 2010  
(Report submitted in Court by Attorney -General regarding Fact 
Finding Inquiry in the case of Missing Letter No. PS/DG/FIA/ 
2009/5047 -49 dated 17.11.2009)  
 
 
Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 12 54 of 2010 in Suo Mot u 
Case No. 4 of 2010  
(Additional Documents comprising of Interim Report filed by 
Secretary Law dated 04.04.2010, pointes formulated by Secretary 
for Hon’ble Court, Advice of Former Attorney -General and 
Authorization letter in favour of  Mr. Hassan Wasim Afzal, Joint 
Secretary of Ehtisab Bureau dated 20.05.1998)  
 
 
Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 1082 of 2010  
(Report/Minutes of Hon’ble Chief Justice of Lahore High Court, 
Lahore)  
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Irfan Qadir ,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan   2 
 
On behalf of National   Mr. Akbar Tarar, Addl. PG. NAB  
Accountability Bureau:   Mr. Fauzi Zafar, Addl. PG. NAB  
 
 
For Ahmad Riaz Sheikh:   Dr. A. Basit, Sr. ASC  
 
 
On behalf of Secretary Law:  Nemo  
 
 
Date of hearing:    12.07.2012  
 
 
ORDER  
 
 
Asif Sae ed Khan Khosa, J. : Mr. Shaiq Usmani, Sr. ASC, 
the learned counsel for the National Accountability Bureau, is on 
general adjournment and, therefore, consideration of the matters 
pertaining to Mr. Adnan A. Khawaja, Mr. Ahmad Riaz Sheikh and 
Malik Muhammad Qa yyum is postponed.   
 
2. On the last date of hearing, i.e. 27.06.2012  this Court had  
passed the following order:  
 
“2. As regards the non -implementation of the direction of this 
Court given in para -178 in the case of Dr. Mubashir Hasan, the  
former Prime Mini ster was convicted and sentenced by this Court 
for contempt of Court. Resultantly, he lost his membership of the 
National Assembly and consequently the office of the Prime 
Minister. The newly elected Prime Minister has assumed the 
charge of his office last  week. We trust that he will implement the 
aforesaid direction. The Attorney -General for Pakistan present in 
Court shall in this regard obtain instructions from the Prime 
Minister and inform the Court of his response on the next date of 
hearing. Relist on 12th July, 2012. ”  
 
Today the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan  has submitted  
that upon having been informed about the above mentioned order 
the Prime Minister of Pakistan has instructed  him to state before  
this Court on his behalf  as under:  
 
“The matt er was taken up in yesterday’s Cabinet meeting and the 
Cabinet has desired that the Ministry of Law should furnish its 
views as regards the matter of implementation of the relevant 
paragraph of this Court’s judgment and as and when the Ministry 
of Law rend ers its opinion in the matter the Cabinet shall then 
take decision in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution.”   3 
 
3. We are constrained to observe that we find it difficult to 
appreciate or accept the said response of the Prime Minister . It 
may be pertinent to mention that during the present 
implementation proceedings this Court had passed the following 
order on 08.03.2012:  
 
“3. As regards the implementation of the direction given in 
Para 178 of the judgment in Dr. Mobashir Hassan’s case, despite  
specific orders and warnings given from time to time since March, 
2010, the implementation of the directions have still not been 
implemented. We need not repeat the previous orders, however, it 
may be mentioned that ultimately this Court was compelled to 
issue notice for contempt of court to the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan, Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, for disobeying the orders of 
this Court in his capacity as the Chief Executive of the Federation 
of Pakistan. In response to the show cause notice, the Prime 
Minister appeared before the Bench on 02.02.2012 and 
personally addressed the Court. While making particular 
reference to the immunity of the President of Pakistan, he 
maintained that his decision that the letter to the Swiss 
Authorities in terms of Paragrap hs 177 and 178 of the said 
judgment shall not be written was based on the advice tendered 
to him in the ordinary course of business. However, courteous in 
his demeanor, he made no commitment to implement the Court’s 
direction. We will not comment upon the defence of the Prime 
Minister as the same will be examined in the contempt 
proceedings still pending adjudication. The said proceedings 
relate to disobedience of the earlier orders of the Court and their 
pendency does not affect the process already underta ken for 
implementation of the said directions. Thus, regardless of any 
advice tendered earlier or in future, the Prime Minister, being 
Chief Executive of the Federation, who admittedly has the final 
say in the executive domain, shall implement the directio ns given 
in Paras 177 and 178 of the judgment in Dr. Mobashir Hassan’s 
case.  
 
4. The Attorney General for Pakistan, present in Court, shall 
communicate this order to the Prime Minister. By the next date of 
hearing, the Prime Minister shall report to this C ourt compliance 
of the above direction and similar orders made from time to time 
in this respect.  
 
5. Adjourned to 21.3.2012.”  
 
 
Unfortunately the said direction issued by this Court to the then 
Prime Minister in respect of implementation of the relevant order of 
this Court “ regardless of any advice tendered earlier or in future ” 
was also not obeyed and in the final judgment handed down  by 
this Court in the contempt proceedings against  the former Prime 
Minister (PLD 2012 SC 553)  this Court had held as foll ows: 
  4 
“It was a straightforward case for implementation of the judgment 
of this Court on which there could have been no two views. -------  
It was not a matter where the respondent was left with any 
discretion. He was supposed to give a formal approval or d irection 
to implement the decision of the Court. -------  He cannot shift the 
blame or the responsibility to his ad visors for not giving him 
proper advice. -------  The respondent had no option but to order 
the implementation of this Court’s direction, parti cularly after the 
review of the Federal Government was dismissed.”  
 
 
It goes without saying that all the above mentioned directions 
issued by this Court during  the implementation  proceedings apply 
with equal force to the present incumbent of the office of the Prime 
Minister / Chief Executive of the Federation as he has merely 
stepped into the shoes of his predecessor in office and, thus, he too 
is bound to implement the relevant directions of this Court 
“regardless of any advice tendered earlier or in futur e”. We, 
therefore, reiterate the said directions to the Prime Minister 
requiring him to act in the matter forthwith.  
 
4. We take judicial notice of the fact that after attending a 
meeting of the Federal Cabinet yesterday the Federal Minister for 
Informati on held a press conference wherein he categorically 
declared that the Constitution of Pakistan d oes not permit writing 
of the relevant letter to the Swiss authorities and, therefore, the 
direction of this Court issued in that regard cannot be 
implemented. We further note that different political functionaries 
of the Federal Government and others have also been harping on 
the same theme in the print and electronic media and even in 
public meetings for some time  and a reference in this respect is 
being made t o the provisions of Article 248 of the Constitution of 
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. The record shows that on 
10.01.2012 in th ese very implementation proceedings  this Court 
had en listed  different options available with it and one of such 
options was as follows : 
 
“Option No. 4 : Although in the present proceedings 
nobody has so far raised the issue pertaining to the protections 
contemplated by Article 248 of the Constitution yet if anybody 
likely to be affected by exercise of these options by this C ourt 
wishes to be heard on that question then an opportunity may be 
afforded to him in that respect before exercise of any of these 
options. ”  
  5 
It was further ordered on that date as under:  
 
“The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan is hereby put on 
notic e to address arguments before this Court on the next date of 
hearing, after obtaining instructions from those concerned, as to 
why any of the above mentioned options may not be exercised by 
us in these matters. It goes without saying that any person likely  
to be affected by exercise of the above mentioned options may 
appear before this Court on the next date of hearing and address 
this Court in the relevant regard so that he may not be able to 
complain in future that he had been condemned by this Court 
unhe ard. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan is directed to 
inform all such persons mentioned above about the passage of 
this order and also about the next date of hearing. ”    
 
5. On 16. 01.2012 the then learned Attorney -General for 
Pakistan appeared and  informed the Court that the order dated  
10.01.2012 had been  communicated by him to all the relevant 
persons and authorities mentioned therein, including the President 
of Pakistan and the Prime Minister, but he had not received any 
instruction from any of them to be communicated to the Court. It 
was in th at backdrop that contempt of court proceedings were 
initiated, conducted  and concluded by this Court against Syed 
Yousaf Raza Gillani, the then Prime Minister  of Pakistan / Chief 
Executive of the Federation , culminating in his conviction and 
sentence, disqualification from membership of the Majlis -e-Shoora  
(Parliament ) and removal from the office of the Prime Minister.  
During the said proceedings at the time of the preliminary hearing 
afforded to the then Pr ime Minister on 19.01.2012  he and his 
learned counsel Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC had briefly addressed 
the Court and the Prime Minister had maintain ed inter alia that his 
inaction in the matter was due to the immunity enjoyed by the 
President of Pakistan un der Article 248 of the Constitution . The 
order passed by this Court on that date specifically referred to the 
said stance but soon after recording of that order Ch. Aitzaz 
Ahsan, Sr. ASC representing the then Prime Minister filed Criminal 
Miscellaneous App lication No. 49 of 2012 in Criminal Original 
Petition No. 06 of 2012 before the Court clarifying and submitting 
as follows:  
 
“4.  In view of the recorded proceeding, it is submitted with  
respect that the aforesaid is not the correct record of proceedings  6 
and submissions made on that day i.e. January 19, 2012. In 
particular:  
 
a. The learned counsel representing the Prime  
Minister (Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, Senior ASC) had expressly 
submitted at the Bar that there was no need to focus on 
Article 248 as to whether it did or did not provide 
immunity to the President of Pakistan;  
 
b. -------  
 
c. It was insistently, and with respect, argued that  
the court must not focus, in the contempt proceedings 
against the Prime Minister, on whether the President had 
complete immunity  or not under Article 248. That was 
precisely the point . 
 
5. -------  
 
6. That the Prime Minister and his learned counsel continue  
to assert, with humility and respect, that the Hon’ble Bench 
should not concern itself with whether the President indeed has 
such immunity but should only seek to reassure itself that the 
Prime Minister believed, or had reason to believe, especially as per 
advice tendered to him that the President was immune and thus 
there was a constitutional impediment, for the time being, to 
writing the letter to the Swiss Authorities for compliance with 
Para 178 of the judgment in Dr. Mubashir Hassan Case.  
 
7. That the Respondent/Prime Minister briefly seeks that the  
Show Cause notice be decided on the basis of the arguments 
submitted by the c ounsel, while reserving for some other 
appropriate case the examination and consideration of the scope 
of Article 248(2) of the Constitution.”  
  
The main judgment passed by this Court on 26.04.2012 in that 
matter shows that even during his final arguments Ch. Aitzaz 
Ahsan, Sr. ASC had categorically maintained that the immunity 
being referred to in defence of the then Prime Minister was that 
enjoyed by a Head of the State under the customary international 
law and not the one contemplated  by Article 248 of th e 
Constitution. This Court had observed in th at judgment that an 
immunity under the customary international law was relevant to , 
and could be invoked by the person concerned before , a foreign 
court and was, thus, irrelevant to the contempt of court 
proceed ings against the then Prime Minister.  That judgment of this 
Court has already attained finality as it was never challenged 
through any appeal or review.  
 
6. Adjourned to 25.07.2012 on which date the Prime Minister 
of Pakistan / Chief Executive of the Fede ration shall cause a report 
to be submitted before this Court regarding compliance of the  7 
directions contained in paragraphs No. 177 and 178 of the 
judgment passed by this Court in case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan 
failing which this Court may initiate any appro priate action under 
the C onstitution and the law.   
 
Judge  
 
Judge                             Judge  
 
Judge                             Judge  
 
Islamabad  
12.07.2012  
M. Yasin  
 
 