IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
  (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:   
 MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
 MR. JUSTICE SAJJAD ALI SHAH   
 MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED  
    
 
CIVIL PETITIONS NOS. 4540 & 4541 OF 2021  
(Against the order dated 3.8.2021 of t he Lahore High Court, 
Lahore passed in WP No.48537/21 & WP No.48555/21)  
 
Federation of Pakistan thr. Secy.  
M/o Industries & Production  
and another             … Petitioners in both cases  
     Versus  
Hamza Sugar Mills Ltd.  
Rahim Yar Khan and others          …   Respondents in CP .4540/21  
-     
Hunza Sugar Mills  Ltd., Lahore and others   …   Respondents in CP .4541/21  
 
 
 
For the Petitioner(s):  Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. A.G.  
    Mr. Asad Ali Bajwa, DAG  
 
For Respondents Nos.1 -8:  Mr. Ali Sibtain Fazli, ASC  
    Ch. Akh tar Ali, AOR  
    (in CP -4541/21)  
 
For Respondents Nos.1 -8: Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, ASC  
    Mr. Shehryar Kasuri, ASC  
    Mr. Husnain Ibrahim Kazmi , ASC  
    (in CP -4540/21)  
 
For Respondents Nos.5 -6: Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
    (in CP -4540/21)  
Date of hearing:   12.08.2021  
     O R D E R 
  Umar Ata Bandial, J.  Learned Additional Attorney General 
has read to us from an order dated 07.04.2021  passed in Writ Petition 
No.22977/2021 . That order refers to meetings being conducted by the 
Federal and Provincial Government authorities with the management of 
sugar mills in the Province of Punjab for fixing the price of sugar. The CP.454 0-4541 of 2021  2
minutes of that meeting are reproduced in the said order. It appears that a 
pricing formula of sugar, ex factory and retail , based on the costs incurred 
by the sugar mills was settled with the government authorities . However, 
the latter fixed a different price of sugar on which stocks were to be 
released by sugar mills in the market. This intervention by the regulators 
was challenged in the  said writ petition for being incompetent and 
without lawful authority. However, the Court ordered the requisite stock 
to be released for the month of Ramadan at the disp uted price. The order 
also refers to an earlier proceedings pending in the High Court in Writ 
Petition No.3834 of 2020 wherein the question of vires of similar impugned 
action is already under consideration. Several writ petitions have since 
been filed  by interests in the sugar industry . The order dated 03.08.2021 
impugned before us is an i nterim order passed in a recent writ petition . 
That order is assailed by the Federal Government for having been passed 
on the first date of hearing without affording any opportunity of hearing 
to the government regulators whose notification dated 30.07.202 1 fixing 
the policy sale price of sugar has been put in abeyance. A surety bond for 
the differen tial amount from the higher price charged by the respondent 
sugar mills has been ordered as security.   
2.  The Constitutional Courts of the country have a duty to 
resolve legal disputes coming before them in accordance with the 
Constitution and the law. In the discharge of their duties and functions, 
the Courts do not supervise pricing nor monitor profit and loss dealings 
by or between the stakeholders. In our vi ew, the High Court has in the 
present case entered the uncertain territory of monitoring commercial and 
policy terms  regulating the supply of an edible commodity in the market. 
This endeavour is far removed from its jurisdiction vested by Article 199 CP.454 0-4541 of 2021  3
of th e Constitution and is likely to invo lve technical details that are 
outside the realm of judicial adjudication. The common question s of law 
and jurisdiction raised in the petitions pending before the High Court are 
already noted for its determination in Wri t Petition No.3834 of 2020. 
Notices under Order XXVII -A CPC have also been issued to the Law 
Officers of the Federation and the Province. The respondent private 
parties who are present before us are also ready to proceed with the ir 
cases. We consider that judicial consideration by the High Court ought to 
be devoted to resolving the legal dispute between the parties rather than 
the pricing mechanism regulating commercial and policy matters . 
According ly, the learned High Court shall  make a serious effort to decide 
the legal issues arising for determination in this matter within a fortnight 
from the date of receipt of this order. If either party prolong s the 
proceedings on account of adjournments or otherwise they shall be subject 
to penalization , inter alia, by modification of the  terms of the  interim 
relief ordered below .  
3.  The impugned interim  order dated 3.8.2021 protects the 
interest of the respondents mill -owners on the strength of a surety bond 
equal to the difference in price charged by them and the p rice fixed by the 
regulators on 30.07.2021 . We do not consider that the surety bond 
constitutes sufficient security  for the regulators . According to the 
impugned order, the  Cane Commi ssioner  is maintaining the records of 
production and sales of all sugar m ills in the Province.  He shall continue 
to do so and keep an account of the amount charged and collected by the 
sugar mills and the amount fixed by the regulators at the stage (ex-factory 
and/or retail) specified by the latter. The difference in the two am ounts 
shall be deposited contemporaneously by each sugar mill with the Deputy CP.454 0-4541 of 2021  4
Registrar (Judicial) of the Lahore High Court, Lahore. Such deposits shall 
be made voluntarily but shall be subject to replenishment forthwith to the 
correct amount that is notif ied to the erring sugar mill by the Cane 
Commissioner. In case of dispute about the amount of the requisite 
deposit to be made during the pendency of the petition before the learned 
High Court, the amount fixed by the Cane Commissioner shall prevail. 
These  petitions are converted into appeals and are disposed of in the 
terms mentioned above.  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
Islamabad , the  
12th August, 2021 
 M. Azhar Malik + Irshad Hussain /*     
 
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING.    