SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED, CJ 
MR. JUSTICE MUSHIR ALAM  
MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
 
C. M. A. NO.490 OF 2021  
IN 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.20 OF 2013  
(Action against Distribution of Development Funds to 
MNAs/MPAs by Prime Minister )   
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood, Add l. AGP  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Barrister Qasi m Ali Chohan,  
Addl. A.G.  Punjab  
Khalid Mehmood,  
Addl. Secretary Finance, Punjab  
Shehbaz Ahmed Sheikh,  
Law Officer, Finance, Punjab  
   
For Govt. of KPK  : Mr. Shumail Ahmed Butt, A.G., KP  
Mr. Aftab Ali Khan, Addl. A.G., KP  
Atif Rehman, Secretary Finance , KP 
Amir Sultan Tareen,  
Secretary, P&DD , KP 
   
For Govt. of  
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir,   
A.G., Balochistan  
Mr. Muhammad Fareed Dogar,  
Assistant A.G. , Balochistan  
   
For ICT  : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi,  
A.G., Islamabad  
   
For Govt. of Sindh  
(via video link from 
Karachi)  : Mr. Salman Talib ud din, A.G. , Sindh  
Saeed Ahmed Qureshi,  
Focal Person to Chief Secretary , 
Sindh  
Sikander Has san,  
D.S. Finance , Sindh  
 
 
Date of Hearing  : 11.02.202 1 CMA.490/20 21 IN CONST.P.NO.20/2013  2       
 
 
    ORDER   
 
 GULZAR AHMED, CJ. —  The learned At torney G eneral for 
Pakistan has filed a report by way of CMA No.751 of 2021 , signed 
by the Secretary, Finance Division, Government of Pakistan, 
Islamabad.   The above report, inter alia , submits as follows:  
“iii) There is no discretionary allocation at the disposal  of the 
Prime Minister, Federal Minister, Parliamentarian, or any 
other person , under the existing budgeta ry system.   As such, 
expenditures incurred are never person  speci fic.  Rather they 
are Demand -specific, duly approved by the National 
Assembly. ” 
 
It was observed i n Court that the Prime Minister enjoys protection 
for his person under Article 248 of the Constitution, neverthe less 
he has in deference to our last orde r also signed the above report  
with the following endorsement : 
“It is submitted that no p ublic funds are being distributed to 
Parliam entarian s by t he Federal Government and any report to the 
contrary in media is incorrect.  No money will be handed over to the 
legisla tors to carry out development sc hemes. ” 
 
2. The learned Additional Advocate Gen eral, Punjab, has also  
submitted a report by way of CMA N o.719 of 2021 , signed by the 
Finance Secretary and the Chief Secretary, Government of the 
Punjab, where responding to que ry (b) in para 4 of the order of this 
Court d ated 03.02.2021, it is stated as follows:  
 “Public fund s are allocated by the Provincial A ssembly in 
terms of Articles 120 to 124 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan .  Expenditure against aforesaid budgetary 
allocations is made in accordance with the rules made  under 
Article -119 of the  Cons titution.  There is no provision in  the rules 
ibid to hand over funds to legislators.  The Government of Punja b 
has neither hand ed over funds to l egislators , nor is it in the process 
of handi ng over funds to l egislators , and nor does  it intend to hand 
over funds to legislators .  Under the A nnual Development Program 
2020 -21 prepared by the Planning & Development Board , 
Government of P unjab,  no funds have be en allocated at the sole 
disposal / discretion of the Chief Minister or Provincia l Minister or 
any memb er of the Prov incial Assembly.  The  execution of various 
development schemes is made by the respective authorities 
mentioned in the above referred ru les, which empower the 
concerned author ities mentioned therein to incur  expenditure u p to 
the limits prescr ibed under these rules.  Furthermor e, the 
development schemes are project specific and no person specific. ”   
 CMA.490/20 21 IN CONST.P.NO.20/2013  3       
 
 
whether the Federal and provi ncial governments h ad handed over 
or intended to ha nd over monies to the legislators and /or c arry out 
development w orks identified by them. ” 
 
3. The l earned  Advocate General, Sindh, while appearing 
through vi deo lin k from the Supreme Court Branc h Registry, 
Karachi, has infor med that the Government of Sindh has also filed 
its re port by way of CMA No.750 of 2021, signed by the Secretary 
Finance as well as  the Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh, in 
respo nse to the order of this Court dated 03.02.2021 . The re sponse 
of the Gover nment of Sindh to the query (b) of para 4 of the order 
of this Court dated  03.02.2021 , it is stated as follows:  
“In response to que ry at Para-4(b) of the Order dated 03 .02.2021  
passed by the Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan , it is 
submitted that the Government o f Sindh  has not 
allocated /disbursed any Development funds to any  MNA/MPA or 
notable in  the A nnual Development Plan (ADP -2020-21).   
 
It is further submitted that the Government of Sindh will make all 
allocations in accordance with the provisions o f Constit ution of 
Islamic Rep ublic of Pakistan and the guidelines provide d by this 
Honourable C ourt in its judgment (action agains t distribution of 
Development Funds by the Ex-Prime Minister, PLD 2014 Supreme 
Court  131) referred to in the order dated 03.02.2021. ” 
 
4. In our order dated 1 0.02.2021 , we have noted that the 
Government of Khyber Pakhtunk hwa by way of CMA No.568 of 
2021 so also the Government of Balochistan by way of CMA 
No.613 of 2021, have already submitted their replies where the 
categorical  statement s have been made that no development fund  
is going to be given to  any of the MPAs/Minis ters/Notable s of their 
respect ive Province s and that the development funds shall be used 
and spent as per the constitutional mandate and the rule s framed 
by the respective Governments  for utilizat ion of the development 
funds, provided  in their annu al budget.  
5. The report of the Federal Govern ment (CMA No.751 of 2021 ) 
submitted by the learned Attorney General for Pakistan  in Court 
today, the relevant para s where of have been r eproduced above , 
amply demonstrate that none of the developme nt funds shall be CMA.490/20 21 IN CONST.P.NO.20/2013  4       
 
handed over to any of the Federal Minister s, Parliamentarian s or 
any other person under the existing budget and that wh atever 
budgetary  provisions have been made in the annual b udget, the 
same will be utiliz ed in the manner , as is provide d in the 
Constitution and  other applicable laws and regulati ons.  The 
report s of the Government of the Punjab so also Gove rnment of 
Sindh , in specific terms, have responded that no development fu nd 
is going to be given to any of the MPAs/Minister s/Notable s of their 
respective Provinces and that the development  funds shall be used 
and spe nt as per the constitutional mandate and the applicable 
rules framed by the respec tive Governments for utilization  of the 
development funds provided in the annual budget.   
6. At this st age one of us (Qazi Faez Isa, J. ) sought to place on 
record photocopies of certain documents statedly received by him 
from some anon ymous source through a WhatsApp  message.  
Copies of such documents were handed over by the Hon. Judg e to 
other Hon. Members of the Bench.  A copy was also  handed over to 
the learned Attorney General for Pakistan.  The Hon. Judge also 
stated that he was unsure if the documents were genuine.  The 
learned Attorne y General for Pakista n submitte d that since the 
authenti city of the documents was ques tionable, the same may not 
be taken on record .  He further submitted that in any event  the 
Hon. Judge would become a complainant in the matter  and in that 
capacit y it would not be appropriate for the Hon. Judge to hear the 
matter.  The Hon. Chief Justice of Pakistan, therefore, observed 
that in these circumstances it would not be proper for the Hon. 
Judge to hear the matter con sidering that he had already filed a 
petition against the Prime Minister of Pakistan , in his personal 
capacity .  Therefore , to uphold the principle of un -biasnes s and 
impartiality , it would be in the interest o f justice  that the Hon. CMA.490/20 21 IN CONST.P.NO.20/2013  5       
 
Judge should not hear matter s involving the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan.  
7. In view of the above position on record, it a ppears that the 
queries raised by this Court in the order dated 03.02.2021 have 
been responded/addressed by all the re spective Governments and 
thus, we see no reason to further  proceed with the matter.   
Accordingly, the Civil Miscellane ous Application No.490 of 2021 in 
Consti tution Petition No.20 of 2013 is disposed of.  
 