IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 549 of 2020   
(Against the order dated 5.6.2020 passed by the Lahore 
High Court Lahore in Crl. Misc. No.19465 -B/2020)  
 
 
Babar Nadeem  
 
…Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
The State  through P.G. Punjab and another    
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner(s):  Mr. Naveed Ahmed Khawaja, ASC  
 
For the State:  Mirza Abid Majeed,  
 Additional Prosecutor General Punjab   
along with Tana Tanvir, SHO, M. Akram, 
I/O. 
 
For the  Respondent(s) : Nemo  
 
Date of hearing:  21.07.2020.  
 
     ORDER  
 
       Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Manzoor  Ahmed, deceased, 
was done to death by two unknown assailants, inside his house , located 
within the remit of Police Station  Saddar Arifwala, District Pakpattan  at 
9:00 p.m. on 17.2.2020 ; they  vanished into the darkness ; identified as 
assassins Muhammad Din , Muhammad Latif  and Tanvir Hussain  were 
subsequently arrested under section 54 on 29.2.2020 ; it is upon their 
disclosure that Babar Nadeem, petitioner along with two others was taken 
on board as amongst the abettors beh ind the scene; one of them, namely, 
Naveed has since been let off  from the array . As the investigation 
progressed, the Investigating Officer  recorded statements of Sher 
Muhammad and Muhammad Shahbaz PWs on 18.2.2020 ; according to 
them, they had seen the petitioner along with two others , shortly before the Criminal Petition No.549 of 2020   
 2
occurrence,  an information that they statedly conveyed to the complainant 
after the occurrence.  It is through these statements that the prosecution 
also introduced the motive  that related to a brawl between the parties 4 /5 
months prior t o the incident.  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Argument that  in the absence of any legal evidence  there was 
no occasion for the Courts below to deny judicial protection  to the 
petitioner  in the face of mala  fide vividly lurking behind the intended arrest 
warrants serious consideration . We would refrain to comment upon  the 
absence of abettors’ name in the crime report despite their having been 
spotted by the witnesses , shortly before the tragedy  struck a small rural 
neighbourhood i.e. Chak No.72 -EB, nonetheless, the omission by itself 
brings petitioner’s culpability within the purview of subsection 2 of section 
497 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 ; combined with  exoneration of 
Naveed from the list of abettors , argued as mutually destructive wi th the 
hypothesis of conspiracy , does admit space to contemplate considerations 
for arrest other than being noble ; a case for judicial protection stands made 
out. Petition is converted into appeal and allowed; ad interim bail granted 
vide order dated  8.7.2 020 is confirmed upon  furnishing  a bond in the sum 
of Rs.500,000/ - with one surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of the 
trial Court.   
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
21st July, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Ghulam Raza /- 