IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT:  MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ  
  MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
 
 
S.M.C. NO. 26 OF 2007, H.R.C. NOs. 2698/2006, 133/2009, 778 -
P/2009, 13933/2009, 14072 -P/2009, C.M.A. NOs. 4662/2011, 
302/2010 , 4249/2018 & CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 64/2009  
(Deadbeats got loans 54 billions written off ) 
 
In Attendance:  
 
For the Petitioner:  Nemo.  
(In Const.P.64/2009)  
  
For Federation : Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan, Attorney Gen  
Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Addl. A GP. 
 
For NAB Syed Asghar Haider, P.G. NAB.  
 
For PIDB:     
 Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
For IDBL  Mr. Zarghoon Shah, Chief Manager,IDBL.  
  
For ZTBL , SME, Pak 
Libya Holding Co  Mr. Muhammad Rasheed Qamar, ASC  
  
For HBL , Kraf Kit Ltd  Mr. Arshad Tayably, ASC  
For Utilit y Store  Saudi Pak, 
Industrial & Agricultural 
Investment Co.  Mr. Kashif Farooq, GM + Mr.Masood Alam 
Niazi, Sr.G.M.HR. , Mr. Liaqat Hussain, G.M. 
Account s and  
 Mr. Iftikhar Ahmed, Manager Law  
 
For State Bank   
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR. a/w  
Mr. Asad Ahmad Gani , Advocate on behalf of 
Dr. Pervez Hassan Sr. ASC.  
  
 
On Court’s notice   
Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC  
For Orient Rice Mills, Rizek Industries, Abbas 
Steel, Misto Industries, Petro Commodities, 
Abbas Engineering  (CMA 5048 -5053/18)  
 
Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR.  For Ahmed Food 
Industries  
 
Mr. Nadeem Ahmed Sheikh, ASC for Afghan 
Gheen industrieis, Hakim Textile Mills  
 
Mr. Zafrullah Khan Cheema, ASC for SCHON  
Industries.  
 
Mr. Farhat Nawaz Lodhi, ASC.  For Paksitan 
National Textile Mill s, Kurdistan Trading Co.  
 
 SMC No. 26/2007 etc  2
Agha Muhammad Ali, ASC.  
Mr. Nawaz Khan, CEO, A -lAbas Fabrico.  
 
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR. For Tutripax Foods Ltd. , 
Taha Spinning Mills, Alaji Ismail Mills. Ltd.  
 
Syed Qalb -e-Hassan, ASC in CMA 5409/2018  
 
Sardar M. Aslam, ASC for Langar Sulemani 
Food Ltd.  
 
Mr. Fa zal ur Rehman, in person for Latif 
Shakil Textile Mills  
 
Mr. Umar Alvi, ASC for Prodential Textile Mills 
Ltd, M/s Rubicon Industries.  (CMA 5033 -
5034/18)  
 
Sh. Muhammad Akram, ASC for Footcare Pvt. 
Ltd. And its directors. (CMA 5035 -5039/18  
 
Nemo  for Jam Jafe es Ali s/o Jam Sher Ali  
 
Mr. Mehr Khan  Malik, AOR for Irum Textile 
Mills 
 
Mr. Shahid Ikram Siddiqi, ASC for  Kashif Steel 
Mills 
Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR. (CMA 5195/18)  
 
Mr. Munawar ul Islam, ASC  (CMA 50 14/18)  
(For Mubarik Textile Mills, Shafiq Textile Mills, Azi z 
Spinning Mills, Chaudhry Electrodes Ltd, Siraj Steel Ltd, 
Techno Agriculture Ltd, Al -Asif Sugar Mills, National Bulbs 
Pvt Ltd, Icepack Ltd)   
   
Kh. Ahmed Tariq Rahim, Sr. ASC  (CMA 
5040/18)  
Syed Moazzam Ali Shah, ASC  
(For Choti Textile Mills Ltd)   
 
Malik Muhammad Ahmad Qayyum, Sr. ASC  
(CMA 5290/18) for Sheikhoo Oil Mills  
 
Mr. Abbas Mirza, ASC  
(For Chohan Vegetable Mills)  
 
Mr. Fauzi Zafar, ASC  (CMA 5362/18)  
(For Farooq Habib Textile Mills Ltd)  
 
 
Maj. Gen. (R) Mian Abdul Qayyum  for Qurel 
Cassettes Ltd.  
 
Mr. Ahmed Qayyum, ASC for Ibex Textile  
 
Mian Tariq Manzoor, ASC.  
Mr. Abdul Haleem Paracha, for Zamir Textile 
Mills 
 
Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC for Sooraj Mukh Co.  SMC No. 26/2007 etc  3
Mr. Hamid Ali Shah, ASC.  
 
Mr. Ayaz Aslam Ch. For Salar Textile Mills ad 
Munarak Netwear Ltd.  
 
Mr. Rab Nawaz Khichhi, Trantice Ltd.  
 
Mr. Khurram Raza, ASC. For SS Oil Mills Ltd.  
 
Mr. Asif Jabbar Khan, for Spectrum Chemicals  
 
Mr. Habib ur Rehman, Advocate a/w Ashaar 
Khurram on behalf of Frontier Dextrose Ltd.  
 
Mr. Asim Hafeez, ASC (CMA 5556, 5557/18)  
for Ayaz Textile Mills (HBL), Dascon Pvt. Ltd. 
(HBL), Pak Pattan Dairies Ltd (ZTBL), Punjab 
Propylene Industries Ltd Service Fabrics & 
Monnoo Dairies  
 
Mr. Asad Aalam, Ms. Lubna Asad, Ms. Bushra 
Naeem for Fatima Food Industries  
 
Mr. Azid Nafees, ASC. For S insas Pvt. Ltd., 
Azeem Foods Industries, Electronic 
Information & Energy System  (CMA 5396/18)  
 
Mr. Jahangir Jadoon, ASC for Kashmir Poultry 
Mills.  
 
Mr. Haq Nawaz Chatha, ASC for Compact 
Particle Board Ltd., Expo International Pvt. 
Ltd. And Continental Ric e Mills Ltd.  
 
Syed Mudassar Ameer ASC for mala Ghee Pvt. 
Ltd. 
 
 
Mr. Zaheer Abbas for Tabaco Mills Ltd.  
 
Mr. Zulfiqar Chohan, Director Chohan Ghee 
Mills Ltd  
 
Agha  Muhammad Ali, ASC for Al -Abbas 
Fabrics Ltd.  
 
Mr. Hasan Akbar, ASC. For Taha Spinning 
Mills Ltd. & Haji M. Ismail Mills  
 
Syed Raza Ali Bukhari, s/o Syed Iftikhar Ali 
Bokhari for Mubarik Dairies  
 
Mr. Irfan Bannu for Bannu Dairies  
 
Mr. Zafarullah Cheema, for Shan Knite Wear 
Ltd.  
 
Mr. Mudasir Khalid Abbasi, ASC  for Pak Green 
Fertilizers Co & Multan  Edible Oil Ltd.  SMC No. 26/2007 etc  4
 
Mr. Wajid Jawad, Associated Industries Ltd. 
(CMA 5406/2018)  
 
Mr. Shehryar Kasuri, ASC for Lion Steel 
Industries Pvt Ltd.  
 
Mr. Shabbir Hussain Dir. Batala Ghee Mills  
 
Mr. Habib ur Rehman Advocate, Mr. Ashar 
Khurram for Frontier Dextrase  Ltd.  
 
Raja Qasit Nawaz, Advcoate for Ghulam 
Muhammad & Co.  
 
Mr. Saalim Saleem Khan, ASC for Ahmad 
Foods Pvt. Ltd.  (CMA 5047/2018)   
 
Mr. Ayaz Aslam Ch. For Salaar Textile Mills , 
Munareh  Knitwear  
 
Mr. Muhammad Arshad s/o Khusi 
Muhammad for M/s Ink Chemi cals Pvt. Ltd.  
 
Barrister Haris Azmat, ASC for Kotri Textile 
Mills Ltd.  
 
Syed Nazim Hussain Shah on behalf of Sidra 
Rice Mills Pvt. Ltd.  
 
Mr. Shakil Jamil Anjum for Continental 
Beverages Ltd.  
 
Mr. Ikramullah Chaudhry, CEO Gadoon 
Synthetic Mills Ltd. & Attock Textile Mills Ltd.  
 
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR for Mian 
Muhammad Sugar Mills, Oberio Textile Mills 
Ltd.  
 
Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC  (CMA 5403/18)   
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR for Kiran Sugar Mills Ltd, 
Pak Land Cement, Saudi Cement, Sarbaz 
Traders, Kiran  Enterprises Ltd. Dewan 
Cement  
 
Mr. Zulfiqar Ali Abbas, brother of deceased 
Iftikhar Ali Abbas for Afghar Gheen Industries 
Ltd.  
 
Mr. Shaukat Hussain Malik, Bosan Road 
Multan  
 
Mr. Zafrullah Cheema, for Shan Knitewears 
Ltd.  
 
Mr. Zohaib Khaliq for Jadeed Te xtile Mills.  
 
Mr. Zahid Minhas, ASC for Haye Sons  SMC No. 26/2007 etc  5
 
Raja Muhammad Shafqat Abbasi, ASC for 
Mehr Dastagir Spinning Mills, Dastagir 
Leather & Foot wear industries Ltd  (CMA 
5394 -5395/18 ) 
 
Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, ASC for Kakashian 
Oil & Kakashian Feed Mills Lt d 
 
Malik Qamar Afza l, ASC for Spectrum Pvt Ltd 
Chemicals  (CMA 5411/18)  
 
Mr. Abdul Rauf, Director Shariq International Ltd  
 
Mr. Imtiaz Ahmed, Director Jaiguar Mating Pvt 
Ltd 
 
Mr. Aleem  Baig Chughtai, ASC for Novalty 
Fabrics Pvt Ltd  
 
Mr. Khalid Mehmood Khan , ASC for Frontier 
Dextroz Ltd  (CMA 5408/18 ) 
 
Mr. Muhammad Khalid, Director Polysex Pvt 
Ltd 
 
Mr. Arif Khan, ASC in CMA 5005, 5207, 5208, 
3210/2018  
 
Mian Javed Iqbal Arain, AS C for Ali Knitwear  
 
Mr. Hasan Nawaz Makhdoom, ASC for 
Taimoor Spinning Mills  
 
Mr. Hafeez ur Rehman, ASC for Ravi Dairy 
Products Ltd  
 
Mr. Nawab Khan for Al -Abbas Fabrics Pvt Ltd  
 
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR for AM Pak Dairies Pvt Ltd  
 
Raja Inaam Minhas, ASC (CMA 5168, 
5172/2018)  
 
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR for Aslam ginning & Press 
Factory Pvt Ltd  
 
Mr. Zahid Ibrahim, ASC  in CMA 5205, 5208, 
5209, 5210/2018  
 
Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
Ch. Muhammad Akra m Nat, in person for 
Rani Agro Dairy Products Ltd.  
  
Mr. Haider Waheed, ASC (Shan Foods CMA 
5361/18)  
 
Sardar Abdus Sami, ASC (CMA 5397 -
5399/18) . SMC No. 26/2007 etc  6
 
Mr. Umar Aslam, ASC (CMA 5404 -5405/18)  
 
Mr. Khalid Mahmood Khan, ASC. (5408/18)  
 
Syed Mudassar Amir, ASC (CMA 5559/18)  
 
Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC.  
 
Mr. Ahmad Qayyum, ASC (CMA 5044/18) . 
 
Mr. Arif Khan, ASC. (CMA.5005, 5007 to 5010, 
5190/18) . 
 
Mr. Abdur Rauf rohala, ASC. (Salala  
Industries)  
 
Mr. Shahzada Mazhar, ASC Harrpa Textile 
Mills.  
 
 
Date of hearing:  30.06.2018 
 
ORDER  
 This matter has been proceeding for the last several dates 
and we have had the assistance of the learned counsel for the respective 
parties  (being the borr owers)  to whom notices were issued by way of 
publication as well as the learned Attorney General for Pakistan.  
 
2.   Very briefly by way of background this is a matter taken up 
by the Court exercising suo moto jurisdiction , regarding loans that were 
written off or waived by various financial institutions including banking 
companies , as to whether such write -offs were bonafide  and done only 
for proper and lawful business and commercial reasons and 
consideration s and not for any ulterior motive or in bad fai th or in abuse 
of law or power in order to give undue favour and /or to benefit the 
chosen few. In order to assist the Court, a high powered commission 
chaired by Mr.  Justice  (Ret’d)  Syed Jamshed Ali, a former Judge of this 
Court , was appointed to undertake  an in-depth and detail ed analysis of 
such loans . Certain terms of reference were settled for the Commission. 
After a detailed inquiry and numerous hearings the Commission 
presented its report to this Court and for the last several dates its 
recommendation s and the implementation of the same ha ve been under 
consideration.  
 
3.   The learned Attorney General and learned counsel appearing 
for the respective parties have taken us to Volum e 1 of the Commission’s SMC No. 26/2007 etc  7
report , which sets out the detailed exercise that  was undertaken and the 
recommendations that have been m ade. Several paragraphs from this  
volume were read out before us and we would like to acknowledge the 
assistance that has been provided by learned counsel in this regard.  
 
4.  We may note that after having considered several hundred 
cases, the Commission ultimately recommended that 22 2 cases ought to 
be taken up for further proceedings. T he summary of the se cases is given 
in Table 5.9 at page 107 of Volume -I. We are only concerned with these 
222 cases . 
 
5.  Having considered the respective submissions and the 
recommendations we have concluded that the interest s of justice will 
best be  served in the following manner. Firstly, we accept the 
recommendation of the Commission, as contained in para 5.28 (iii) of 
Volume -I (page 108) that a uniform formula ought to be applied across 
the board while dealing with the 22 2 cases. The Commission has given 
its rationale and nothing has been said before us that would dissuade us 
from taking the same approach.  The ratio nale is sound, reasonable and 
practical.  This aspect may be regarded as fu ndamental to these 
proceedings. Secondly, at page 109 the Commission has made four 
recommendations , serialized as (I) to (IV) and being , from  the perspective 
of the borrowers, in des cending order of “severity” . Having considered the 
matter , in our view it is recommendation (IV) that ought to be adopted , 
i.e., the one that is most favorable to the borrowers , and whi ch the 
Commission itself has recommended as a “moderate option”. The 
Commission has of course quite rightly emphasized that it is ultimately 
for the Court itself to decide the appropriate course of action.  
 
6.    In the several volumes of the report following Volume -I, the 
Commission has considered the case of each borrower individually and 
has applied a standardize d formula with regard to the position of 
finance s/loans /advances obtained by all the borrowers. This is of  course 
in line with the Commission’s recommended approach of applying a 
uniform across the board formula. I n each case, a  standardized table has 
been prepared for the borrower, the first two columns of which relate to 
“amount sanctioned” and “amount recovered” respectively. In our view 
recommendation (IV) as referred to above and which has been accepted 
by this  Court is to apply in relation to these two figures.  SMC No. 26/2007 etc  8
 
7.  In view of the above, it is decided that in the first instance all  
of the borrowers included in the 22 2 cases identified by the Commission, 
be given an option  (herein after the “first option”)  to deposit with this 
Court an amount equal to 75% of the differential between the “amount 
sanctioned” and “amount recovered”. If a borrower deposit s this amount 
within  a timeframe and in a manner to be fixed by the Court, then no 
further proceedings will be ta ken against it. I n the case of all those 
borrowers that do not avail the first option, their cases will be referred to 
the Banking Court (herein after the “second option”). The Banking Court 
will then reconsider the entire case with in such per iod as may be  fixed by 
this Court , i.e., will consider whether the amount written off/waived  (as 
identified  by the Commission in relation to the said borrower  in the 
subsequent columns of the table relating to it)  was done in a lawful 
manner and not by way of any abuse  of power or the law. For such 
purpose the Banking Court shall be entitled and bound to look behind 
the position as may have emerged in consequence of the application to 
Circular 29 that was issued by the State Bank of Pakistan in relation to 
written off l oans. More particularly, t his exercise shall be carried out 
within the parameters laid down in section 8(1) of the Financial 
Institutions (Recovery of Finances ) Ordinance  2001. It is clarified that 
since this exercise will be  carried out under the directio ns of this Court 
in exercise of suo moto jurisdiction, sub -section (2) of section 8 shall 
have no application , and the same shall likewise  apply in respect of any 
question of limitation.  (There is in any case a requisite power in the 
Banking Court under th e 2001 Ordinance.)  Furthermore, the onus shall 
lie on the borrower to establish affirmatively  that the written off/waived 
loans/  finances/advance s did not come within the parameters of section 
8(1). The Banking Court will be at liberty to issue notice to t he concerned 
financial institution  and/or the State Bank (or any other person)  if it so 
deems appropriate but it shall not be bound to do so . In case the 
borrower fails or refuses to appear before the Banking Court it shall 
proceed against it ex parte  and in such a situation shall be entitled to 
assume that the waived off amount(s) come within the parameters of 
section 8(1).  If the Banking Court concludes that any amount is 
recoverable, it shall make an appropriate order, which shall be deemed to 
be the dec ree of the court and shall be executable accordingly  and also in 
terms as herein after stated . 
 SMC No. 26/2007 etc  9
8.  In respect of any borrower that avails the second option , its 
propert ies and assets shall be deemed attached with immediate effect 
from such date as may be specified by this Court, as shall the properties 
and assets of all persons who are the directors or partners of the 
borrower and all persons having  a majority or controlling interest therein 
(whether as shareholder or owner). In respect of any such borrowe r, if 
ultimately the Banking court concludes that any amount is recoverable , 
then in addition to such proceedings by way of execution that may be 
taken, any property or assets to which the order of attachment 
hereinabove may apply shall also be liable to b e disposed off , and in such 
manner as the Banking Court may deem appropriate,  in order to make 
full recovery.  This is however subject to one condition.  If a borrower that 
chooses to avail the second option  (or to which the latter applies)  
deposits with thi s Court the differential amount referred to above in 
relation to the first option (i .e., 75% of the difference between the 
“amount sanctioned” and “amount recovered”) within the stipulated 
period then such borrower may make an appropriate application to th e 
Banking Court and on such  application, if that Court is satisfied that the 
amount has been so deposited, it may make a n order  declar ing that the 
order of attachment shall cease  to operate in relation to such borrower  
and its directors/partners/controllin g persons. The amount so deposited 
will be subject to adjustment or return, as the case may be, depending 
on the outcome of the proceedings before the Banking Court. 
 
9. Learned counsel for some of the borrowers  appearing before us 
have contended that thei r instructions are that the first option is not to 
availed but the facts of their cases are such that the matter ought not to 
be regarded as falling within the second option. Such learned counsel 
shall be heard by this Court in relation to their respective  cases but 
subject to following condi tions. Firstly, the case ought to be made out by 
learned counsel must be so clear and obvious that it must be regarded as 
floating on the face of the record. No other case, which requires any 
deeper consideration of the record, will be entertained.  Secondly, if in 
relation to any borrower learned counsel fails to make out a case in this 
regard, then the case of the said borrower shall be deemed referred to the 
Banking Court in terms of second option, but in such case the  borrower 
shall not have an opportunity of making a deposit in terms as aforesaid 
i.e. the order of attachment in such cases shall apply immediately and in SMC No. 26/2007 etc  10
full from the specified date and shall continue till the termination of the 
proceedings before the b anking court.  
 
10.  It may be noted that any case to which the first option does not 
apply shall be deemed to fall within the second option (unless there is 
anything expressly to the contrary in this or any subsequent order of this 
Court.) Finally, it  need hardly be pointed out that since the order of 
attachment will apply in terms of the order s of this Court, any 
disobedience or violation thereof shall also be tantamount to contempt of 
court and the concerned party/persons shall be liable accordingly.  
 
11.  Learned counsel may take instructions from the respective parties 
in terms of the above and proceed accordingly on the next date. We may 
note that on earlier dates some learned counsel had indicated that their 
instructions were that the concerned borrow er wished to avail the first 
option. Such instructions may be reaffirmed on the next date. Finally, 
the learned Attorney General may also, if he so deems appropriate, make 
further submissions in light of the above for the assistance of the Court.  
 
12. Re-list for 4th July, 2018.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad,  
the 30th June, 2018.  
Not approved for reporting  
Nisar /* 
 