 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ  
  MR. JUSTICE UMAR ATA BANDIAL  
  MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.134 OF 2012  
AND  
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.1864 OF 2010  
IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.9 OF 2005  
AND  
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATIONS NO.1939 OF 2014, 5959 OF 2016, 
4095, 1793, 2876, 2996, 3014 AND 6672 OF 2018 IN 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.134 OF 2012  
AND  
CIVIL MISC. APPLICATIONS NO.3034, 3048, 3051 AND 6247 OF 
2018  IN CIVIL MISC. APPLICATION NO.1864 OF 2010  
 
 
Const.P.134/2012:  Pakistan Bar Council through its Chairman v. 
Federal Government through Establishment 
Division and others  
  
C.M.A.1864/2010:  Article by Aredshir Cowasjee in Daily Dawn 
dated 27.06.2010 titled “Looking the Future” 
regarding standards of professional ethics in 
the legal profession.  
  
C.M.A.1939/2014:  Application by Pakistan Bar Council for 
Impleading Universities as respondents.  
  
C.M.A.5959/2016:  Application in Respect of Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali 
Bhutto University of Law (SZABUL) through its 
Registrar v. Federal Government through 
Establishment Division and others  
  
C.M.A.1793/2018:  Impleadment application by Muhammad Amin 
Sandhila  
C.M.A.2876/2018:  Concise Statement by KPK Law Colleges in reply 
to show cause notices issued vide order dated 
6.3.2018.  
  
C.M.A.2996/2018:  Impleadment application by Pakistan Bar 
Council through Chairman Legal Education 
Committee v. The Federal Government thr. 
Secretary Establishment and others  
  Const. P. No. 134/2012  2
C.M.A.3014/2 018:  Impleadment application by Islamabad Bar 
Council  
  
C.M.A.3034/2018:  Concise Statement on behalf of respondent No.2 
College of Legal & Ethical Studies (Coles), 
Abbottabad.  
  
C.M.A.3048/2018:  Additional Documents (copies of show cause 
notices issued  to the private law colleges of 
KPK) on behalf of respondent No.10.  
  
C.M.A.3051/2018:  Impleadment application by Zahid Hussain  
  
C.M.A.4095/2018:  Impleadment application by M . Umar Jatoi  
  
C.M.A.6247/2018:  Impleadment application by City Law College  v. 
Federal Government through Secretary M/o 
Education etc. Islamabad and others  
  
C.M.A.6722/2018:  Impleadment application by Muhammad 
Shafique  
 
In attendance:  Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. M. Anwar Kamal, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Zafar Iqbal Kalanori, ASC  
Mr. Muhammad Arshad, Secy. PBC  
Mr. Muhammad Ahsan Bhoon, ASC  
Mr. M. Shoaib Shaheen, ASC  
Ch. Zulfiqar Ahmed Khan, ASC  
Ms. Bushra Qamar, ASC  
(Chairperson Executive Committee,  
Punjab Bar Council)  
 
Mr. Bilal Ahmed Qazi, ASC  
(For Islamia University BWP)  
 
Syed Iftikhar Hussain Gillani, Sr. ASC  
Mr. M. Akhtar Ali, ASC  
(For K.P. Private Law Colleges)  
 
Mr. Zafar Iqbal, Ch. ASC  
(Topper Law College)  
 
Rai Bashir Ahmed, ASC  
(In CMAs 1844 & 6247/2018)  
 
Rai M. Nawaz Kharral, ASC  
(CMA. No. 6722/18)  
 
Mr. Zafarullah Khan Khakwani, ASC  
Dr. Amanullah, Chairman, Affiliation 
Committee, BZU  Const. P. No. 134/2012  3
Ch. Muhammad Umar, Registrar BZU  (For BZU)  
 
Mr. Munir Ahmed Khan Kakar, ASC  
Raja Abdul Rehman, ASC  
(For Zargoon Law College)  
 
Mr. Riasat Ali Azad, ASC  
(Alfalah Law College/Kashmor Law Colleg e) 
 
Mr. M. Ikram Chaudhry, Sr. ASC  
(In C.M.As.4012 & 4013/2018)  
 
Mr. M. Qasim Mirjat, AOR  
(In C.M.A.4094/2018)  
 
Mr. Junaid Akhtar, ASC  
(In C.M.A.2996/2018)  
 
Mr. Waseem -ud-Din Khattak, ASC  
(for University of Peshawar)  
 
Mr. Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta, ASC  
(For Pakistan College of Law)  
Mr. M. Amin Sandhela, in -person  
(In CMA 1793/2018)  
 
Mr. Fawad Saleh, ASC  
(For Coles Law College)  
 
Mr. Shaukat Ali, Principal,  
(Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Law College,  
Nausheroferoz).  
 
Mr. Abdul Ali, Owner of Ali Law College 
Sanghar,  Sindh. (CMA -6898/18)  
 
Mr. M. Faseeh ud Din Wardag, ASC  
(For Jalawan Law College, Khuzdar)  
 
Mr. Amanullah Qazi, Director,  
Intelligence Law College, Moro, Sindh  
 
Mr. Faisal Javed, VC School of Law, Lahore  
 
Mr. Hassan Fareed, Legal Advisor,  
University of M anagement & Technology, 
Lahore.  
 
Mr. Saleem Akhtar Warraich, ASC  
 
Mr. Aftab Sohail, College of Law, Gujranwala.  
 Const. P. No. 134/2012  4
Mr. M. Afzal Khan, ASC  
(For Pakistan Law College, Lahore)  
 
Mr. Nafeer A. Malik, ASC  
(Principal Quaid e Azam Law College, 
Lahore.)  
 
Rana Ali Akbar, Adv.  
(For Topper Law College)  
 
Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Mohal, ASC  
 
Sh. Irfan Akram,  ASC  
Mrs. Tasneem Amin, AOR  
(For Institute of Law)  
 
Mr. Ahmed Qayyum, ASC  
(For Lahore Law College)  
 
Mr. Abbas Mirza, ASC  
(For Farabee Law College)  
 
Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC  
(For Punjab University)  
 
Mr. Anwar ul Haq Pannu, ASC  
 
Mr. Qaiser Amin Rana, ASC  
 
Mian Tariq Manzoor, ASC  
 
Sardar Muhammad Aslam, ASC  
Mr. Faiz Ahmed Jandran, ASC  
Mr. Kifayat Ali Jaskani, Principal Shan -e-Ali 
Law College, Tando Adam  
 
Barrister Adnan Sheikh, ASC  
(For Topper Law College, Lhr.)  
 
Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Mohal, ASC  
(For PSC)  
 
Malik Matiullah, ASC  
(For Asian Law College)  
 
Malik Anee q Ali  Khattana, A dvocate  
(In-person) (CMA -3046/18)  
 
Rana M. Arif, ASC  
(CMA -2475 -L/18)  
 
Mr. Ashfaq Bhullar, ASC  Const. P. No. 134/2012  5
Rai M. Nawaz Khan Kharral, ASC  
(For Qarakuram Law College/  
CMA -6722/18)  
 
Usama Shafique, Assistant Registrar,  
University of South Asia.  
  
On Notice:  Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti,  
Addl.  Attorney General for Pakistan.   
assisted by:  
Barrister Menal Tariq  
Mr. Qasim Ali Chohan, Addl. A.G. Pb.  
Mr. Shehryar Qazi, Addl. A.G. Sindh  
Malik Akhtar Hussain Awan, Addl. A.G. KP  
Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl. A.G. Balochistan  
Syed Naveed Abbas, ASC  
Mr. Aftab Mustafa, ASC  
(for respondent No.7)  
 
Mr. Waseem Hashmi, Ad visor, HECP  
Mr. Asif Munir, Director, HECP  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
(For HECP)  
  
Date s of hearing:  20.08.2018 & 24.8.2018 at Lahore  
and 28.8.2018 at Islamabad.  
 
    JUDGMENT:   
 UMAR ATA BANDIAL, J .  This petition is filed by the Pakistan 
Bar Council (“PBC”)  under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan (“Constitution”). It seeks to enforce the judgment 
of this Court rendered in Pakistan Bar Council vs. The Federal 
Government & Others (PLD 2007 SC 394) (“PBC judgment”) 
wherei n the Court considered the matter of declining standards of 
legal education and the mushroom growth of substandard law colleges 
in the country. In the PBC judgment, the Court directed all law schools 
and colleges to comply with the “Affiliation of Law Coll eges Rules” 
(“Affiliation Rules ”) framed by the PBC in order to ensure uniform 
quality of legal education. The Court further directed that any rules Const. P. No. 134/2012  6
framed by the PBC shall be read into the rules framed by any univers ity 
and in case of conflict, the former  shall prevail.  A five-member 
commission was formed in order to  examine existing courses of law 
prescribed by universities for obtaining the LL.B. degree and to 
propose other suitable steps in the light of the observations made by 
the Court. Through the present petition the PBC has claimed that none 
of the Respondent law colleges and universities have complied with 
the directions given in the PBC judgment and have instead granted 
affiliation certificates to private law colleges in violation of the 
Affiliation Rules that lay down, inter alia , the standards of legal 
educ ation, criteria for disaffiliation, necessary infrastructural resource 
facilities, maintenance and attendance record and minimum number of 
lectures required of law colleges.  
2.   It is to be noted that the PBC judgment was not being 
implemented . This came  to the notice of th e Court via an article 
published in Dawn on 27.06.2010 pursuant to which implementation 
proceedings were initiated in the same ye ar. The se proceedings 
continued sluggishly but came to be actively pursued in 2017 whereby, 
in the light of  the submissions made by the learned counsels for the 
petition ers, this Court vide  order dated 21.01.2018 constituted a 
Special Committee for Structural Reforms in Legal Education. This 
Special Committee consisted of Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC, Dr. A. Khalid 
Ranjha, Member, PBC, Mr. Azam Nazeer Tarar, Chairman, Legal 
Education Committee, PBC, Mr. Justice (R) Khilji Arif Hussain, Mr. 
Anwar Kamal, Prof. Ahmed Ali, Mr. Justice (R) Amanullah Yasinzai, Mr. 
Mian Zafar Iqbal Kalanauri, Former Member, Punjab Bar Counc il, Dr. Const. P. No. 134/2012  7
Ali Qizalbash, Advocate, Mr. Qazi Khalid Ali, Vice -Chancellor, Shaheed 
Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto University of Law, Karachi, Dr. Sohail Shahzad, 
Principal, Law College, University of Peshawar, Mr. Gul Muhammad 
Kakar, Principal, Law College, University of  Baluchistan, Mr. Amjad 
Hussain, Chairman, Law Department, Islamia University Bahawalpur, 
Mr. Muhammad Arshed, Secretary PBC, Mr. Wasim S. Hashmi Syed, 
Advisor, Human Resource Development Division and Mr. Muhammad 
Raza Chohan, Director General, Academics D ivision, Higher Education 
Commission.  In addition to the Special Committee, four Provincial 
Commissions and one for Islamabad Capital Territory (“ICT”) were 
also formed by this Court. These were headed by Mr. Justice (R) Khilji 
Arif Hussain (Sindh), Mr. An war Kamal (Punjab), Prof. Ahmed Ali 
(Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) Mr. Justice (R) Amanullah Yasinzai 
(Baluchistan) and Mr. Justice (R) Sardar Muhammad Aslam (ICT) 
respectively. The Provincial Commissions also consisted of nominees 
of the PBC, concerned Provincial B ar Councils, Higher Education 
Commission of Pakistan, Higher Education Departments of concerned 
Provinces and the Advocate Generals of concerned Provinces. For the 
ICT Commission, Mr. Muhammad Shoaib Shaheen, Member, Pakistan 
Bar Council, Mr.Fiaz Ahmed Anj um Jandran, Vice -Chairman, Islamabad 
Bar Council and Dr. Muhammad Idrees, Director Academic, Higher 
Education Commission were appointed as members.  
3.   The work of the Special Committee involved deliberations 
on the matter in issue from the following per spectives: (i) Eligibility for 
entry into law colleges (ii)  Preparation of uniform Syllabi of LL.B. 
courses and their duration (iii) Permanent and visiting faculties at Law Const. P. No. 134/2012  8
Colleges (iv) Assessment/  evaluation of examination and (v) Eligibility 
of entry to  the Bar. The Special Committee and all fiv e Commissions 
thereafter  inspected affiliated law colleges that had mushroomed in 
the market and to report on the standard of legal education, training 
and services imparted by them. Based on the findings of these 
inspections, the Special Committee of the PBC submitted its report  to 
the Court containing recommendations for advancing the object of 
uplifting the standard of legal education in the country. These 
recommendations variously impacted several law colleges that failed 
to comply with the minimum standards and criteria presc ribed by the 
Affiliation Rules or specified by the regulations of the chartered 
universities. Accordingly , with the assistance of learned counsel s 
representing the PBC, Provincial Bar Councils, concerned universities 
and law colleges, the Court during its proceedings held at the Branch 
Registry at Lahore on 20.08.2018 & 24.08.2018 and at the Principal 
Seat on 28.08.2018 examined, deliberated and considered the 
recommendations given by the Special Committee. The Court by a 
short order dated 31.08.2018 dispos ed of Constitution Petition No. 134 
of 2012 and Civil Misc. App lication No. 1864 of 2010 in  Constitution 
Petition No.9 of 2005 and issued dir ection s reproduced at the end of  
this judgment.   
Analysis:  
4.   The Rule of Law is a fundamental principle of any  
democratic society and in our legal system, it is the bedrock  of the 
Constitution. The Judicature is entrusted with  the constitutional duty 
to enforce the Rule of Law and to safeguard the Constitution. The Const. P. No. 134/2012  9
Courts in our country resolve disputes in accorda nce with the 
Constitution and the substantive and procedural law s framed 
thereunder. The system on the whole flourishes by positive and 
productive cooperation between the Bar and the Bench for 
ascertainment of the truth and decision of controversies accord ing to 
the relevant and applicable law. An independent, competent, honest 
and industrious Judicature requires an equally independent, dynamic, 
honest and dedicated Bar in order to effectively provide justice in 
accordance with law to all members of the soc iety.  
5.   The legal profession across the world is actively evolving. 
There is an ever -increasing demand for diverse legal services ranging 
from consultative work to dispute resolution by contractual or 
regulatory fora to litigation in Courts. Consequently there is a growing 
need for law degree awarding institutions offering education that 
possess corresponding breadth and quality. The phenomenon of 
globalisation has further contributed to this demand, thereby leading 
to a greater involvement of  law in both the national and international 
spheres. Legal education in this respect plays a crucial role in 
strengthening the Rule of Law, social stability, governance and 
economic de velopment. Law schools across th e world are striving to 
attain  higher st andards of legal education for meeting the complexity  
of legal relations and problems that arise in the increasing ly integrated 
global society and market. However , the case in Pakistan is different. 
There has been a major decline in the standard of legal e ducation 
owing to various reasons, explained cogently in the PBC judgment  (at 
pp.399 -400 ):  Const. P. No. 134/2012  10
13. “… Every year thousands of law graduates are 
getting added to the Bar. Some are products of 
colleges, having a certain credibility of imparting 
quality education  whereas many come from 
colleges where the standard  is below  average. The 
products of the latter kind neither have the 
requisite knowledge of law nor any commitment to 
professional ethics. The apprenticeship training, 
prescribed under the Bar Council Rules  is taken as a 
formality. The good old tradition of a senior 
training the junior in court room skills and ethics 
has given way to a new culture, where a young 
entrant is on his own sooner than is appropriate i.e. 
before he has legal skills or is fully equi pped to 
properly advice the client and assist the Court…”  
 
6.  One of the principal causes of decline in the standard of 
legal education is due to proliferation of substandard law degree 
awarding institutions that are motivated solely by commercial 
consid erations rather than academic excellence. This shift in priorities 
has inevitably compromised the quality of education and hampered the 
intel lectual development of law students . Insofar as the stage of 
apprenticeship in the legal profession is concerned, that also requires 
reform. New entrants into the profession require guidance from the 
expertise, skill and experience of senior members of the Bar to imbibe 
legal skills and pro fessional ethics. However more often than not, 
entrants are left to their own device s due to a dearth of advocates who 
are available to train juniors or simply for their lack of time and 
interest to  act as seniors.  The omission of this crucial training pe riod  
therefore, adversely affects the professional development of qualified  
new  entrants.  
7.   Apart from law degree awarding institutions, the Bar as 
an institution also plays an important role in improving the quality of Const. P. No. 134/2012  11
legal education. Provision of goo d quality legal education is 
inextricably linked with dispensation of justice that the Bar is 
responsible for ensuring. Some of its primary responsibilities  include: 
regulating the legal profession, shaping legal reform, ensuring fair 
access to justice, pr otecting the Rule of Law and upholding the 
independence and the ethical standards of the legal profession and 
nurturing legal education by mentor ing. Therefore in this s timulati ve 
capacity , the Bar must make a conscientious effort to standardise law 
degree awarding institutions. In this regard the PBC  judgment 
observes that:  
11. “…The quality of the Bar and assistance it 
renders to the Courts t o a great extent depends on 
legal education. The  Bar in general and the Pakistan 
Bar Council in particular therefore have awesome 
responsibility to improve the quality of legal 
education because it is the possession of a degree of 
law which is a sufficient academic qualification for 
entering the Bar.”  (at p.398)  
 
8.  For the past 45 years, the Legal Practitioners and Bar 
Councils Act, 1973 (“Act”)  has regulated the standards of proficiency 
for entry to the Bar in Pakistan.  The PBC established under the Act and 
the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan  (“HECP”) established 
under the Higher Education Commission Ordinance, 2002 are the key 
regulators to supervise and enforce professional standards in legal 
education. In pursuance to the views expressed in the PBC judgment 
and based upon its own deliberati ons, the PBC reviewed the Pakistan 
Bar Council Legal Education Rules of 1978 and re -enacted these as the 
Legal Education Rules of 2015 (“Rules”) . These Rules lay down 
detailed provisions on several matters concerning legal education, in Const. P. No. 134/2012  12
particular, criteri a for recognition of degree awarding institutions and 
for affiliation of law colleges thereto. The Rules were proposed, 
finalised and notified during the proceedings for the implementation of 
the PBC judgment.  
9.  The Rules have an overriding effect  (reference is made to 
Rule 2 ) and lay down, inter alia , the eligibility criteria for admission to 
the LL.B. programme, duration of the programme, inspection of law 
faculties and departments of law colleges for establishing or renewing 
their qualifying sta tus as affiliates of recognized degree awarding 
university.  Rule 17 stipulates that “no University/Degree Awarding 
Institution shall commence a law programme and admit students 
unless it is recognized by the Pakistan Bar Council…” and Rule 34 
requires “the  College shall ensure quality legal education according to 
the standard laid down by the Pakistan Bar Council as per its Rules. 
The directions issued by the Pakistan Bar Council, the Higher 
Education Commission and/or the University/ Institution from time to 
time in this behalf, shall be complied with and followed by the law 
college.”  Equally , the failure to comply with the Rules entails 
disaffiliation of the law colleges that are found lacking. Therefore , the 
PBC is obliged to collaborate with the HECP to monitor and ensure that 
law colleges adopt a stringent admission crite rion for the LL.B. 
programme and an  even more rigorous standard for entrance into the 
LL.M. and Ph.D. programmes  in pursuan ce to Rule 13 which lays down 
the requirement of prior approval  from the PBC and HECP f or its 
postgraduate programmes. For the LL.M. programme, the same Rule 
stipulates the requirement of a two -year programme and a limit of 20 Const. P. No. 134/2012  13
students in a class offered by law degree awarding institutions. Both 
bodies are therefore e ntrusted with the momentous responsibility of 
carrying out continuous monitoring and scrutiny of law colleges and 
authorizing only those that impart good quality education. 
Furthermore, cooperation between the Bar Councils, HECP and law 
colleges also has f ar reaching effects in terms of development in the 
law. Therefore law degree awarding institutions must comply with the 
guidelines and rules framed by the Bar Councils from time to time.  
10.  A well -structured curriculum also fosters quality 
education with  enduring results. The law degree curriculum should 
effectively impart academic knowledge and hone skills of argument, 
legal analysis and linguistic communication.  Examples in this regard 
can be taken from leading law schools in the world that offer 
multifaceted curricula inclusive of clinical legal education, mooting, 
mock trials, client interviewing, negotiation and mediation to provide 
students with an insight into the practical  requirements of law  
practice . The need for legal education to be multidi sciplinary is 
expressed in the PBC judgment in the following words:  
14. “Legal education should not only cater for those 
students who study to pursue law as a career but 
should also provide instructional and research 
facilities to those who aim at becomin g researchers, 
academicians or critics in the domain of law. The 
discipline of law encompasses almost every 
dimension of social life. Before students join a 
professional law course, they need to have a 
multidisciplinary academic base...” (at p. 400)  
 
11.  One of the  essential canons of professional conduct is the 
codification of legal ethics in order to inculcate ethical standards and Const. P. No. 134/2012  14
social responsibilities in legal practitioners. This is greatly emphasised 
upon in other jurisdictions such as the UK where Professional Ethics is 
a compulsory module taught in the Bar Professional Training Course. 
Incorporating legal ethics in law curricula is vital for making students 
aware of the ethics, professional responsibilities, fiduciary obligations 
and discipline exp ected of them as future legal practitioners. Another  
important skill for the practice of law as stipulated in Rule 9 is 
proficiency in the English language . Law colleges must strive that  
English as a medium of instruction  of legal subjects is adopted so that  
students are adequately proficient before they graduate. It is also 
particularly beneficial that , apart from substantive and procedural law, 
law colleges include social sciences such as sociology, economics and 
political science in their curricul a to inform students about growing 
number of  specialised fields in the legal profession.  
12.  In the foregoing perspective, it is advantageous that a five -
year LL.B. programme is introduced in law colleges that are not already 
offering it. This would  provide t he time and exposure  to ensure a 
complete and comprehensive legal education where students can 
adequately learn and acquire the knowledge, skills, values and 
practical judgment required for the legal profession.  In this regard the 
HECP has recommended a S tandardized Curriculum Format for LL .B (5 
year s) degree programme which provides guidelines for the 
regulator s, PBC and HECP , and the law degree awarding institutions . 
This is attached as Annexure –I to this judgment  for illustrative Const. P. No. 134/2012  15
purposes and subject to enforcement to the extent directed by the 
regulators .  
13.   For faithfully discharging their duty under the Rules, the 
law degree awarding institutions also have a crucial responsibility of 
ensuring availability of adequate resources, infrastructure and a 
faculty that is well equipped to provide quality education. To maintain 
a good standard of education, it is necessary th at instructors possess 
the relevant academic qualifications, experience and a high degree of 
competence. In this regard, a faculty comprising of practising lawyers 
and retired judges is generally well placed to provide students with a 
realistic view of the  practice of law. Faculty members should also assist 
in administrating the admission procedure and policies, curriculum, 
methods of teaching and examination to maintain high academic 
standards as well as closely supervise each student’s academic 
performanc e to ensure the best possible results. Equally, it is 
imperative that institutions set clear educational objectives or learning 
outcomes for students to effectively meet both educational and 
professional requirements. Law degree awarding institutions must 
therefore devote adequate resources to a law library, co -curricular 
activities such as mooting and student support services academic and 
career advi ce. As regards infrastructural requirements stipulated in 
Rule 25 under the Affiliation Rules, law colleges must have at least ten 
classrooms, a common room, adequate toilets, cafeteria, first aid 
facilities and so forth. During inspection of one of the colleges, it 
appeared that libraries in 13 out of 32 colleges were either locked or Const. P. No. 134/2012  16
had insufficient resources  while only 3 amongst 32 colleges maintained 
an attendance record of its students even though Rule 28 mandates 
law colleges to maintain as well as display an attendance record.  It is 
clear that without a competent faculty or sufficient resources, students 
with the necessary skills for working in a c hallenging and expanding 
legal environment  cannot be produced . Due consideration must also be 
given by provincial and federal governments to allocate sufficient 
resources for the improvement of legal education.  The State has a duty 
to promote the fundamental right of access to justice. In the course of 
time, t he quality of  legal education reflects upon the professional 
capabilities available in the Bar. These capabilities are extremely 
important both for assuring competent legal advice to the disputant 
parties in a controversy and also for competent legal assistance being 
provided to Courts and other dispute resolution fora . Prompt and good 
judgments and determinations improve governance, foster economic 
activity, progress and peace in society. This entire cycle of empowering 
persons and institutions realizes the constitution al goal of 
strengthening the Rule of Law in the society.  
 
14.   Once young professionals are admitted to the Bar, it is 
necessary that they continue to evolve, learn and improve their skills 
and knowledge to maintain consistency with a progressing legal 
environment. As a matter of fact, some foreign jurisdictions requi re 
mandatory/minimum continuing legal education (CLE) or continuing 
professional development (CPD) for lawyers and attorneys to 
undertake after they are admitted to the Bar. This mandatory  Const. P. No. 134/2012  17
 
continuing education requirement ensures that lawyers keep abreast  
with the developments in law and jurisprudence, maintain professional 
ethical standards and enhance the quality and calibre of the ir practice 
of law. As held by the Supreme Court of Canada in Sidney Green vs. 
the Law Society of Manitoba  (2017 SCC 20) at page 1:  
“A lawyer’s professional education is a lifelong 
process. Legislation is amended, the common law 
evolves, and practice standards change as a result 
of technological advances and other developments. 
Lawyers must be vigilant in orde r to update their 
knowledge, strengthen their skills, and ensure that 
they adhere to accepted ethical and professional 
standards in their practices.”  
 
In a similar manner the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Pakistan 
(ICAP) has put in place Quality Co ntrol Review (QCR) framework for 
mandatory quality assurance and compliance of professional standards 
amongst practitioners and firms engaged in audit. It is therefore 
imperative that such a system is also devised in the legal profession 
where practicing l awyers are continuously tested to ensure that they 
have the requisite knowledge of the law and amendments or 
developments thereof. Academic qualifications alone do not suffice and 
to maintain quality at the Bar, legal education must be treated as a 
continu ous process and promoted as a priority. In this regard, senior 
members of the Bar have a duty to contribute to the learning and 
grooming of entrants during the mandatory apprenticeship period by 
imparting their knowledge and expertise of different areas of  practice.  Const. P. No. 134/2012  18
15.   In the foregoing perspective and vision for the legal 
profession and in light of the recommendations submitted by the 
Special Committee, this Court vide its short order dated 31.08.2018  (as 
amended on 13.12.2018 ) was pleased to formul ate the following 
directions in the matter of legal education. These directions are 
reproduced below:  
“Court’s declarations & directions:  
1. Restoration of Bar Entrance Examination [Law 
Graduate Assessment Test (LAW -GAT)].  
 A Law Graduate Assessment Test (LAW -GAT) of law 
graduates seeking enrolment to the Bar shall be held on 
quarterly basis by HECP as the executing institution 
throughout Pakistan based on a question bank prepared for 
the Assessment Test.  
 
2. Test for Entry to Law College (Law Admission 
Test)  (LAT).  
 A law admission test for all law colleges in Pakistan 
shall be held biannually by the HECP. The outline of such a 
law admission test is given below:  
 
“LAW ADMISSION TEST (LAT)  
Division of Question s Marks  Nature of Questions  
Essay (either in English or 
Urdu)  15 200 words maximum  
Personal Statement (either 
in English or Urdu)  10 200 words maximum  
MCQs:    
MCQs: English  20 Synonyms/Antonyms / 
Prepositions  
MCQs: General Knowledge  20  
MCQs: Islamic Studies  10  
MCQs: Pak Studies  10  
MCQs: Urdu  10 Vocabulary  
MCQs: Math  05 Basic Math  
         Total Marks  100  
3. Specification of Affiliating Universities and their 
territorial jurisdiction.  
 The following universities are recognized and 
authorised by the PBC under the Rules to be law degree 
awarding institutions. The territorial jurisdiction of each 
such university is indicated against its name:  
 
Sr. No. Affiliating 
University  Area of Jurisdiction  
1. University of 
Baluchistan  Whole of the Province  
2. University of 
Peshawar  Districts & Civil Divisions of 
Peshawar, Malakand and Const. P. No. 134/2012  19
Mardan.  
3. Gomal University, 
D.I.K  Districts & Civil Divisions of 
D.I.Khan, Bannu and Kohat.  
4. University of 
Hazara, Mansehra  All the District of Hazara 
Division.  
5. University of the 
Punjab, Lahore  Districts & Civil Divisions of 
Lahore, Gujranwala, 
Sargodha, Faisalabad,  
Sahiwal and Rawalpindi.  
 
6. Bahauddin 
Zakariya University, 
Multan  District & Civil Divisions of 
Multan and Dera Ghazi Khan.  
7. Islamia University, 
Bahawalpur  All Districts of Bahawalpur 
Division.  
8. Karachi University  All Districts & Civil Division of 
Karachi.  
9. University of Sindh, 
Hyderabad  All Districts & Civil Divisions 
of Hyderabad, Mirpur Khas 
and Shaheed Benazirabad.  
10. Shah Abdul Latif 
University, Khairpur  Districts & Civil Divisions of 
Sukkur and Larkana.  
11. Quaid -e-Azam 
University,  
Islamabad.  Islamabad Capital Territory.   
 
4. Ban against conducting LL.M . and Ph.D. in law 
classes by the Universities/ Colleges / institutions 
that are not allowed to hold LL.B. classes.  
The universities and institutions that are not 
recognized and authorised by the PBC to confer LL.B . degree 
shall not impart legal education t o students at LL.M . and 
Ph.D . levels or to admit students to either of such 
programmes. The same rule applies to law colleges affiliated 
to such universities and institutions.   
 
5. Limit on admission to LL.M. and Ph.D. 
programmes in law and ban on mushroom 
admissions to these programmes as per criteria 
of HECP.  
Admission to LL.M. and Ph.D. programmes by an 
authorised law college/ university/institution shall be 
granted on the criteria laid down by HECP, including, the 
ceiling on the number of studen ts fixed for admission to such 
programmes.  
 
6. Designing of Curriculum for five year LL.B. 
Programme – annual and semester.  
 The HECP National Curriculum Review Committee 
along with the representative of the PBC sub -committee has 
finalize d the Curriculum for a five year  LL.B . programme to 
be run on the basis of an annual or semester system of 
examinations. The salient aspects of the Curriculum are 
attached as Annexure -I.  
 
7. Qualification of faculty (permanent and visiting) 
at law colleges . 
The university/ degree awarding institution/law 
College imparting legal education at the level of LL.B . 
programme shall hire law faculty members/  teachers as 
under:  Const. P. No. 134/2012  20
(i) The Dean Law Faculty/Head of Law 
Department/  Principal of law college shall be Ph.D. in 
law with 8 years law teaching experience/  practice 
experience in High Court or Masters Degree in Law 
with 15 years law teaching experience/  practice 
experience in High Court or a retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court or a High Court or a retired District & 
Sessions Judge having 5 years of judicial service to his 
credit;  
(ii) At least five permanent/whole time faculty 
members/teachers having a Masters degree in law 
with 5 years law teaching experience/practice 
experience in High Court or having a Bachelors 
degree in law with 10 years law teaching experience/ 
practice experience in High Court; &  
(iii) There shall be at least five part time/visiting 
faculty members/ teachers having 5 years standing 
as Advocates of High Court.  
(iv)  The above stand ard ratio of permanent and 
visiting faculty shall be followed to meet the needs of 
up to 100 students. Additional students shall be 
catered by increasing faculty strength according to 
the said ratio.   
 
8. Affiliating Universities to constitute separate 
Affiliating Committees for law colleges within 
their territorial jurisdiction.  
 Every affiliating university shall constitute a separate 
Affiliating Committee for initial and annual inspection of its 
affiliate law colleges and to take immediate action against 
those affiliate law colleges which are non -compliant with the 
rules framed by the PBC and the applicable rules of the 
affiliating university itself.  
 
9. Ban on admission to 3 year LL.B. programme.  
 A five years LL.B. programme shall be offered by a ll 
law colleges and institutions with effect from September, 
2018. The current three years LL.B. programme shall 
continue until Fall, 2018 however, no further admissions 
shall take place in the three year LL.B. programme after 
December 31, 2018 at any law college or institution.  
 
10. Ban against holding of evening classes Colleges/  
Universities.  
 There shall be a complete ban on evening classes 
being offered at all law colleges/universities across Pakistan.  
 
11. Introduction of Special Equivalence Examination 
for Law Graduates of foreign universities (by 
HECP).  
 No law graduate from any foreign university 
recognized by the Pakistan Bar Council shall be allowed to 
take the Law Graduate Assessment Test (LAW –GAT) unless 
he or she passes a Special Equiv alence Examination for law 
graduates of foreign universities which shall be held 
periodically by HECP in the following five subjects:  
1) Constitution of Pakistan  
2) Civil Procedure Code  
3) Criminal Procedure Code  
4) Qanoon -e-Shahadat  
5) Specific Relief Act  Const. P. No. 134/2012  21
 
12. Bar  Vocat ional Course:  
The Provincial/Islamabad Bar Councils may 
introduce “Two Weeks Bar Vocational Course”  during the six 
months training/pupillage period that a law graduate 
intending to join the legal profession must undergo for being 
enrolled as an Advocate for practicing law. The Provincial/ 
Islamabad Bar Councils may, however, consider and decide 
modaliti es for introducing the said course through respective 
Federal/  Provincial Judicial Academies.  
 
13. Allocation of Funds in Federal and Provincial 
Budgets for promotion of legal education:  
The Federal and Provincial Governments may be 
canvassed by the PBC and Provincial/ICT Bar Councils for 
allocation of substantial funds in the annual Federal and 
Provincial Budgets for promotion of legal education by the 
PBC.  
 
14. Salary package and payment of non -practicing 
allowance for permanent members law faculties:  
For securing services of competent and experienced 
law faculty on a permanent basis, concerned authorities in 
the Federal and Provincial Governments and the universities 
and law colleges shall ensure that a reasonable salary 
package and non -practicing allo wance is paid to the qualified 
law teachers in the respective universities/law colleges. This 
is necessary for enhancing and maintaining the standard and 
quality of legal instruction. The HECP being the apex 
regulatory authority of the recognized and autho rised 
universities shall play a guiding role in the foregoing regard.  
15. Assessment/Evaluation of Examination:  
The HECP shall, in collaboration with universities 
imparting legal education and the PBC, consider the matter 
of assessment/ evaluation of the e xaminations for LL.B 
classes exhaustively and make recommendations for 
updating and improving the current system of such 
examination to make it more relevant, practicable and 
reflective of the real talent and potential of candidates.  
 
16. Establishment of  autonomous Secretariat/  
Directorate of Legal Education in the Pakistan Bar 
Council:  
For improvement of the standard and quality of legal 
education in the country, concerted and well -planned efforts 
shall be made to establish a full -fledged and adequately 
equipped autonomous Secretariat/Directorate of Legal 
Education in the PBC. For this purpose active and meaningful 
logistic and financial support of the Federal Government 
shall be secured by the PBC. The Supreme Court of Pakistan 
shall for this purpose end eavour to project the need for an 
autonomous Secretariat/ Directorate of Legal Education.  
 
17. Constitution of Implementation/Monitoring 
Committee:  
An Implementation/Monitoring Committee for 
enforcing the directions given herein shall be constituted by 
the PBC which shall be chaired by Chairman, HECP or a 
senior functionary nominated by him.  Const. P. No. 134/2012  22
18. Immediate closing down of unauthorised law 
colleges:  
A university that neither offers a law programme nor 
is recognized by the PBC shall not unauthorisedly grant 
affiliation to any institution pretending to be a law college. 
Accordingly, the following law colleges shall immediately be 
closed down for the reason that their affiliating 
university/Shaheed Benazir Bhutto University, Benazirabad 
is not recognized or auth orised by the PBC to offer a LL.B . 
programme:   
(1) Leons Law College, Shaheed Benazirabad.  
(2) Intelligentia Law College, Moro.  
(3) Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Law College,  
 Naushahro  Feroze.  
(4) Ali Law College, Sanghar.  
(5) Shah -e-Ali Law College, Tando Adam.  
19. Disaffi liation of sub -standard law colleges:  
 The following law colleges affiliated to their 
corresponding universities having been found below the 
mark and for being outside the territory of their affiliating 
university have been recommended by the special 
Commi ttee of PBC to be disaffiliated:  
(a) University of Peshawar:  
(1) Abbot Law College, Abbottabad.  
(2) Abbott Law College, Mansehra.  
(3) Ayub Law College, Hairpur.  
(4) Frontier Law College, Peshawar.  
(5) Islamia Law College, Peshawar.  
(6) Jinnah Law College, Peshawar.  
(7) Justice Law College, Abbottabad.  
(8) Kohat Law College, Kohat.  
(9) Mardan Law College, Mardan.  
(10) Muslim Law College, Swat.  
(11) Peshawar Law College, Peshawar. .  
(12) Quaid -e-Azam Institute of Legal Studies,  
 Nowshera.  
(13) Sanni Islamia Law College, Haripur.  
(14) Supreme Law College, Peshawar.  
(15)  Swabi Law College, Swabi.  
 
(b) University of Hazara, Mansehra:  
 COLES -College of Legal & Ethical Studies, Abbottabad.  
 
(c) Gomal University, D.I. Khan:  
(1) Danish Kada Law College, Miryan Gate Bannu.  
(2) Frontier Law College, D.I. Khan.  
(3) Institute of Legal and  Management Sciences,  
 Islamabad.  
(4) Luqman Law College, D.I. Khan.  
 
(d) University of Baluchistan, Quetta:  
(1) Zarghoon Law College, Quetta.  
(2) Jhalawan Law College, Khuzdar.  
 
(e) University of Sindh, Hyderabad:  
(1) Everest Law College, Hyderabad.  
(2) SISTEC, Sukkur.  
 
(f) Shah Abdul Lateef University, Khairpur:    
(1) Al-Falah Law College, Kashmore.  Const. P. No. 134/2012  23
(2) Abdul Wahid Soomro Law College, Kashmore.  
(3) Mirza Khan Law College, Panu Aqil.  
(4) Mashal Law College, Dahrki, Dahrki.  
(5) Bilawal Bhutto Law College, Jaccobabad.  
(6) Faiz Muhammad Sehto College, Kandiaro.  
(7) Bilawal Bhutto Zardari Law College,  
 Qambhar.  
 
 (g) Bahauddin Zakriya University, Multan:  
(1) South Punjab Law College, Multan . 
(2) Professional Law College, Multan . 
(3) Multan Law College, Multan . 
(4) Times Institute, Multan . 
(5) Muhammadan Law College, Multan . 
(6) Central Law College, Multan . 
(7) Merit Law College, Multan .  
(8) Pakistan Law College, Multan . 
(9) Sargodha Toppers Law College, Multan . 
(10) Kaims International Law College, Multan . 
(11) Ayan Law College, Multan . 
(12) Sir Syed Law College, Multan . 
(13) Justice Law & Education College, Multan . 
(14) International Law College, Multan . 
(15) Noor Law College, Multan . 
(16) Quaid -e-Azam Law College, Sahiwal . 
(17) Montgomery Law College, Sahiwal . 
(18) Muhammadan Law College, Sahiwal . 
(19) Command Law College, Sahiwal . 
(20) Multan Law College, Sahiwal . 
(21) Johar Law College, Sahiwal . 
(22) Limit Law College, Sahiwal . 
(23) Leads Universal Law College, Khanewal . 
(24) Progressive Law College, Vehari . 
(25) Askari Law College, Burewala . 
(26) Justice Law College, Pakpattan . 
(27) Pakistan Law College, Pakpattan . 
(28) Jinnah Law College, Dera Ghazi Khan . 
(29) Multan Law College, Der a Ghazi Khan . 
(30) Ghazi Khan Law College, Dera Ghazi Khan . 
(31) Indus Law College, Dera Ghazi Khan . 
(32) Justice Law & Education College,  
 Muzaffargarh . 
 
(h) University of the Punjab, Lahore:  
(1) Capital Law College, 313 -A, Murree Road,  
 Rawalpindi.  
(2) Muslim Law College, 89 -A, Satellite Town,  
 Rawalpindi.  
(3) East & West Education System, Department of  
 Legal Studies, House# 18, Street # 60, -11/4,  
 Islamabad.  
(4) Islam Law College, Pasrur Road, Sialkot.  
(5) The College of Law, G.T. Road, Gujranwala.  
(6) Muhammadan Law College, Sharqpur Road,  
 Sheikhupura.  
(7) Muhammadan Law College, 3 -Km Sargodha  
 Road, Sheikhupura.  
(8) The Jurists College of Law Gulberg Town,  
Opp. Honda Show Room, Lahore Road,  Sargodha.  
(9) Chenab Law College, Jalalpur Jattan Road,  Gujrat.  
(10) The College of Law, Kanjrur Road, Narowal.  Const. P. No. 134/2012  24
(11) CIMS School of Law, Lahore.  
(12) Leads Law College, Township, Lahore.  
(13) PSE Law College, Nain Sukh, Saqian, Lahore.  
(14) Farabee Law College, Hafizabad.  
(15) Allama Iqbal Law College, Sialkot.  
(16) Premier Law College, Gujranwala.  
(17) Quaid -e-Azam Law College, Okara.  
(18) National Law College, Lahore.  
(19) Global Law College, Shahdara, Lahore.  
(20) Institute of Law, Gulberg, Lahore.  
(21) Asian Law College, Gulberg Town, Lahore.  
(22) City Law College, Allama Iqbal Road, Lahore.  
(23) Lahore Law College, Gulberg, Lahore.  
(24) Shams Tabriz Law College, Ferozepur  
Interc hange, Lahore.  
(25) The National Institute of Legal Studies,  
 Attock.  
 
(i) Islamia University, Bahawalpur:  
(1) Narowal Law College, Narowal .  
(2) Heritage International College, Hafizabad . 
(3) Cambridge Law College, Wazirabad . 
(4) M.A. Law College, Gujrat . 
(5) Al-Mizan Institute of Legal Studies, Islamabad . 
(6) Jinnah Muslim Law College, Islamabad . 
(7) Cornelius Law College, Sargodha . 
(8) Zain Law College, Bhakkar . 
 
(j) Before disaffiliation of any of the above said colleges 
is implemented, they shall be issued notice of fault or 
deficiency by the concerned affiliating university 
thereby granting them opportunity to be heard and 
being provided with reasons of the order passed by 
the concerned university in accordance with its rules 
of affiliation that are availab le to law colleges 
established and functioning within the territorial 
limits prescribed hereinabove.    
 
20. Accommodation of law students in eventuality of 
disaffiliation of some law colleges:   
The adjustment of law students who are affected by 
the disaffiliation of their law colleges shall be pursued by the 
concerned affiliating universities which shall be responsible 
to assure that such students are enabled to pursue their on -
going LL.B . programme till completion.  
21. Law departments of Universiti es and law colleges 
which need improvements in their weak areas 
within six months:  
The following law colleges that are run by or 
affiliated to universities need to overcome weak areas of 
their LL.B . programmes offered by them are given six months 
for doing  so: 
 
(a) University of Baluchistan:  
(1) City Law College, Quetta;  
(2) University of Baluchistan Law College , 
 Peshin Campus ; 
(3) School of Law, University of Turbat; and  
(4) Law College of University of Balochistan  
 Kharan  Campus.  Const. P. No. 134/2012  25
 
(b) University of Karachi:  
(1) Department of Law, University of Karachi.  
(2) Government Islamia Law College, Karachi.  
 
(c) Shaheed Benazir Bhutto, University, Malir -
Karachi:  
 Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto Law College, Malir.  
 
(d) University of Sindh:  
 Dinsh Mehran Institute of Law (SMIL), Jamshoro.  
 
(e) Shah Abdul Lateef University, Khairpur:  
(1) Shaheed Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, College of Law,  
 Khairpur.  
(2) Qazi Mian Ahmed Law College, Moro.  
(3) Law College, Ghotki,  
(4) SDK Law College, Jaccobabad.  
 
(f) Federal Urdu University, Karachi:  
The Federal Urdu University having violated Rules 
and instructions of the Pakistan Bar Council was 
firstly placed under suspension and then was de -
recognized; it is presently non -functional. It shall 
remain suspended till its application for restoration 
of recognition  by the Pakistan Bar Council is decided 
by the Legal Education Committee of the Pakistan Bar 
Council. The following campuses have been found 
lacking:  
(1) Department of law, Gulshan Campus.  
(2) Department of law, Abdul -Haq Campus  
 
(g) University of the Punjab:  
(1) The Best Law College, Rawalpindi.  
(2) Rawalpindi Law College, Rawalpindi.  
(3) Himat -i-Islam Law College, Lahore.  
(4) Superior College of Law, Lahore.  
(5) Toppers Law College, Gulberg, Lahore.  
(6) Gujrat Law College, Gujrat.  
(7) Institute of Legal Studies, Gulberg, Lahore.  
(8) Faisalabad College of Law, Faisalabad.  
(9) Muhammad Ali Jinnah Law College,  
 Gujranwala.  
 
22. Sole recourse before the Supreme Court:  
Any university or affiliated college that is aggrieved 
by a final order/action taken in pursuance of these directions 
after exhausting an y remedy under the University Rules shall 
avail as the first judicial remedy, appropriate relief from this 
Court. Recourse to any other judicial forum without 
permission of this Court is barred.  
 
16.   Consequently, C onstitution Petition No.134 of 2012 & 
Civil Misc. Application No.1864 of 2010 in Constitution Petition No.9 of 
2005  stand disposed of  in the above terms. A ll ancillary Misc. Const. P. No. 134/2012  26
Applications to this matter and listed in the title of this case also stand 
disposed of accordingly.  
17.  These are the detailed reasons of our short order dated 
31.08.2018.    
 
  CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
31st of August, 2018.  
Syeda Jugnoo Kazmi /* 
 
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  
 
 
 
 