IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Jail Petition No s.24, 69, 215, 486 of 2016 & 682 of 2017  
(Against judgment dated 10.12.2015 of the High Court of Sindh, 
Karachi passed in Special Criminal Anti -Terrorism  Appeal Nos.5,6 
& 36 of 2005 with Confirmation Case No.1 of 2005)  
 
 
Muhammad Siddique  
(J.P. No.24/2016)  
Ali Muhammad  
(J.P. No.69/2016)  
Syed Bilal Ali  
(J.P. No.215/2016)  
Fateh Muhammad  
(J.P. No.486/2016)  
Arshad Parvez & another  
(J.P. No.68 2/2017)  
 
   …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State  
(in all cases)  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Mahmood Akhtar Qureshi, ASC  
 (in J.P. No.215/2016)  
 Dr. Raana Khan, ASC  
 (in J.P. Nos.24,69,486 /2016  & JP 
No.682/2017 ) 
    
For the State  Mr. Hussain Bux Baloch,  
 Additional Prosecutor General Sindh.  
    
Date of hearing:  2.1.20 20. 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
     Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. -Kamran -ud-Din 
(PW-3) was on way after dropping his sister at a school on 
24.5.2004 ; at about 7:30 a.m. he was whisked away , within the 
remit of Police Station Shah Faisal Colony Karachi,  in a white car by 
six assailants ; information was laid by Ashiq Hussain (PW-2) with Jail Petition Nos.24, 69, 215, 486 of 2016 & 682 of 2017  2
abduc tee’s father  Ikram -ud-Din (PW -1) who reported the incident to 
the police  same day . An anonymous caller demanded Rs.2 millions 
as ransom for abductee ’s release ; after protracted negotiations, the 
amount was settled as Rs.500,000 , finally paid on 16.6.2004 b y 
Zain-ul-Abideen  (PW-10) at the designated place ; the abductee was 
released soon thereafter . As the investigation progressed,  on a tip off,  
Jamil Akhtar, Inspector/SHO  (PW-11), arrested Syed Abdul Kaleem, 
Fateh Muhammad and Arshad Parvez  on 2.9.2004 followed by Syed 
Bilal Ali, Muhammad Siddique, Muhammad Hassan and Ali Ahmed  
on 3.9.2004 . Pursuant to a disclosure, Muhammad Siddique, 
petitioner got recovered  a part of ransom in the tune  of Rs.100,000  
on 8.9.2004 . Vehicle P -2, conveying the abductee into  captivity , was 
also secured by the Investigating Officer.  Muhammad Siddique, 
Arshad Parvez, Bilal Ali, Abdul Kaleem and Fateh Muhammad  were 
rightly picked by the witnesses in the test identification parade  held 
under magisterial supervision on 9.9.2004 ; Muhammad Hassan and 
Ali Ahmed were identified on 11.10.2004 ; it is in this backdrop that  
they were nominated as the six culprits who took away the abductee 
whereas Syed Abdul Kaleem  was blamed to have provided premises 
to confine him. Upon indictment, the accused claimed trial , resulting  
into their conviction with penalty of death for each, accompanied by  
fine and forfeiture of properties . The High Court of Sindh vide 
judgment dated  10.12.2015 maintained the convictions, however, 
altered penalty of death into imprisonment for life , vires whereof are 
being impugned by Fateh Muhammad, Arshad Parvez, Syed Bilal Ali, 
Muhammad Siddique, Muhammad Hassan and Ali Ahmed  through 
captioned peti tions ; bound by a common thread, these are being 
decided through this single judgment.  
2.  Learned counsel for the petitioners , in a unison with 
vehemence, contend that there was no occasion for the courts below  
to return and uphold a guilty verdict, in a case, according to them, 
inherently flawed inasmuch as initially four persons were alleged to 
have committed the crime  whereas the number was graduated to 
seven during the trial ; it is next argued that test identification 
parade , conducted  in violation of judicial guidelines , without 
assigning specific roles , reliance thereon was  beside the mark . 
Recoveries being fractional as well as inconsequential were liable to 
be excluded from consideration, concluded the learned counsel. The Jail Petition Nos.24, 69, 215, 486 of 2016 & 682 of 2017  3
learned L aw Officer, contrarily, defended the impugned judgment ; he 
argued that prosecution produced the best evidence available under 
circumstances to successfully drive home the charge by excluding 
every hypothesis of innocence ; he submits  that the petitioners h ave 
already been dealt with leniently , therefore, scales being in balance, 
interference  is not  called for.  
3.   Heard. Record perused.  
4.  Prosecution case is primarily structured upon three 
statements furnished by Ikram -ud-Din (PW -1), Ashiq Hussain (PW-2) 
and Kamran -ud-Din (PW -3). PW -1 being complainant is not an eye 
witness of the occurrence ; he was informed by Ashiq Hussain (PW-2)  
that his son was taken away by the assailants mentioned as four in 
number in the crime report ; in the witness -box, however, he blamed 
six accused as  privies to the crime . Surprisingly despite the lengthy 
cross -examination, he is not confronted with his departure  from the 
crime report ; as he is not an eye witness, therefore, an apparent 
discrepancy  does not adversely impa ct the prosecution, particularly 
in the face of defence ’s failure to impeach the witness in terms of 
procedure contemplated under Article 140 of the Qanun -i-Shahadat 
Order , 1984  mandatorily requiring the attention of a witness to the 
impugned portion of his statement . On the contrary, while 
responding to a question, during cross -examination, the witness 
stated as under: - 
 
“PW Ashiq Hussain had informed me that he 
had seen that 6 culprits came there in a car, 
out of whom, 4 persons who were sitting in the 
car taken away my son and remaining two had 
taken away his motorcycle.”  
 
Even attention of Muhammad Nadeem ASI (PW -5), who recorded the 
complaint , was not solicited to explain the actual number of assailants, 
narrated by the complainant ; Ashiq Hussain (PW -2) and the abductee 
(PW-3) are consistent on the number of assailants; nothing contrary is 
suggested to them in their statements , otherwise found by us as 
confidence inspiring; the argument cannot be viewed more than a far 
cry.  
5.  Castigating  severely the  evidence of  test identification 
parade , the learned counsel  relied upon the guidelines laid down in the Jail Petition Nos.24, 69, 215, 486 of 2016 & 682 of 2017  4
case of Kanwar Anwaar Ali (PLD 2019 Supreme Court 488 ) to urge 
exclusion thereof . The supra case, indeed a fine piece of juridical 
literat ure, nonetheless, does not extend much help to the convicts ; it 
mainly addressed laconic  approach adopted by a Magistrate in holding 
the test identification parade  in the said case  while highlighting general 
principles of law  on the subject.  
 Test identification parade  is a method  of proof contemplated by 
Article 22 of the Qanun -i-Shahadat Order , 1984 , reproduced below for 
the convenience of reference: - 
“Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact 
in issue or relevant fact, or which support or 
rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue 
or relevant fact, or which establish the identity 
of anything or person whose identity is 
relevant, or fix the time or place at which any 
fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or 
which show the relation of  parties by whom 
any such fact was transacted, are relevant in 
so far as they are necessary for that purpose.”  
 
The above framework  provides enough space to admit evidence  in 
prosecution of offender s previous ly unacquainted  with the victims or 
the witnesse s; appraisal of such evidence is subject to  same principles  
as are  universally applicable to any piece of evidence, under 
consideration in a criminal trial ; there are no additional barricades  as is 
evident from the plain reading of the Article ibid; without prejudice to 
the safeguards  available to an accused  at each  stage of trial , essentially 
fair as guaranteed under the Constitution,  nonetheless, it does not cast 
an artificially heavier onus  on the prosecution  to meet standards  of 
proof beyond huma n capacity. Each criminal case is to be decided 
having regard to its own peculiar facts and circumstances . A test to be 
essentially applied in one case  may absolutely be irrelevant in another, 
as the crimes are seldom committed in identical situations ; there may 
be cases  wherein prosecution must assign distinct roles  played  during 
the occurrence  by the culprits  for determination of their guilt as well as 
consequences thereof, however, there are  cases in which totality of 
transaction  may not warrant separ ability for such determination , like 
the one in hand. Cases involving  abduction s, dacoities and sudden 
assaults,  more often than not, constitute episodes wherein different Jail Petition Nos.24, 69, 215, 486 of 2016 & 682 of 2017  5
roles played by the culprits merge  into integral totality of the crime, 
thus,  it would be too harsh as well as unrealistic  to demand exact 
reenactment  of roles  by the witnesses . Capacities even intellectually 
most sharp dwindle drastically in calamitous situations , therefore, the  
administration of criminal justice , in such peculiar  situations,  has to be 
dynamic ally balanced upon fair trial  without prejudice to the accused  
as well as  due weightage  to the prosecution evidence without  being 
swayed by  illusory  notions , subjectively structured upon hypothetical  
beliefs .   
6.  Having found the witnesses , with no axe to grind,  in a 
comfortable unison on all the salient features of the prosecution case as 
well as events collateral therewith , we do not feel persuaded by the 
arguments , couched on hyper technical premise . Petitions fail. 
Dismissed .   
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Karachi, the  
2nd January , 2020  
Approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 