IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
 
   (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Present:
 
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
 
 
 
 
CONSTITUTION  PETITION NO.77 OF 2010
 
(President Balochistan  High Court Bar Association  
vs. 
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
 
AND
 
 
H.R.C. NO.13124 -P/2011
 
(Application by Altaf Hassan Qureshi)  
 
AND
 
 
H.R.C. No. 40403 -P/2011
 
(Application by Syed MajeedZaidi)  
 
AND
 
 
H.R.C. No. 40220 -G/2011
 
(News clipping)  
 
AND
 
 
H. R. C. No.  43103 -B/2011
 
(Application by Haji Abdul Qayyum)  
 
AND
 
 
H. R. C. No. 17712 -B/2012
 
(Application by Misbah Batool for recovery  
of her husband, Asif, FC Personnel)  
 
AND
 
 
H.R.C. 27045 -K & 27619 -G/12
 
(Abduction of Dr. Ghulam Rasool)  
 
AND
 
 
H. R. C. No. 30044 -B/2012
 
(Anonymous application against Police Officers)  
 
AND
 Const.P.77/2010  2 
H. R. C. No. 30047 -G/2012
 
(Application of Ms Zuhra Yousif,  
Chairperson HRCP)  
 
AND
 
 
H. R. C. No. 30711 -B/2012
 
(Application for recovery of Habibullah Mujahid)  
 
AND
 
 
H. R. C. No. 30713 -B/2012
 
(Applicat ion of Syed Mumtaz Ahmed Shah,  
Chief Editor, Daily Mashriq)  
 
AND
 
 
C.M.A. No. 42 -43 OF 2012.
 
(Enquiry report of Kharootabad Incident)  
 
AND
 
 
C.M.A. NO.178 -Q OF 2012
 
(Appeal for missing persons cases of Balochistan)  
 
AND
 
 
C.M.A. NO. 219 -Q OF 2012.
 
(Applicatio n by Maj. (R) Nadir Ali)  
 
AND
 
 
C.M.A. NO. 431 -Q OF 2012.
 
(Target Killing of Mr. Zulfiqar Naqvi, ASJ)  
 
AND
 
 
CMA 516 -Q/2012
 
(Appl ication by Mr. Nasrullah Baloch)  
 
 
For the petitioner(s)  Syed Ayyaz Zahoor, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Hadi Shakeel Ahmed, ASC  
    Mr. M. Qa hir Shah, ASC  
Mr. Kamran Murtaza, ASC  
Mr. Baz Muhammad Kakar, ASC  
    Malik Zahoor Shahwani, A SC/ 
    President Balochistan High Court Bar.  
Mr. Sajid Tareen, A SC/Sr. Vice President  
 
 
For SCBAP:    Mr. Yasin Azad, ASC/President  
    Mr. Jehanzeb Jadoon ASC/V .President  and 
    M/s Khalid Kubdani ASC,  Sanauallah Ababki, ASC,  
    Bashir Zahir, ASC  Member s Executive  
     
For the Applicants/  : Mr. Nasrullah Baloch, (In CMA 178 & 516 -Q/12)  
Complainants:  Ms. Tehniat Zahra, Adv./Member PIHRO  
(in CMA 3966/2012)  
Dur Khatoon, Khairun Nisa, Mahah Bibi, Bibi 
Ayesha,  Bibi Raheem, Ms Javeriya, Bibi Fatima, Const.P.77/2010  3 
Gohar Khatoon,  Asia Bibi, Saleem Khatoon, 
Sajida, Hurmat Khatoon, Ganj Bibi, Said Bibi, 
Bibi Haseena, Pervez Ahmed, M. Alam, Zahoor, 
M. Murad, Jehanzeb, Diva & Haji Nase er Ahmed.  
  
For PMA:    Dr. Sultan Tareen, Dr. Saadat Khan, and  
    Dr. Shams Kakar,  
    (applicants in CMA 524 -Q/12)  
Amicus Curiae:   Mr. M. Zafar, Sr.ASC  
    Mr. Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Munir A. Malik, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
 
For Fed. of Pakistan:  Malik Sikandar Khan, DAG  
     
For M/o Interior:   Nemo  
 
For M/o Defence:   Commander Hussain Shahbaz, Director (L)  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Amanulah Kanrani, A.G.  
    Mr. Amanullah Tarin, Addl. AG  
    Mr. Babar Yaqool Fateh Muhamma d, Chief Secy.  
    Mr. Asmattullah Kakar, Secretary Health  
    Mr. Hassan Iqbal, Special Secretary, Home  
Mr. Tarik Umer Khattab, IGP    
 Mr. Kambar Dashti, Commissioner Quetta  
Mir Zubair Mehmood, CCPO, Quetta.  
Mr. Hamid Shakeel, DIG (Investigation)  
     
 
For IG FC:    Mr. S.M.Zafar, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Obaidullah Khattak, IG, FC  
    Major Sohail, HQ, FC  
 
For FBR:    Dr. M. Shamim Rana, ASC  
For Mobile Operators:  Nemo.  
 
For PTA   : Nemo.  
 
Dates of hearing  : 08th to 12th October, 2012.  
    (current session at Quetta ) 
  
    O R D E R
  
 
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ
.— The petitioner 
High Court Bar Association through its President on having 
witnessed repeated incidents of target killing, kidnapping, abduction 
for ransom and forced disappearance of the members of Bars , 
instituted instant petition as the lawyers’ lives and properties were 
not secure. Detail of some of the advocates were noted as follows:  
“That some of the instances relating to the advocates are given 
below:  Const.P.77/2010  4 
On 15th July, 2010, a senior advocate Mr. Habi b Jalib was 
brutally murdered in front of his house.  
On 7th September, 2010, Mr. Zaman Marri was murdered and 
his dead body was recovered from Mastung area.  
On 14th September, 2010, three persons were abducted by 
the law enforcing agencies.  
On 24th Septem ber, 2010, dead body of Mr. Sher Ali Kurd 
Advocate was recovered from Khuzdar area, who was abducted on 
21st September, 2010 from Quetta.  
On 21st August, 2010, dead bodies of Muhammad Umer and 
Arz Muhammad were recovered from Quetta.  
 There is not a day, w hen the print and electronic media do not 
report the incidents of target killing, kidnapping, abduction for 
ransom etc. Some of the newspapers, readily available, are 
attached herewith for the perusal of this Hon’ble Court.”  
 
The lawyers apprehended seriou s threat not only to their lives and 
properties but also of the people of Balochistan as they had been 
continuously watching in the electronic media and reading in the 
newspapers about such incidents. Being educated and members of 
civilized society they re sorted to peaceful demonstration etc. but 
the incidents of target killing, kidnapping, abduction for ransom 
were continuously happening and increasing day by day, therefore, 
to enforce the fundamental rights directions were sought to the 
respondents to pro tect the lives and properties of the people of 
Balochistan and take all such steps on account of which target 
killing, kidnapping, abduction for ransom etc. be controlled for the 
protection of their fundamental right.  
2.   At the initial stage Hadi Shakeel  Ahmad, President of 
Balochistan High Court Bar Association stated that in the Province 
of Balochistan law & order situation is becoming bad to worst every 
passing day; virtually, according to him reaching unprecedented 
heights; the electric and gas instal lations, roads, railway tracks, Const.P.77/2010  5 
bridges etc. have been left no more safe with ever increasing 
incidents of rioting, looting, firing, abduction and explosion at the 
hands of notorious elements and no one including the officers and 
the members of the law enf orcing agencies can safely undertake 
journey amid such an alarming situation. He also informed that 
during pendency of the petition Agha Zahid advocate was abducted 
from Quetta whereas his brother Agha Nadir was earlier abducted. 
On hue and cry of his abdu ction Agha Nadir was released and his 
brother Agha Zahid was abducted. Similarly, Saleem Akhtar and 
Tahir, advocates while travelling in between Quetta to Sibi and 
Dhadar through Bolan Pass were abducted. These incidents, 
according to him, led to the growi ng unrest in the legal fraternity 
and the members of the Bars, but no tangible progress has been 
made so far.  
3.  It is interesting to note that Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, 
learned ASC (now Advocate General of Balochistan) who was 
present in the Court during h earing of the proceedings on 25th 
February, 2011 informed that few days before high ups of law 
enforcing agencies like IGP and the Chief Secretary were targeted, 
fired upon and humiliated. Even Governor of the Province was not 
spared and attempt was made o n his life. Somewhat similar 
incident took place where the Chief Minister was targeted within 
Quetta Town. He further added that in another incident D.C. Jhal 
Magsi and four other officers were abducted and later on released 
but police officials lost their  lives. According to him the situation of 
law & order is aggravated to such a high level that at times it has 
become very difficult for the traffic police to stay on Chowks 
(squares) on roads to control the traffic and for that purpose Const.P.77/2010  6 
minimum three offici als armed with rifles were detailed to perform 
their duty as many officials/police officials have been 
murdered/targeted. They further stated that people of Balochistan 
are dismayed because so far no effective step has been taken by 
the police, administrat ion as well as Federal Government except 
issuing hollow statements reiterating to deal with the accused 
person with iron hands but practically taking no effective measures 
with object to bring about the improvement.  
4.  It is to be noted that in the repli es, the Secretary Home 
and Tribal Affairs, Provincial Police Officer/IGP and Director General, 
I.B, D.G. ISI, Ministries of Interior and Defence, Government of 
Pakistan have not denied about the deteriorating law & order 
situation in the Province of Baloch istan.  
5.   Learned counsel for the petitioner, time and again 
during pendency of the petition, have reiterated that indeed it is the 
primary duty of the of the Provincial and Federal Governments to 
provide protection to the life, liberty and property of the citizens 
within terms of Article 9 of the Constitution providing that “no 
person shall be deprived of life and liberty save in accordance with 
law” and under Article 24(1) of the Constitution, which envisages  
that “no person shall be deprived  of his life, liberty and property, 
save in accordance with law”.  
6.   It has also be observed that prima facie law enforcing 
agencies working in the Province seem to be helpless and also there 
could be no reason to say that the Federal Government is oblivious 
of such grave situation, prevailing in the Province of Balochistan. It 
was not less than surprise for us that the Federal Government failed 
to discharge its duty in terms of Article 148(3) of the Constitution of Const.P.77/2010  7 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan as it should have  played its role with 
the cooperation, coordination and hand in hand with the Provincial 
Government to control and maintain the law & order in the 
Province. Inasmuch as vide order dated 25.02.2011, the Attorney 
General was asked to take up this matter with  the Prime Minister 
and explain him the situation of Balochistan and seek his 
intervention etc.  
7.   It may not be out of place to note that as per the 
contents of the orders, we were informed on 2nd March, 2011 by Mr. 
Tariq Mehmood, Director ISI that Law  Ministry has been briefed in 
respect of the view point of ISI in a high profile meeting held in the 
office of Secretary Interior and the Attorney General was aware of 
the same.  Not only this, on said date of hearing (2nd March 2011) 
once again it was obs erved that the situation of law & order 
required to be tackled in accordance with the Constitution and law 
as it is the duty of the Provincial Government and the Federal 
Government to protect the life and property of the citizens in terms 
of Articles 9 & 2 4 (1) of the Constitution. Therefore, for ensuring 
enforcement of this fundamental right guaranteed by the 
Constitution, both the Governments i.e. Provincial and Federal 
Governments are duty bound to protect life and property of citizens 
without any discri mination, the local administration has to 
undertake the remedial measures for due implementation and to 
enable the Federal Government to provide all assistance to the 
Provincial Government. It was further observed that immediate 
steps are required to be ta ken to do the needful. The Chief 
Secretary of the Province was directed to suggest measures to the 
Federal Government as well as to this Court so we may pass Const.P.77/2010  8 
appropriate judicial order to ensure the protection of fundamental 
rights guaranteed to the citize ns of Province of Balochistan. The 
Chief Secretary GOB placed on record from time to time the facts 
and figures in respect of the recovery of mutilated dead bodies, 
which were found lying in different parts of the Province in 
abandoned places, numbers of t he missing persons, victim of target 
killings/sectarian killing, number of persons abducted for ransom, 
numbers of law enforcing agencies personnel including FC, police, 
levies etc. who also lost their lives. Similarly the number of the 
wounded persons bot h civilian and the members of law enforcing 
agencies were brought on record.  
 
8.   On passing orders from time to time for effecting the 
recovery of missing persons who, though, had not been produced in 
the Court but at their own surfaced and came to thei r homes, 
details whereof are available on record.  
9.   The Court directed for the registration of the cases in 
respect of recovery of mutilated dead bodies and missing persons. 
Although in the areas which are under control of police and levies 
for the purp ose of maintaining law & order, cases were registered in 
respect of categories of the commission of crimes noted 
hereinabove but without any positive investigational results. The 
hearing of the case took place from time to time and uptil now 
about 70 heari ngs have took placed and in the meanwhile besides 
this petition, 162 Civil Misc. Applications have been registered, 
most of which have been moved by different persons, claiming 
about the non recovery of missing persons.  Const.P.77/2010  9 
10.   It is to be noted that as far  as the episode of the 
missing persons is concerned, it has become a dilemma as their 
nears and dears are running from pillar to post spending their 
energy despite poverty and helplessness but without any success, 
which aggravated the mistrust not only on law enforcing agencies 
but also on civil administration. Except, which we noticed at the 
earlier stage of the effective hearings of the case as per the record, 
presently more than 100 persons are still missing, whereas 
according to claim of Nasrullah Baloc h, who has raised the voice for 
the missing persons, their numbers are much higher.  
11.  The situation of law & order has turned worsened day 
by day on account of which anarchy or unrest is prevailing 
throughout in the Province, although there is democrat ic Provincial 
Government headed by Chief Minister and its Cabinet, who are 
about 50 alongwith five Advisors, one Speaker and one Deputy 
Speaker out of total strength of 65 members of Provincial 
Assembly, but no one has come forward with a solution of the 
situation, which is unfortunately prevailing in the Province.  
12.  In the meanwhile another episode of sectarian killing 
started, which has intensified the situation of law & order. 
According to the reports submitted by the administration, following 
number s of the sectarian killing has been taken placed during 
March to August 2012 on record through CMA 445 -Q/2012 by the 
Home and Tribal Affairs Department on 05.09.2012: - 
SUMMARY OF THE TARGET AND SECTARIAN KILLINGS 
 
FROM MARCH TO AUGUST, 2012
 
 
Total  Type of Incident  
 Attack 
on 
Hazara Attack 
on Sunni 
including Attacks 
on FC  Attacks 
on Police  Other 
Shia Settlers 
Killing  Others  Const.P.77/2010  10 
Shia Ulmas  
No. of Incident  21 06 33 26 07 16 16 
No. of persons 
Killed  46 20 33 
(7 
Civilians)  37 14 22 19 
No. of persons 
injured  36 67 83 50 08 27 63 
 
It is to be noted that besides the brutal sectarian killing, the target 
killing including the killing of settlers or the persons who came to 
Balochistan for the purpose of earning their livelihood increases 
manifold. There is no denial of the fact that in repeated incidents 
the culprits on having get stopped the passenger bus, checked the 
I.D. Cards, singled out all them, who were found not residents of 
any of the cities of Balochistan and killed them brutally by making 
them to stand in front of killing squads. Similarly, there is no end of 
incidents, where people of F.C. as well as police and Levies were 
killed in the same manner brutally. The criminals are free to move 
anywhere in all parts of the Province without any hindrance and 
while riding the motorcycles, they use to kill the people but uptil 
now not a single accused actually involved in the commission of 
such target killings has been arrested. Similarly, the law enforcing 
agencies including Police and the Levies are not aware abou t the 
killers who had thrown the mutilated bodies of the citizens in 
different parts of the Province. Failure to maintain the law & order 
situation by the Police and FC, being the para -military force is 
visible throughout in the Province though under the l aw and the 
Constitution they have to remain within the control and perform 
duty as envisaged under the law but it appears that they are free to Const.P.77/2010  11 
do, whatever they like. In this behalf narration of following 
incidents is necessary.  
(a) Reportedly an incident to ok place in the area of Totak on 
night between 17th and 18th February, 2011 wherein 30 
persons were picked up by the F.C. in presence of Azam 
Bazai, Tehsildar and their properties were also set on fire. 
However, later on 14 persons were released but 16 six teen 
persons were still missing. The explanation/reply was 
sought from the Tehsildar but he posed that he was totally 
unaware of the incident but when confronted, he could not 
deny the happening of incident and started making 
unnecessary statements. It was  also informed to us that 
there had been meetings between Sardar Ahmad Ali and 
his sons in the office of then Deputy Commissioner 
Khuzdar (Dr. Parvez Ahmed). According to Brig.Shehzad, 
DIG, FC the incident took place but it was the exchange of 
fire between  miscreants and the troops. Whereas, the 
learned counsel for the petitioner claimed that 30 persons 
were arrested out of whom initially 26 were released and 9 
are in the custody of FC. Breakthrough of which is 4+5=9 
as five more persons were arrested after  the release of 26 
persons including three children of Sardar Ali Muhammad 
Qalandarani.  
(b) Similarly, in another incident, in which one Ali Hassan 
Mengal son of Khan Muhammad was picked up on 
04.11.2011 from Wadd. His son Gohar Ali appeared before 
the Court and stated that his father has been picked up by 
the FC and he knows the SHO namely Jumma Khan in Const.P.77/2010  12 
whose presence his father was picked up. He also named 
Major Tahir Naveed and Major Nadeem. On the direction of 
this Court, case was registered. Gohar Ali sta ted before 
this Court that he was called in the FC Headquarters 
Khuzdar, where he was asked that if he will not pursue the 
matter and cooperate with them, his father would be 
released but till now his father has not been recovered.  
(c) Likewise in respect of missing of Abdul Malik son of Abdul 
Khalik, allegations were on FC for taking him away. Inquiry 
was got conducted by the Sessions Judge Noshki, who in 
his report concluded as follows: - 
“FC is in facta Para Military Force, if it actually 
involved in kidnapp ing/arresting of said missing 
persons as stated in the statement recorded by 
the witnesses then it is highly illegal and excess of 
authority. Police is authorized to arrest any 
person, who is involved in crime, however, it is 
necessary to arrest a culprit during searching by 
FC he may be handed over for interrogation. It is 
also duty of the abductee family in such cases, 
when the police is not going to lodge FIR, they 
should approach the competent court of law for 
lodging the FIR.”  
(d) Similarly, FIR No.36 & 38  of 2012 were lodged wherein it 
was recorded that FC personnel took away Mehran Baloch 
along with two persons namely Muhammad Khan Mari and 
Muhammad Nabi. The incident was witnessed by two traffic 
police officials (ASI Amjad Hussain and Constable 
Muhammad Farooq), who stated that all of them were 
picked up in FC vehicle near Serena Hotel and that vehicle 
went towards FC Headquarters. Brig.Shehzad undertook Const.P.77/2010  13 
before the Court that he will produce these missing 
persons, however, requested that this fact may not  write 
down in the order and time be given to him to contact the 
concerned officers. We issued directions time and again to 
police and FC, inasmuch as, at one stage Brig.Shehzad 
DIG FC sought time from the Court giving the impression 
that he was in a posit ion to make a statement about their 
whereabouts but he did not turn back immediately as such 
this fact was incorporated in the order dated 11.05.2012. 
Subsequent thereto, at one stage the police officials 
succeeded in getting the footage of CCTV, which was  
displayed in the Court Room on multimedia in the presence 
of I.G. FC on 14.05.2012.   However, on 01.06.2012 it was 
sadly reported that on 28.05.2012 three dead bodies 
packed in gunny bags were found lying in the area of PS 
Shalkot. IG, Police submitted r eporting CMA 440 -Q/2012 
wherein he has involved the FC with the allegation that FC 
people are responsible as they pick up the people from 
time to time. According to the report, in most of the FIRs 
allegations were leveled against FC for kidnapping the 
people.  
(e) In the matter of Shabbir Ahmad Sumalani, who was 
detained in B rewery  Road Police Station along with another 
person namely Qari Naseer Ahmed the allegation was 
against the FC personnel that they were taken into custody 
immediately after their release o n 12.10.2009 in presence 
of Amir Khan Dasti, the then SHO P .S. Brewery . According 
to the version of Saleem Khatoon, mother of Shabbir Const.P.77/2010  14 
Sumalani, the fact of picking up these two persons in front 
of Police Station was brought in to the notice of then SHO, 
who confirmed the version but could no show any entry in 
this regard. A report was submitted wherein names of 
some MI officials were mentioned. The said names were 
also disclosed to Brig. Shehzad, DIG, FC. Notices were also 
issued to Shahid Nizam Durrani, th e then CCPO Quetta and 
Abid Nutqani, the then DIG, on whose directions, the 
above noted persons were detained. In the investigation 
Shahid Nizam Durrani disclosed the name of one Major 
Moeen  to whom he had handed over the custody of above 
said missing pers ons. Despite repeated directions, the 
investigation team has failed to recover the above named 
missing persons.  
(f) Likewise in another case allegedly two persons namely 
Bansra and Kao were forcibly taken away from Dera Bugti 
by FC and reportedly Kao was hande d over to some secret 
agencies whereas Bansra was taken to Chamman, from 
where he was allegedly involved in immigration case and 
he was released after receiving fine from him. He appeared 
before the Assistant Commissioner, Dera Bugti and 
recorded statement . Similarly, he also appeared before the 
Sessions Judge/MIT High Court and confirmed the above 
fact and also alleged that his brother kao is in custody of 
FC in Dera Bugti alongwith so many other persons 
regarding whom he stated that they were about 80 
persons. Col. Arshad Hussain, Commandant Bambore 
Rifles was named to be responsible for the same. Despite Const.P.77/2010  15 
our direction and cancellation of his leave neither he 
appeared before this Court nor Kao has been produced.  
13.   There are so many other allegations on  FC for taking 
away the persons forcibly but few examples have been cited to 
substantiate that allegations against FC of taking away the persons 
from different places cannot be over ruled.  
14.   It may be observed that we have repeatedly demanded 
from all  the law enforcing agencies including FC etc. for the 
production of missing persons and in this behalf categorical 
directions were m ade time and again but the orders of producing 
them were not carried out by simply denying that missing persons 
are not in t heir custody. Contrary to it, there is overwhelming 
evidence as it has been noted hereinabove, on the basis whereof 
prima facie  involvement of FC cannot be over ruled. Inasmuch as 
on 06.02.2012 Mr. Sadiq Umrani, the Provincial Minister to the GOB 
disclosed  the fact about involvement of FC personnel in killing some 
of the persons on Floor of the House, whose statement was 
supported by Haji Ali Madad Jatak during the proceedings of the 
Provincial Assembly, who while making statement had stated that 
incident o f kidnapping of two persons had been shown by him along 
with Mr. Zafarullah Zahri, Home Minister and Mr. Younas Mulazai, 
Provincial Minister and next day when they were coming from Qalat 
to Quetta, they have found dead bodies of the same. Surprisingly, 
no action was taken on this report.  
15.   During hearing of the case learned counsel for the 
petitioner drawn our attention towards the difficulties of the 
inhabitants and citizens of Dera Bugti, who belong to different Const.P.77/2010  16 
tribes after the incident of killing o f late Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti 
and because of conflict between the law enforcing agencies and the 
tribes, no one can visit Dera Bugti without the permission of the 
Local Administration and Law Enforcing Agencies. More than half of 
the population has migrate d from there. Therefore the Secretary 
Home was directed to clear all the hindrances and to submit 
comprehensive reports in this regard. On 03.09.2012 the Court 
observed that as far as the Constitution and law is concerned, 
subject to law, it does not prohi bit or restrict any citizen to move in 
any part of the country wherever they intent to stay without any 
restriction or objection of whatsoever. The Chief Secretary 
Balochistan on his own stated that he would be submitting report 
on this issue after his vis it to Dera Bugti. The Chief Secretary 
visited Dera Bugti and prepared a report, which is reproduced 
herein below: - 
 “a)  Dera Bugti, as a civil district is dysfunctional. It 
appears districts heads mostly remain away from 
the district headquarters or stay conveniently at 
Sui. For instance, even the SP of the District 
prefers to live at Sui rather than at Dera Bugti. 
The result is obvious. Dera Bugti as a District 
headquarter is no longer providing service to the 
local people.  
b)  Absenteeism of government e mployees is across 
the board and not limited to district headquarters 
or district heads. The District Accounts Officer did 
not have any idea of how many government 
functionaries were drawing salaries from the 
treasury. Maximum absenteeism appeared on the 
education side.  
c)  Performance of social sectors like education and 
health appears abysmal. Clean drinking water is 
not available. There is hardly any road network in Const.P.77/2010  17 
the district.  Economic sectors like agriculture and 
livestock do not have much to show. It is obvious 
why Dera Bugti is one of the poorest districts in 
the world in terms of economic and human 
development.  
d)  The role of PPL and OGDCL etc was discussed at 
length. While people treated these as providers of 
employment and facilities, maximum c omplaints 
were also against these Companies for alleged 
irregularities. It is true that these Companies 
should provide service under corporate social 
responsibility but this should not absolve the 
provincial government of its duties towards 
people of Der a Bugti.  
e)  During the meeting with waderas  and notables, 
everyone stressed that Dera Bugti was not a no 
go area. However, there is no doubt that security 
situation is precarious. The road from Sui to Dera 
Bugti was manned and guarded by the FC. There 
were check posts on the road but everyone 
insisted they were meant for intercepting 
miscreants. Visibility of ordinary vehicles plying 
on the road was significant. Visit by members of 
Bar Association may give a more accurate picture. 
However, for ordinary resid ents of Dera Bugti 
there does not appear any problem. There is a 
general apprehension that members of late 
Nawab Akbar Bugi’s family may not be 
comfortable in traveling to Dera Bugti. The 
Waderas of Bugti tribe openly stated that groups 
traveling with larg e numbers of armed guards 
would not be welcome. In my opinion situation is 
not such where late Nawab Akbar Bugti’s family 
members can settle peacefully in Dera Bugti.  
For this to happen, the Government will have to 
create an appropriate environment.”       
 Const.P.77/2010  18 
16.  Mrs. Noor Jehan wife of Mr. Talal Akbar Bugti filed CMA 
No.443 -Q of 2012 for declaration of orders passed against Bugti 
family restricting their movement as null and void. She appeared in 
person and stated that the administration namely, the FC, MI  and 
ISI are causing hurdles in their movement from Quetta to Dera 
Bugti and that they have a constitutional right to have permanent 
abode in the place of their origin where they have got their estate 
as well as agricultural property and other interests/be nefits but 
after the assassination of Nawab Muhammad Akbar Khan Bugti, 
they alongwith more than 1,50,000 people are not allowed to enter 
into the Dera Bugti. A number of times attempts were made by the 
family members of late Nawab Sahib to go to their nati ve place but 
they were stopped by the administration.  In the meanwhile, a 
separate Constitution Petition being No.107 of 2012 was filed on 
behalf of Nawabzada  Talal Akbar Bugti for enforcement of 
fundamental rights of Bugti tribe. The said Constitution Pet ition was 
clubbed with the instant case and notice of the same was ordered 
to be issued. Mr. Amanullah Kanrani, learned Advocate General of 
Balochistan waived the notice and filed para -wise comments on 
behalf of the Provincial Government wherein it has bee n stated that 
after submission of report by the Chief Secretary as well as order of 
this Court dated 03.09.2012 passed in this case, nothing was to be 
added in response to the petition of Talal Akbar Bugti. On 
08.09.2012 the Chief Secretary and the Politic al Agent i.e. Deputy 
Commissioner, Dera Bugti appeared in Const. Petition No.107/2012 
and stated as under :- 
(i) A plan is being prepared to ensure rehabilitation to the 
IDPs as according to the Deputy Commissioner, it is not 
possible to ascertain the exact  number of such persons Const.P.77/2010  19 
who have migrated from different areas of the district 
Dera Bugti towards Sindh and Punjab as well as other 
parts of the country. However, approximately the figure 
of such persons could be 14000 to 18000. The 
government has made ava ilable funds for their 
rehabilitation.     
(ii) At present, the district has become dysfunctional for the 
last many years, therefore, efforts are being made to 
make all the departments located in Dera Bugti like 
Education, Health, Law enforcing departments , 
functional.    
(iii) As there is serious problem of law and order which the 
government is facing for the time being, therefore, 
gradually steps are being taken to improve the situation 
which require some time as being tribal area, the 
people do have thei r differences although their number 
is only to the extent of 20% out of the IDPs but at time 
they create serious threat to the administration and it 
becomes difficult to maintain the law and order 
situation, therefore, the FC is called out to control the 
situation.  
(iv) The levies have also been made functional and the 
notables of the area who were using the levies as their 
personal force had been requested to surrender all 
these levies men and in the meanwhile about 22/30 
people have returned back.  
(v)  There is another problem in respect of controlling the 
land mines etc. which are found spread, off and on, on 
different areas and with the assistance of the FC and 
other law enforcing agencies like police and levies, a 
comprehensive plan shall be prepared.  
The Chief Secretary stated that he would be in a position to put up 
a comprehensive plan about rehabilitation  of IDPs etc. in the are a 
of Dera Bugti. He was ordered to place on record the notifications 
on the basis of which the FC has been called out to m aintain the law 
and other situation. However, no reply has been filed on behalf of Const.P.77/2010  20 
the Federation. The DAG requested for time to file reply and to seek 
instructions from the concerned quarters. It is pertinent to mention 
here that right to movement freely throughout the country and to 
reside and settle any part thereof. Reference can be made to the 
case of Pakistan Muslim League (N) v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 
2007 SC 642).  
17.   The proceedings were joined by the notables and the 
key figures of the Prov ince as a news was published in the 
newspaper to trace the case of murder of Mir Haqmal Khan 
Raesani. It is painfully noted that this Youngman, who is nephew of 
Nawab Aslam Khan Raesani, Chief Minister of Balochistan was 
mercilessly murdered when he was pr esent in football ground, but 
up till now despite this Court’s clear directions, the authorities have 
failed to arrest culprits involved.  
18.   During hearing of this case a CMA No.190 -Q/2012 was 
filed on behalf of Sardar Akhtar Jan Mengal for his implead ment as 
party in this case. He appeared on 27.09.2012 and addressed the 
Court contents whereof have been reduced to writing which read as 
under: - 
 Const.P.77/2010  21 
 Const.P.77/2010  22 
 Const.P.77/2010  23 
 Const.P.77/2010  24 
 
19.   He ha d also filed a statement in writing, in which he 
also shown confidence upon Supreme Cour t and stated that they 
are still hopeful that this Court since has already taken action to 
minimize the alarming situation in the Province of Balo chistan . In 
his written statement he raised following points for resolving by the 
Provincial Government : 
 
(1) All covert and overt military operations against 
the Baloch should immediately be suspended.  
(2) All missing persons should be procured before a 
court of law.  
(3) All proxy death squads operating under the 
supervision of Inter Services Intelligence (ISI) 
and Militar y Intelligence (MI) should be 
disbanded.  Const.P.77/2010  25 
(4) Baloch political parties should be allowed to 
function and resume their political activities 
without any interference from intelligence 
agencies.  
(5) Persons responsible for inhuman torture, killing 
and dumping of dea d bodies of the Baloch political 
leaders and activists should be brought to justice.  
(6) Measures should be taken for the rehabilitation of 
thousands of displaced Baloch living in appalling 
condition.   
In the end of his statement he requested that directions  may be 
made to solve such burning issues through negotiations by and 
dialogue either the leadership of Baloch in order to curtail further 
bloodshed of innocent persons.  The Chief Secretary, Government of 
Balochistan was directed to convey above statement to President, 
Prime Minister, etc., for filing of their response. The Chief Secretary 
conveyed the contents of the order dated 27.09.2012 a meeting 
was held, in one Para of the minutes of the said meeting, a 
conditional statement had been made to the effec t that “… … the 
concerns, if any, of the inhabitants of Balochistan … … ” will be 
addressed, which, prima  facie, seems to be incorrect, inasmuch as 
on the basis of the orders passed by this Court from time to time 
during hearing of the case, one feels no d ifficulty in concluding that 
the inhabitants of Balochistan do have grave concerns about the 
law and order situation prevailing over there. However, reaction 
submitted by the Federal Government is reproduced herein below: - 
“The measures which has been sugg ested by Sardar 
Akhtar Jan Mengal in a statement before this Hon’ble Court 
for building a conducive atmosphere for the Balochistan 
reconciliation process as claim by him are answered 
hereunder after consultation with the concerned authorities 
as desired vi de order dated 27th September 2012, with the 
observation that the government is on record making 
statement that the genuine concerns of any person 
irrespective of the fact he or she, is a resident of Const.P.77/2010  26 
Balochistan, must be met so as to bring harmony and 
peace in a coexisting living of all citizen of Pakistan.  
 
(i) No covert and overt military operation is 
being carried out in Balochistan by the 
armed forces.  
(ii) No person alleged to be missing is in the 
custody or under detention of any law 
enforcing authorities or a ny other agency of 
Pakistan. Despite this all out efforts are 
being made to find out the whereabouts of 
the persons who are alleged to be missing. 
In this regard detailed statements and 
affidavit has already been filed on record of 
the court.  
(iii) No proxy deat h squads are operating under 
the supervision of ISI and MI. In this regard 
Secretary Defence has already filed a 
affidavit.  
(iv) The government has always believed  that 
all the political parties in Balochistan should 
participate in political activities without any 
interference from any quarter. In this 
regard any concern by any person 
whomsoever shall be addressed so that the 
forthcoming election should take place in a 
transparent manner through participation of 
all political parties.  
(v) Lodging of FIR has been or dered by the 
government and JITs for conducting the 
investigation have also been constituted and 
recently the Government of Balochistan has 
approved a compensation policy for the 
legal heirs of deceased persons.  
(vi) Government makes a commitment to settle 
the displaced persons, if any, to the 
satisfaction of all concerned.  
Chief Secretary  
Balochistan”  
 
20.  Mr. Muhammad Aslam Bhotani, Speaker of Provincial 
Balochistan also appeared and stated that the Chief Secretary and 
the IGP are trying their best to improv e the law & order situation in 
the Province but they all are helpless before the political 
expediencies, therefore, the Province is facing serious law & order 
situation.  Const.P.77/2010  27 
21.   Mr. Abdul Raheem Ziaratwal and two others filed  
Constitution Petition No.115 o f 2012 and prayed as follows: - 
“(a) That the respondents are under obligation to spend the 
public money fairly, honestly and in accordance with 
constitutional guarantees  to safeguard the interest of general 
public.  
(b) Due to shortage of water, priority of  new schemes allocation 
should be given for water storage dames.  
(c) That the Government of Balochistan and its departments 
may be restrained from spending any amount shown in the 
PSDP of 2012 -13.” 
The said petition came up for hearing before this Court on  
08.10.2012 when we heard the petitioner as well as the learned 
Advocate General and S ecretary Planning & Development and 
notice was ordered to be issued to the remaining respondents as 
well as the learned Attorney General under Order XXVII A CPC for 
19.10 .2012.  Notice was also issued in the Misc. Application for 
interim relief.  
 
22.  The miseries of the citizens of Balochistan have not 
ended up here, because as far as kidnapping for ransom is 
concerned, it has become a trade. The police, levies and FC des pite 
of full powers available to them to crack down the crime have failed 
to do so. There are so many people including six people belonging 
to minority (Hindus) in Qalat and others who had been kidnapped 
for ransom have not been produced so far. In this ki nd crime, the 
sitting Ministers are also being named and involved. To substantiate Const.P.77/2010  28 
the same, reference to the statement of Interior Minister Mr. 
Zafarullah Zehri, which has been recorded by Media and was 
displayed in the Court, may not be out of context, c ontents whereof 
are reproduced herein below: - 
 
 
 
23.   It is equally important to note that involvement of 
Provincial Ministers has also been voiced at the high pitch by M/s 
Usman and Nasir Ali in the National Assembly on 09.10.2012, which 
reads as under: -  
 Const.P.77/2010  31 
incidents about the involvement of police were reported w herein it 
was alleged that it is not possible without the patronage of some 
influential persons: - 
(i) On 23.07.2011 complainant Zohaib Hassan caste 
Qureshi, resident of Kansi Road Quetta reported that his 
maternal uncle Riaz Kansi was abducted by some 
unknown persons in 2 -D Car. Later on the kidnappers 
demanded Rs.20,00,000/ - as ransom, which was paid. 
FIR No.121/2011 u/s 365,34 PPC at Police Station 
Shalkot was registered. On one of the dates of hearing 
Mrs. Farah Riaz and Adeel Ahmed the relatives of the 
abductee stated that one SP Zaman Tareen persuaded 
them to make payment of Rs.20,00,000/ -. The IGP was 
directed to look into the matter personally for affecting 
the recovery of abductee but so far no progress has 
been made.  
(ii) The other incident took place in th e area of Quetta 
Town, from where Dr. Ghulam Rasool was kidnapped 
for ransom, who paid about 1,00,00,000/ - and was got 
himself released. Cognizance of this matter was taken 
by this Court through HRC No.27045 -K and 27619 -
G/2012 and the case was heard before  one of us 
(Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.) in Chamber 
on 23.08.2012 at Quetta.  
(iii) Similarly, two doctors namely Farid  Barrech and 
another were also kidnapped for ransom. Medical 
services remained suspended throughout in the 
Province for a considerab le period due to strike but on Const.P.77/2010  32 
the intervention of this Court, vide order dated 
03.09.2012 same was called off. When we inquired 
from CCPO Quetta about the progress. He replied that 
efforts are being made and the police is likely to 
succeed in nabbing the accused.   
(iv) It is to be noted that though this fact is not on record 
that Mukesh Kohli, advocate son of Mr. W. N. Kohli, ASC 
was also abducted for ransom and remained in custody 
of kidnappers and was released after making payment 
of ransom.  
25.   There are  so many other cases, which can be quoted to 
establish that no citizen in the Province feels himself secure at the 
hands of kidnappers. This type of crime is increasing day by day in 
the Pashtoon Belt as few days before one Farhan Agha son of 
Ahmar Din Agh a was abducted perhaps on account of some 
business deals and the administration after great difficulty 
succeeded in effecting the recovery without effecting arrest of the 
kidnapper. Still there are so many other cases of abduction wherein 
abductees so far have not been recovered.  
26.   The issues of target killing highlighted by the print and 
electronic media has not been denied by the authorities. We have 
noticed that in the Province of Balochistan such crimes are 
committed by using the smuggled/Kabli veh icles including the 
motorcycles, rikshaws etc. smuggling of which into the country, 
otherwise is crime under the Customs Act, therefore, we asked the 
Chairman FBR and the officers of Customs Department to control 
the same and in this context it was directe d vide order dated 
23.08.2012 passed in Chambers that the authority should launch a Const.P.77/2010  33 
campaign to impound the vehicles plying on the roads 
unauthorizedly. In this behalf, the Secretary Excise was directed to 
put up a comprehensive report showing that how man y vehicles 
have been registered by the Excise & Taxation Department 
throughout in the Province in accordance with the Motor Vehicle 
Ordinance, 1965. The Excise Department of the Province was also 
directed that without collecting and examining the record an d 
import documents of such vehicles same should not register and if 
such registration had taken place, action in accordance with the law 
be taken. IGP was also asked to cooperate with the Excise 
Department in this behalf.  
27.   Reportedly the Law Enforcin g Agencies including, ISI 
are issuing Rahdaries  for the vehicles, arms & ammunition etc. to 
their favourites. When we inquired form Secretary Defence that 
under what authority such Rahdaris have been issued, he stated 
that there is no such law and he had i ssued directions for the 
cancellation of the same. We directed him to provide list after 
collecting the figures from all concerned agencies showing the 
number and names of the persons who have been allowed to keep 
the unlicenced arms, ammunition and simila rly non -custom paid 
duty vehicles, the names of the persons to whom Rahdaris were 
given throughout in the Province with the names of the authorities 
who have issued the same and how many arrested so far and the 
persons from whose names Rahdaris  have been c ancelled. The 
representative of Ministry of Defence on 11.10 .2012  submitted list 
in compli ance to our order and undertook  to surrender all vehicles 
in respect of which Rahdaries  were issued to Customs authorities 
within 3 days.   Const.P.77/2010  34 
28.   The Home Secretary i nformed the Court that on account 
of easy availability of activated Mobile SIMs in market the crimes 
including kidnapping for ransom are increasing day by day as this 
mode of communication is a big source of increasing crime ratio. 
The service providers wo rking in the Province were asked by him to 
cooperate but nothing has been done, we, therefore, directed to the 
Service Providers  (Ufone, Warid, Mobilink, Zong, Telenor and V -
PTCL) though the Chairman PTA to cooperate with the Home 
Secretary and IGP Baloch istan and in this regard meeting of Home 
Secretary was convened with the Director PTA and the 
representatives of Service Providers based in the Province of 
Balochistan. On the next date of hearing the Home Secretary 
complained that the Service Providers ar e not cooperating with the 
administration, even during the meeting 6 SIMs which were 
purchased from open market, duly activated were presented to 
Director PTA but he failed to question about the same to the Service 
Providers, who were present in the meetin g.  As we were informed 
that PTA without adhering to the relevant provisions of law, has 
allowed to each service provider to sell at time 10 SIMs and if there 
are more than one companies, the customers at one time can 
purchase 10 SIMs from each company, th erefore, we directed to 
the Director PTA to immediately convene a meeting with the 
Service Providers and submit report that:  
(i) How many SIMs are in use of person to whom same 
was not issued?  
(ii) How many Service Providers have sold more than one 
SIM against one CNIC?  
(iii) What procedure is to be followed for the purpose of 
blocking the SIMs, which were purchased from market Const.P.77/2010  35 
without activation and for which no record is 
maintained?  
The Chairman PTA was also directed to reduce the number of SIMs 
from 10 to 5 only, to be  purchased against one CNIC, whether from 
one or more Service Providers and if the Service Providers were not 
ready to adhere to the directions made hereinabove, he would 
cancel their licenses to the extent of Balochistan. D.G. NADRA was 
also asked to prov ide assistance to PTA in implementation of above 
order. It is not out of place to mention here, on the direction of this 
Court, in one day about  1435 activated  SIMs  were collected from 
market.   
29.   On having noticed the grave deteriorating law & order 
situation, we direct to the IGP and the Home Secretary to adopt 
necessary measures for providing safety to the life and property of 
the citizens including recovery of the illicit arms & ammunition by 
adhering to the provisions of surrender of illicit Arms Act, 1991 
because object of the present proceedings are to enforce the 
fundamental rights of the citizens; it seems that perhaps 
notification has been issued but no effective progress has been 
made.  
30.   On 24.07.2012 the Court having observed that no 
progress has been made despite orders passed time and again to 
protect the life and property of the citizen in Province  of 
Balochistan.  We directed the Provincial A uthorities, the Federal 
Government and the representatives of FC and Ministry of Defence 
to pu t their respective statement s in Court under the signatures of 
competent and concerned officers, indicating as to why the 
Constitution is not being fully enforced and that State machinery Const.P.77/2010  36 
has failed to control law and order situation as it had become 
routine in the Province of Balochistan where the innocent persons 
might be civilians or in uniform including FC, Coast Guards and 
persons belonging to religious sect are murdered, abducted and 
kidnapped for ransom. The requisite joint statement was filed on 
31.07.2012 contents whereof are reproduced herein below: - 
 
“In compliance of Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan order dated 24th July, 2012, passed in the 
subject petition, the Federation of Pakistan and 
Government of Balochistan submit as under: - 
 
 
That the F ederation and the Provincial Government 
are highly conscious about their constitutional 
obligations with regard to the security of life and 
property of citizens as envisaged in Article 9 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan.  
 
 
That the Feder ation and Provincial Government 
through their LEAs and intelligence Agencies will 
make all out efforts to ensure early and safe 
recovery of missing persons, take steps and 
measures to identify and arrest the culprits 
involved in the target/sectarian killin gs, kidnapping 
for ransom and put them to justice and will further 
strengthen/enhance the level of coordination at the 
highest level amongst the different stakeholders to 
efficiently discharge with their constitutional 
obligations and restore peace and har mony 
amongst all the segments of society in the province 
and create conducive environment for the 
economic development, well being and prosperity 
of the Province.  
 
 
Sd/   Sd/- 
Secretary   Secretary  
M/o Interior   M/o Defence  
Islamabad   Rawalpindi  
 
 
Sd/-   Sd/- 
Chief Secretary  Inspector General of Police  
Govt. of Balochistan  Balochistan  
 
 
Sd/-   Sd/- 
Secretary Home &  IG, FC  
Tribal Areas Deptt,  
Quetta.”   
 
 Const.P.77/2010  37 
The above statement is self explanatory. However, it was pointed 
out by the Advocate General that im provement has been made. He 
submitted the following Chart: - 
 
TARGET/SECTARIAN KILLINGS, RECOVERY OF DEAD BODIES, 
MISSING PERSONS AND KIDNAPPING FOR RANSOM.  
 
JULY TO 8TH OCTOBER, 2012  
 
 
Nature of 
crime  July August  September  8th Oct Total   Re
co
ve
re
d Pen
ding  
Kidnapping 
for Ransom  20 15 05 01 41 30 11 
Recovery 
of Dead 
bodies  14 03 02 00 19 
Missing 
person  - - - - - 
 
Target 
Killings  Ins Killed  Inj Ins Killed  Inj Ins Killed  Inj Ins Killed  Inj Ins Killed  Inj 
Police  04 03 02 05 06 22 02 03 02 01 02 02 12 14 28 
FC 04 09 02 11 07 04 05 01 02 00 00 00 20 17 08 
Settlers  03 04 00 02 00 02 04 04 00 00 00 00 09 08 02 
Sectarians  05 07 03 03 09 04 07 16 11 03 04 02 18 36 20 
Others  01 07 12 06 02 13 06 14 07 02 01 02 15 24 34 
Total  17 30 19 27 24 45 24 38 22 06 07 06 74 99 92 
 
31.   It is to be noted that with the intervention of this Court 
PSP officers have been transferred by the Federal Government but 
we received an anonymous application (HRC No.30044 -B/12) 
wherein it was pointed out that the police officers who w ere 
transferred to Balochistan, their services are not being utilized and 
instead of posting them in the field, they have been posted in the 
offices or against the posts which are not so important in view of 
the situation of law and order prevailing in the  Province. The Chief 
Secretary stated that he will look into the matter. On 09.10.2012 
Mir Zubair Mehmood CPO Quetta submitted a report on behalf of 
IGP mentioning therein that out of 38 officers, 22 have been posted 
in the field, 05 as Staff Officer, 04 i n specialized units, 03 have Const.P.77/2010  38 
proceeded on training whereas only 04 officers are awaiting 
posting.  This clearly demonstration the lack of will on the part of 
administration to safeguard the life and property of the residents.  
32.   It is to be noted that l earned Attorney General has not 
shown interest in the instant proceedings despite our observations, 
made time and again during the proceedings of the Court as well as 
in the orders, showing displeasure during the time when Maulvi 
Anwar -ul-Haq was the Attor ney General and thereafter when Mr. 
Irfan Qader  as Attorney General  was called to appear subject to 
making statement in writing that Secretary Defence and Secretary 
Interior desired that he would be allowed to appear on their behalf. 
Such statements. made on 19.09.2012 read as under: - 
“SUBMISSION OF REPLY ON BEHALF OF SECRETARY DEFENCE  
“In compliance of Para 12 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pakistan 
order dated 8th September, 2012 passed in the subject petition and 
subject to Article 100 of the Constituti on, it is submitted that 
Ministry of Defence vide uo Note No.1/313/Director (Legal)/10 
dated 14th September, 2012 while furnishing necessary input has 
requested Ministry of Law and Justice to submit a consolidated 
response of the Federation in the Apex Cou rt through learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan. A meeting was also held between 
Law Minister, Law Secretary, Learned Attorney General for Pakistan 
and Defence Secretary on 18th September, 2012 where it was 
agreed that learned Attorney General will repres ent Ministry of 
Defence on 19th September, 2012 and thereafter. However, written 
response of Ministry is not available.  
In view of the above, it is requested that learned Attorney General 
of Pakistan may please be allowed to represent Ministry of Defence 
in this case before this Hon’ble Court”.  
 
SUBMISSION OF REPLY OF SECRETARY INTERIOR  
 
2.  That on 4th of September, 2012 an order was passed by this 
Hon’ble Court wherein it was mentioned that the Attorney General Const.P.77/2010  39 
shall not be allowed to appear in this cas e unless the Secretary 
Interior and Secretary Defence made a request before the Court.  
3. Accordingly, in the course hearing a request in this regard is 
being made by the applicant.  
It is, therefore, prayed that the applicant be permitted to be 
represent ed by the Attorney General for Pakistan.”  
 
Again, during proceedings of this case at Quetta, learned Attorney 
General did not appear and the case was entrusted to a Deputy 
Attorney General. This indicates the interest of Federal Government 
in this case. Im portantly, it is necessary to bring on record that 
learned Attorney General and DAG have not dispelled that 
fundamental rights of the citizens living in the Province of 
Balochistan are not being enforced as per the mandate of the 
Constitution of Pakistan.  
33.   Hadi Shakeel Ahmad, ASC, former President of 
Balochistan High Court Association and Malik Zahoor Ahmad 
Shahwani, incumbent President as well as Mr. Sajid Tareen, 
ASC/Sr. Vice President appeared on behalf of petitioner body. M/s 
M. Zafar, Sr. ASC, Mu nir A. Malik, Sr. ASC, Rasheed A. Rizvi, Sr. 
ASC and Salman Akram Raja, ASC appeared as amicus curiae, 
whereas Mr. S.M.Zafar, learned Sr. ASC appeared on behalf of FC 
and addressed their respective arguments. We are thankful to them 
as they suggested ways and means to improve the situation of law 
and order and also to enforce the fundamental rights in the 
Province. We are specially thankful to Hadi Shakeel Ahmad, learned 
ASC, Malik Zahoor Shahwani, learned ASC and Mr. Sajid Tareen, 
ASC who followed the proc eedings whole heartedly.  Const.P.77/2010  40 
34.   It is to be noted that in a parliamentary system of 
Government, federating units like Government of Balochistan and 
others enjoy provincial autonomy, thus are responsible to ensure 
that affairs of the Provinces  and are run i ndependently according to 
the constitutional provisions as it has been envisaged in Article 2A 
of the Constitution, according to which the Territories included in or 
in accession with Pakistan and such other territories as may be 
hereafter be included in o r accede to Pakistan shall form a 
Federation wherein the units will be autonomous with such 
boundaries and limitations on their powers and authority as may be 
prescribed. Article 137 of the Constitution empowers executive 
authority of the Province to make laws in the matter with respect to 
which the Provincial Assembly. it provides that subject to the 
Constitution, the executive authority of the Province shall extend to 
the matters with respect to which the Provincial Assembly has 
power to make laws. Provid ed that, in any matter with respect to 
which both Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) and the Provincial 
Assembly of a Province have power to make laws, the executive 
authority of the Province shall be subject to, and limited by, the 
executive authority expressly  conferred by the Constitution or by 
law made by Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) upon the Federal 
Government or authorities thereof.  
35.  Admittedly, the Provincial Government has power to 
make laws for maintaining law & order situation in the Province and 
to the extent of its territory. There is no limitation on its powers to 
make laws as far as subject under discussion is concerned, except 
that no law shall be made which is against the fundamental rights 
guaranteed by the Const itution including Articles 9,  10A and 24  Const.P.77/2010  41 
thereof. It has been noted earlier that the due process of law was 
not one of the fundamental right but after the 18th Constitutional 
Amendment was made part of Chapter 18 and Part II and the 
Constitution as one of the fundamental right s. It pro vides that for 
the determination of his civil rights and obligations or in any 
criminal charge against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial 
and due process. Thus, it is the duty of the State i.e. Provincial 
Government (in terms of Article 7 of th e Constitution) to enforce 
fundamental rights of citizen and protect their lif e, liberty and 
property and any one of them if charged for any offence, he has to 
be de alt with in accordance with law by providing fair trial and due 
process.  However, it is stra nge that State (Provincial Government) 
in view of overwhelming material available on record has not only 
failed to enforce fundamental rights of the citizen but in fact 
violated the same . In such situation one can asked about  the 
authority of such Governme nt to rule the people. Answers to it lies 
in the judgment titled as Watan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2011 SC 997) relevant paras therefrom are reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
58. There is no denial of the fact that ensuring good 
governance, maintaining law and order situation and 
providing security to the persons is a primary duty of the 
Government. Our religion has also emphasized upon the 
significance and sanctity of `life' as it has been noted in the 
opening Para of the judgment, according to which, i f anyone 
killed a person, it would be as if he killed the whole humanity, 
and, similarly if anyone saved a life, it would be as if he saved 
the whole humanity. Similarly, it is the responsibility of the 
ruler (government) to ensure security of all its citi zens, high 
or low, without any discrimination. It would be appropriate to 
refer here to the saying of the Second Caliph Umar ibn al -
Khattab (R.A) that if a dog dies of hunger on the banks of the 
River Euphrates, Umar will be held responsible for derelictio n 
of duty. [Mohtsham, Saeed M., Vision and Visionary 
Leadership - An Islamic Perspective]. Mr. Abdul Hafeez 
Pirzada, Sr. ASC appearing on behalf of the Chief Executive of Const.P.77/2010  42 
the Province suggested in his arguments that a wake up call 
should be given to the Pr ovincial Government by this Court, 
so that it may enforce the constitutional provisions. The 
suggestion of the learned counsel, however, does not sound 
well as 'this is the duty of the ruler to maintain the law and 
order without any interference of the Cou rt. It is the history 
of this country that on account of law and order situation, 
disturbance, absence of peace, etc., many governments were 
dismissed in the past. In this behalf, reference may be made 
to the instruments of dissolution of Parliaments issue d by 
civilian constitutionally elected Presidents which were upheld 
by the Supreme Court from time to time: -- 
* Order dated 29 -5-1988 whereby the President of. 
Pakistan dissolved the National Assembly under Article 
58(2)(b) : 
"And whereas the law and order in the country have 
broken down to an alarming extent resulting in tragic 
loss' of innumerable valuable lives as well as loss of 
property:  
And whereas the life, property, honour and. security of 
the citizens of Pakistan have been rendered totally 
unsafe an d the integrity and ideology of Pakistan have 
been seriously endangered. [Federation of Pakistan v. 
Haji Muhammad Saifullah Khan (PLD 1989 SC 166)]   
* Order under Article 58(2)(b) of the Constitution on 6th 
of August, 1990 dissolved the National Assembly  
(d) The Federal Government has failed in its duty under 
Article 148(3) of the Constitution to protect the 
Province of Sindh against internal disturbances and to 
ensure that the Government of that Province is not 
carried on in accordance with the provisions of 
Constitution, despite the heavy loss of life and property, 
the rule of terror in urban and rural areas, riots, arson, 
dacoities, kidnapping for ransom, politics of violence 
among citizens and widely condemned failure of the 
Provincial Government and its  law enforcing agencies, 
and also, in this behalf, failed to act under appropriate 
provisions of the Constitution. [Khawaja Ahmad Tariq 
Rahim v. the Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1992 SC 
646)]  
* Order dated 5 -11-1996 whereby the President dissolved 
the Natio nal Assembly under Article 58(2)(b)  
"Whereas during the last three years thousands of 
persons in Karachi and other parts of Pakistan have 
been deprived of their right to life in violation of Article 
9 of the Constitution. They have been killed in Police 
encounters and Police custody.  
73. We may reiterate here that now it is not possible under 
the Constitution and law for the Armed Forces to dismiss the Const.P.77/2010  43 
Government by adopting extra -constitutional measures, 
detailed reference in this behalf, if required, can be made to 
the only judgment of this Court in Sindh High Court Bar 
Association's case (ibid), but at the same time the chosen 
representatives also owe a duty to the Constitution and if 
they feel that on account of any political expediency they can 
allow th e continuance of the present position of law and order 
in the Province, it will be at their own risk and cost, otherwise 
under the Constitution they are bound to secure lives and 
properties, ensuring the proprietary rights, freedom of 
movement, etc., and f ailing which constitutionally such 
government is likely to lose their right of ruling.  
36.   Material brought on record and statements which are 
available on record, on close scrutiny persuaded us to hold that the 
affirs of state in the Province of Balochi stan are not being carried 
out in accordance with the Constitution due to which internal 
disturbance  is increasing .  
37.   Once it has been agreed that there is internal 
disturbances and the Provincial Law Enforcing  Agencies  including 
FC, police and Levies  have failed to ensure protection of life and 
property of the people living in the Province and appears to have 
lost its Constitutional authority to carry out affairs of the Province 
as lives of the people cannot be left at the mercy of a Government 
who ha d lost its credibility in view of facts and circumstances noted 
above, particularly, with reference to the circumstances prevailing 
in the Province of Balochistan where there are serious charges 
against the sitting member of the Cabinet and about their 
involvement in abduction for ransom some of the police officers as 
well, including FC personnel of course criminals belonging to 
different organizations are also effectively involved but no case has 
been traced of any kind of heinous crimes i.e. missing perso ns, 
target killings, recovery of mutilated dead bodies, kidnapping for 
ransom  against them . Const.P.77/2010  44 
38.   Under the circumstances, endeavor has to be made to 
ascertain whether any other Constitutional authority is duty bound 
to take action against internal disturb ances. Reference may be 
made to Article 148(3) of the Constitution, which reads as under: - 
“148. Obligation of Provinces and Federation.  
(1)  The executive authority of every Province shall be so 
exercised as to secure compliance with Federal laws which 
apply in that Province.  
(2)  Without prejudice to any other provision of this 
Chapter, in the exercise of the executive authority of the 
Federation in any Province regard shall be had to the interests 
of that Province.  
(3)  It shall be the duty of the Fed eration to protect every 
Province against external aggression and internal 
disturbances and to ensure that the Government of every 
Province is carried on in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution.”  
 
39.   Now the question, required considerati on is the duty of 
the Federation in view of internal disturbances in the Province.  This 
issue has been considered in the case of Khalid Malik v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 1991 Karachi 1), Jamat -i-Islami Pakistan v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2000 SC 111 ), and Mohtarma Benazir 
Bhutto v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1998 SC 388). Relevant paras 
therefrom read as under: - 
Khalid Malik v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1991 Karachi 1)  
Article 148 (3) casts duty upon the Federation to protect and 
save the province s from external aggression and internal 
disturbance. It also compels the Federation to see that the 
Government of the Province is carried on in accordance with 
the provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, it is the duty of 
the Federation not only to take  measures to protect the 
provinces from internal disturbance but can also devise ways 
and means to ensure that the Government of the province is 
run in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. In 
certain cases even directions can be issued to th e provinces. 
The words `internal disturbances' in the wider constitutional 
background do not refer to minor clashes, riots, strikes or 
incidents of similar nature which may disturb the peace and 
tranquillity of a province in a localised manner. Such small 
incidents may be every day happenings in the provinces 
which their Governments fully equipped with power and 
resources, are expected to deal with such situation. However, Const.P.77/2010  45 
if situation arises that the internal disturbances are of such a 
serious nature that the Provincial Government has failed to 
control them or that it is unable to manage it then Federation 
may take steps to protect the Province from such internal 
disturbances.   
Jamat -i-Islami Pakistan v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2000 SC 111) , 
10. The lea rned counsel for the petitioners and the learned 
Attorney -General have not drawn our attention to any other 
statute wherein definition of the term "internal disturbances" 
has been given. The above term has not been defined in the 
Constitution. Under Artic le 232 thereof, it is merely stated 
thereunder that "internal disturbances" refer to. those 
disturbances which are beyond the power of the Provincial 
Government to control. Therefore, while construing the term 
"internal disturbances" the term is to be unde rstood in terms 
of general parlance. "Internal disturbances" in the context of 
civil commotion may include an outbreak of large scale 
violence due to disturbances in any part of the country. The 
term "strike" is popularly used in labour laws of the country  
and is generally understood as a simultaneous cessation of 
work on the part of the workmen, and its legality or illegality 
depend on the means by which it is enforced and upon its 
object having reference to specific provision in the relevant 
laws. The "st rike" is the combined effort of workmen to obtain 
higher wages or other concessions and privileges from their 
employers by stopping work at a pre -concerted time until 
their demands are met. The question as to whether a call of 
strike given by workmen or me mbers of Labour Union or 
members of the Union of workers/employees is lawful or 
otherwise depends upon the facts and circumstances of each 
case having regard to the specific provisions laid down in the 
relevant statutes and the object sought to be achieved . 
Distinction between lock -out and strike is depicted in a case 
from American jurisdiction Dail -Overland Co. v. 
Willys -Overland, D.C. Ohio, 263 F.171, 186, wherein it was 
observed that "A 'strike' where men quit because the 
employer refuses conditions dema nded of him, and a 
'lock-out' where employees refuse to return to work unless 
the employer meet their demands". (Refer Words and 
Phrases, Permanent Edition, Volume 40, p.471). In City of 
Wilmington v. General Teamsters Local Union 326 Del., 321 
A.2d 123, 1 26, it was held that "In order for there to be a 
'strike,' there must be some concerted action or combined 
effort by group which is designed to exert pressure on an 
individual or entity to accede to certain demands."  
Lock-out distinguished from strike  
Work stoppage is a lock -out and not a strike. However, in 
certain conditions a "work stoppage" may be synonymous 
with the word "strike", for instance, where stoppage of work 
may arise because of strike, but picketing by employees 
during work stoppage as a resu lt of lock -out generally does 
not mean that the employees were on "strike". Strikes and 
lock-outs in labour or industrial disputes may be permissible Const.P.77/2010  46 
as well as impermissible, legal as well as illegal, depending 
upon the facts of each case with reference t o the relevant 
provisions in the relevant statute. Strike is also understood to 
mean cessation of economic activity including ' Paiyya Jam 
(Wheel Jam) and closure of shops and establishments at the 
call of a political party to press for their political dem ands in 
furtherance of their manifesto, policies or programmes. Strike 
may also be in the nature of sympathy strike which is a 
common manifestation of traditional solidarity with a cause. 
Sympathy strikes are a common manifestation of national 
solidarity o n any national or international cause in 
endeavouring to preserve and strengthen a noble cause. Sit 
down strike is generally observed at the call of a political 
party by resorting to "Dherna" (sit down).  
 
Mohtarma Benazir Bhutto v. President of Pakistan  
(PLD 1998 SC 388)  
37. It is thus clear that the above mentioned provisions in the 
Constitution regulate relationship between the Federation and 
a Province in a situation in which Federal law is applicable in 
that Province and a situation has arisen in which  it is to be 
considered as to how the Federal law is to be made applicable 
so that it should bring about the desired result and be 
effective so that proper remedial measures are adopted to 
contain and control the situation in which the Federal 
Government h as to adopt supervisory role and give directions 
to the Province in which is being applied the federal law.  
 
40.   The Federation of Pakistan apparently provided some 
protect ion to Provincial Government of Balochistan against internal 
disturbance by deploy ing FC in the Province. Detail in this behalf 
has been filed by Secretary Home, Government of Balochistan, 
according to which FC is assisting to provincial law enforcing 
agencies to maintain law and order. The fact has also been 
admitted by Mr. S.M. Zafar learned Sr. ASC appearing for FC. He 
explained that vide letter dated 28.12.2009 Government of Pakistan 
Ministry of Interior placed FC at the disposal of |Government  of 
Balochistann for assistance and support for maintenance of law and 
order  almost in enti re Province . Subsequent thereto, FC has been 
posted almostly in all the districts of the Province as a civil armed 
force. It is to be noted according to Home Secretary FC was Const.P.77/2010  47 
deployed in the Province prior to letter referred to hereinabove. It is 
also to be noted that as per information given by the learned 
counsel of FC that since 2006 till 10.10.2012  432 personnel of FC 
have embraced Shahadat whereas 604 were injured. On our query 
he stated that except in one case  in which  accused persons were 
arrested in  the year 2009 , no arrest was affected so far . It is 
important to note that against casualties and in the case of injured 
personnel of FC only 69 FIRs have been registered. On our further 
query it was pleaded that earlie no FIR in respect of incidents were  
lodged. Such information was quite surprising for us because it is 
the basic law of criminal administration of justice that no sooner a 
cognizable offence is committed, matter is to be reported to law 
enforcing agency.  
41.   It would be equally important  that in respect of 
recovery of mutilated dead bodies, target killing and etc. people are 
reluctant to lodge FIR  due to fear or due to lack of confidence on 
law enforcing agencies . As far as missing persons are concerned, 
people are so scared that they avo ided to report the matter to the 
police because there is strong presumption that instead of return of 
missing person, they have to re ceive the dead  bodies of their near 
and dears, however, due to intervention of this Court people started 
lodging FIRs . In m ost of t he FIRs under section 365 PPC F C was 
blamed to be accused for the commission of offence, as it has 
already been noted  above.  
42.   It is equally important to point  out that a large number 
of civilians  belonging to different ethnic groups including  Pashtoon, 
Baloch, Sindhi and settlers belonging to different religious sects i.e. Const.P.77/2010  48 
Sunni & Shia have been killed dur ing the period from 2006 onward, 
besides killing of police, levies and FC personnel.   
43.   In the Province of Balochistan disturbance has s tarted 
from August, 2006 when Nawab Muhammad Akbar Khan was killed 
and so many persons had lost their lives. Similarly, a good number 
of people males, female and children belonging to different 
linguistic  groups residents of Balochistan  were made victim. T heir 
valuable properties have been disposed. They have l ost their 
business  and are not in a position even  to earn their livelihood 
because of seriou s law and order position and they express ed their 
dissatisfaction and lack of confidence on the administrati on. 
Invariably people  (the victims)  protest  issue , call for strike, shutter 
down, wheel jams etc.   
44.   Province of Balochistan is  backward area for the 
reasons as no long term development projects have been 
undertaken  and except in some parts of district  Lasbella there is no 
industries functioning, the people are not getting their due share in 
economic development and despite of existing of king size cabinet 
people do feel that they are not being represented in the Parliament 
and the Provincial Assemb ly as these institutions  except  obliging 
the MPs are not extending any relief to them. It is to be noted that 
according to Budget documents, at the disposal  of each MPA,  Rs.30 
crore has been allocated enabling them to identify development  
schemes, a ccording to  their own desire as a result of which benefit 
of development are not reaching to the masses . Contrary to it, 
serious allegations of misappropriation of amounts are leveled. 
Similarly  there is no writ  of the Government in the Province, people 
are scared an d apprehend danger to their life and are not in a Const.P.77/2010  49 
position to enjoy  their fundamental rights according to the 
Constitution.  
45.   It is also to be noted that there are serious allegations 
of corruption against the Provincial Government and people do feel 
that there is no socio economic uplift in the Province and when 
there is such a situation prevalent in the province , it creates 
disappointment in the people and they do get involved in criminal 
activities.  
46.   M/s S.M. Zafar,  M. Zafar,  Munir A. Malik,  Slman Akram 
Raja, learned counsel  conceded frankly that there is serious 
violation of human rights and fundamental rights guaranteed  by the 
Constitution and such fact has also been report ed by Pakistan 
Human Rights Commission  in their report of 2010 -11. Mr. 
S.M.Zafar, learned counsel for FC  also conceded that despite of 
posting/ deployment  of good number of the FC troops out of 50,000 
to maintain law and order situation in the province is not improving. 
We have noted that due to interference  of different fo rces in the 
administration of Province it has become almost difficult to maintain 
law and order or t o ensure enforcement of fundament right of the 
people. As noted herein above that Secretary Defence has ensured 
that no violation shall be allowed  now by is suing Rahdaris  to Secret 
Agencies and all Rahdaris previously issued stand cancelled and all 
vehicles ply ing without payment of customs duty will be 
surrendered within three days.  The list of persons to whom 
Rahdaris were issued by the agencies was shown c laiming privilege 
we have accepted the plea . Number of such vehicle is 98. We fail to 
understand that under which provision of law, such Rahdaris  to ply 
vehicle s without paying customs duties etc. were issued  by law Const.P.77/2010  50 
enforcing agencies . This action on the p art of security agenci es is 
without lawful authority . Thus, t hey are restrained in future not to 
issue any Rahdari  for plying any vehicle without paying customs 
duty etc. nor such concession should be extended in future for 
carrying illicit arms ammunition . 
47.   Above narration of facts and the constitutional provision  
cited on the subject i.e. Article 148(3) of the Constitution caste 
duty upon the Federation to protect provincial Government of 
Balochistan  against internal disturbance which has been establ ished 
by relying upon undisputed facts reference of which has been noted 
above and the authority who has a duty which had to be exercised 
by the Federal Government as a Constitutional d uty and for 
exercising  such  duty no departur e is possible because perfo rmance  
of duty is an obligation. In this behalf reference may be made to 
the case of Alcock A. & Co. v. C. Revenue A  (AIR 1923 Privy Council 
138). Relevant paras therefrom are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
Their Lordships, however, agree with the Bombay High C ourt 
that this is too narrow a construction of the section, Take first 
the case which is last in the clause, If the assessee applies for 
a case, the Authority must state it, unless he can say that it is 
frivolous or unnecessary. He is not to wait for the C ourt to 
order him to do it; it will be a misfeasance and a breach of 
the statutory duty if he does not do it. Put that case aside. 
The rule here is supported upon the earlier part of the 
section. No doubt that part does not say that he shall state a 
case, it only says that he may. And as the learned Counsel for 
the respondent rightly urged, may does not mean "shall 
Neither are the words "it shall be lawful those of compulsion, 
Only the capacity or power is given to the Authority. But 
when a capacity or( pow er is given to a public authority, there 
may be circumstances which couple with the power a duty to 
exercise it. To use the language of Lord Cairns in the case of 
Julius v. Lord Bishop of Oxford (3).  Const.P.77/2010  51 
“There may be something in the nature of the thing 
empow ered to be done, something in the object for which is 
to be done, something in the conditions under which it is to 
be done, something in the title of the person or persona for 
whose benefit the power is to be exercised, which may couple 
the power with a du ty, and make it the duty of the person in 
whom the power is reposed, to exercise that power when 
called upon to do so.”  
In their Lordships' view, always supposing that there is a 
serious point of law to be considered, there does lie a duty 
upon the Chief R evenue Authority to state a case for the 
opinion of the Court, and if he does not appreciate that there 
is such a serious point, it is in the power of the Court to 
control him and to order him to state a case.  
So far their Lordships are in agreement with t he High Court. 
There remains the question which has led to this appeal. The 
High Court has apparently considered that there is no serious 
point of law involved in this case. It was, indeed, contended 
by counsel for the respondent that the High Court had 
accepted the position that there was a question of law and 
then had gone on to decide it adversely to the appellants ; 
but their Lordships think this contention inadmissible. If there 
is a point of law, it ought to be decided in a regular manner 
and upon pro per materials; and here it should be said that 
the manner is not regular and that it is at least doubtful 
whether the materials are complete.  
21.Their Lordships must therefore consider whether the High 
Court should have ordered a case to be stated. This, a s it 
appeared to the learned Chief Justice, depended upon the 
question whether the Chief Revenue Authority had reasonable 
grounds for being satisfied that a reference was necessary. 
This is not quite the way in which their Lordships would put it. 
But to pr oceed: In the view of the Chief Justice profits not 
employed in the business are not capital for the purpose of 
this Act, and profits intended to be employed in the business 
are not therefore necessarily to be treated as capital, and 
finally, whether profi ts are or are not employed in the 
business is a question of fact to be determined by the 
Authority. Fawcett J. agreed, and held that it was not shown 
to be clearly incumbent on the Chief Revenue Authority to 
refer these questions to the Court, and that he had 
reasonable grounds for being satisfied that the reference was 
unnecessary.  Const.P.77/2010  52 
48.   Unfortunately in the instant cas e Federal Government 
except  deploying  FC troops , has also failed to protect Province of 
Balochistan from internal disturbance s. Similarly, as far as 
Provincial Government of Balochistan is concerned  it had lost its 
constitutional authority to govern the Province because of violation 
of fundamental rights  of the people of Pakistan . 
49.  Thus in view of the above discussion, the following 
order  is hereby passed: - 
1. This Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 184 (3) 
of the Constitution has jurisdiction to enforce fundamental 
rights conferred by Chapter -I of Part II of the Constitution 
as it considers that a question of public importance 
involving enforcement of Fundamental Rights enshrined 
under the Constitution viz. section 4 read with 
fundamental rights under Article 9, 10A, 14, 15, 17, 18, 24 
& 25 of the Constitution, have been violated.  
2. The incumbent Provincial Government has failed t o 
establish writ of law in the Province on account of which 
the fundamental rights of the citizens, noted hereinabove, 
have been violated. The people of Balochistan also include 
civilians, the members of law enforcing agencies i.e. Police, 
Levies, BC, FC a nd reportedly the armed personnel of the 
Coastal Guard, as a result whereof the Provincial 
Government has lost the ability of governance and 
constitutional authority to govern the Province of 
Balochistan in accordance with the Constitution of Islamic 
Repub lic of Pakistan and to ensure the enforcement of 
above noted fundamental rights under the Constitution.  Const.P.77/2010  53 
3. The Federal Government of Pakistan though has attempted 
to protect the Provincial Government against internal 
disturbance in discharging of its function s under Article 
148(3) of the Constitution as, from 2006 onward the FC 
was deployed to assist the Provincial Government for the 
purpose of controlling disturbances but as it has been 
stated that during this period, 432 personnel of FC were 
killed and more than 600 were injured. Inasmuch as on 
11.10.2012, according to DSR supplied by the Home 
Secretary, four personnel of FC were killed in Dera Bugti. 
There are prima facie, serious allegations of the 
involvement of FC as it is evident from the report 
submitte d by the Inspector General of Police that in every 
third case, the FC personnel are being named as accused 
regarding missing persons. For the last four years, 
mutilated dead bodies had been recovered from the 
abandoned places of the Province of Balochistan . Neither 
the Provincial Government nor the Federal Government 
succeeded in identifying the culprits involved in the killing 
of such persons inasmuch as no report was registered by 
the law enforcing agencies. Same is the position in respect 
of the missing persons, target killings, abduction for 
ransom and sectarian killings. This Court, during the 
pendency/hearing of this case has got registered FIRs but 
not a single accused has been brought to book. It is a 
routine exercise in the province that a great maj ority of 
the cases of the same kind are found untraced. The people 
in general and the employees both civilians and non -Const.P.77/2010  54 
civilians have no protection as to the security of their lives 
and properties, dignity and professions. The Provincial 
Government as well  as the Federal Government, despite 
clear directions of the Court including obtaining the 
commitment on 31.7.2012 which has been signed by: - 
a. Secretary, M/o Interior, Govt. of Pakistan.  
b. Secretary, M/o of Defence, Govt. of Pakistan.  
c. Chief Secretary, Govt. o f Balochistan.  
d. Secretary Home, Govt. of Balochistan.  
e. Inspector General of Police, Balochistan.  
f. Inspector General, FC.  
 
They have failed to honour the above commitment, as a 
result whereof disappointment, despondency and anarchy 
is increasing day by day amo ng all the citizens.  
4. Under the circumstances, it was the constitutional 
obligation of the Federation to exercise all constitutional 
options to ensure that the fundamental rights of the people 
of Pakistan are fully protected and secured particularly 
relatin g to the security of their lives. But no option has so 
far been exercised as such like options are to be followed 
or exercised taking into consideration the political 
decisions by the democratic governments while remaining 
within the four corner of the Con stitution but regrettably, 
despite having noticed the situation prevailing in the 
province of Balochistan, nothing so far has been done. 
However, we are of the view that even now it is the 
constitutional obligation/duty under Article 148(3) of the 
Constitu tion to control the internal disturbance in the 
province of Balochistan as early as possible to provide Const.P.77/2010  55 
security to the lives of the people of Balochistan, the 
Provincial Government which had lost its constitutional 
credibility cannot be allowed to continu e as a silent 
spectator to the violation of fundamental rights. The 
Federal Government is, therefore, called upon to ensure 
immediate action under the Constitution to provide the 
security to the people of Balochistan against all the 
criminal aggression inc luding the recovery of mutilated 
dead bodies, missing persons, target killings, abduction for 
ransom and sectarian killings because we are of the 
opinion that without fulfillment of constitutional 
obligations/duties, the above objects cannot be achieved. 
We had already directed registration of cases in respect of 
the mutilated dead bodies, missing persons, abduction for 
ransom, sectarian killings etc. and on our intervention the 
government of Balochistan had decided to register criminal 
cases and make payme nt of compensation to the heirs of 
the persons whose dead bodies were recovered. We direct 
the government of Balochistan to accelerate this process 
and at the same time prepare a scheme for the purpose of 
providing maintenance etc. to the families whose pe rsons 
have been killed.        
5. The Federal Government/Provincial Government should 
take steps for the rehabilitation of more than 150000 IDPs 
particularly in Dera Bugti immediately and necessary steps 
should be taken not only for the restoration of their 
properties but also by providing security to their lives and Const.P.77/2010  56 
property and restore civil administration such as schools, 
hospitals, Courts, police stations etc.  
6. The interference in the affairs of the province of 
Balochistan by the secret agencies has also b een prima 
facie,  established as it has been noted hereinabove that a 
good number of people are being obliged for the reasons 
best known to the agencies by allowing rahdaris to persons 
who keep plying smuggled vehicles (also known as kabli 
vehicles) without  registration and without payment of 
customs duty. The rahdaris  are also reportedly issued to 
allow unauthorized possession of illicit arms and reportedly 
whenever such persons are apprehended being involved in 
the crimes they take shelter behind such unla wful 
rahdaris/ documents. Although a statement has been given 
by the Secretary Defence that such rahdaris which were 
issued earlier, had already been cancelled and in 
pursuance of our directions, 98 vehicles which were being 
plied on the basis of such Rahda ris by the different persons 
are to be impounded. Therefore, we reiterate that in 
future, no such rahdaris either for the vehicles or for the 
arms shall be issued by any of the secret agencies i.e. ISI, 
MI, IB or the Federal or the Provincial Governments. If any 
such rahdaris are produced by any person, the law 
enforcing agencies, functioning under the government of 
Balochistan, shall arrest such persons to be dealt with 
strictly in accordance with law without any exception. The 
Customs Department of the go vernment of Pakistan had 
also its role in creating a poor situation of law and order Const.P.77/2010  57 
because knowing well that thousands of smuggled vehicles 
are being plied throughout the province and are being 
used in the crimes to disturb the law and order situation. 
Therefore, in view of earlier directions, the FBR is directed 
to recover all these vehicles as early as possible and in 
future no such vehicle including motorcycles etc. shall be 
allowed to ply without the payment of customs duty and if 
any such vehicle is found, the same shall be impounded 
and the accused persons shall be dealt with under the law.               
7. The problem in maintaining the law and order, as it has 
been noticed, is also because there is no prohibition of 
purchasing telephone SIMs. In this behalf, we have already 
issued directions on 21.5.2012 that this should be located 
and dealt with strictly in accordance with law.  
8. The people of Balochistan suffer from various deprivations 
as there is little industry, no chances of jobs with the 
result t he youngsters who after having obtained education 
fail to get a suitable job/work to earn their livelihood. They 
start showing frustration because merit is totally 
disregarded. Therefore, the constitutional functionaries in 
the province, are hereby directe d to take all necessary 
steps to remove the sense of deprivation and it is only 
possible if the due share in the resources of the province of 
Balochistan after passing of the constitutional amendment, 
as notified under Article 172 (2) of the Constitution a re 
made available to the province as early as possible and are 
spent transparently through an honest constitutional 
dispensation in the province. The allegations of corruption Const.P.77/2010  58 
against the government functionaries are also required to 
be looked into by cons titutional functionaries both by the 
province as well as by the federation and it should also be 
ensured that in future the development funds etc. are 
spent transparently and the persons who are responsible 
for misappropriating such funds, already availabl e to the 
province, should be brought to book and dealt with strictly 
in accordance with law.  
9. The learned Advocate General representing the Province of 
Balochistan stated that the only solution according to him 
regarding internal disturbances within the Pro vince is the 
holding of true, free and fair elections to ensure 
representation of the people by their duly elected 
representatives. In view of this categorical statement on 
behalf of the Province, it is observed that the Federal 
Government must fulfill its  duty and obligation under 
Article 148(3) of the Constitution.  
10. On our directions, investigation being carried out against 
the culprits allegedly involved in the commission of forced 
disappearances (missing persons, abduction for ransom, 
sectarian killings , target killings and recovery of mutilated 
bodies), we are not satisfied with the level of investigation 
either by the police or by the levies, therefore, we direct 
that all these cases shall be transferred to CID which vide 
notification No. 23988 -24010/1 (262)/A, dated the 2nd 
November, 2000, has jurisdiction all over the province to 
investigate into the criminal cases. The Inspector General 
of Police is directed to provide adequate manpower and Const.P.77/2010  59 
facilities to the CID by deputing honest, upright and daring 
officers to conduct the investigation. The CID shall submit 
the challans of these cases before the High Court of 
Balochistan directly so that these cases may be decided 
expeditiously.    
11. As under the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
the electi ons are likely to take place, therefore, the Federal 
as well as Provincial constitutional functionaries are 
required to create an atmosphere and exercise their 
constitutional authorities for the purpose of electing true 
representation.  
12. Mr. S. M. Zafar, lea rned counsel appearing for the FC had 
placed on record sufficient material, perusal whereof 
suggests that whenever there is any incident of killing 
innocent persons both uniformed and civilian, the 
newspapers come forward to issue publication regarding 
the responsibility by different organizations which 
increases a sense of insecurity among the people of 
Balochistan. Such publication is contrary to the provisions 
of section 11 -W of the Anti -Terrorism Act, 1997 which 
reads as under: - 
“11-W. Printing, publish ing, or disseminating 
any material to incite hatred or giving 
projection to any person convicted for a 
terrorist act or any proscribed organization or 
an organization placed under observation or 
anyone concerned in terrorism. (1) A person 
commits an offenc e if he prints, publishes or Const.P.77/2010  60 
disseminates any material, whether by audio or 
video -cassettes [FM radio station] or by written, 
photographic, electronic, digital, wall -chalking or 
any the method which [glorifies terrorists or 
terrorist activities] incites re ligious, sectarian or 
ethnic hatred or gives projection to any person 
convicted for a terrorist act, or any person or 
organization concerned in terrorism or proscribed 
organization or an organization placed under 
observation:  
Provided that a factual news r eport, made in good 
faith, shall not be construed to mean ‘projection’ 
for the purposes of this section”.  
              
13. We are told that in this behalf restraint order has also been 
passed by the High Court of Balochistan, therefore, we 
confirm the order w hich has been passed by the High 
Court of Balochistan that in future the above provision of 
law shall be followed strictly both by the electronic and 
print media.  
 
50.  This order is interim in its nature on the basis of the 
material facts and circumstanc es brought before the Court during 
the 71 dates of hearing of this matter but the same is not being 
decided finally as the instant order is passed as an interim measure 
and the Secretary Interior, Govt. of Pakistan as well as the Chief 
Secretary, Govt. of Balochistan are hereby directed to put up a 
comprehensive report in respect of the steps which have been 
taken in pursuance of the this interim order by all the constitutional Const.P.77/2010  61 
functionaries both in the Federation as well as in the Province on 
fortnightly b asis. In the meanwhile all the directions in respect of 
the recovery of missing persons etc. shall continue and the matter 
is adjourned to be fixed at Islamabad on 31.10.2012.       
 
 
   Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Quetta, the  
12th October, 2012  
Nisar/* 
 
 
 
 
  APPROVED FOR REPORTING  