IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 
 
Civil Petition No. 2633  of 20 19 
 
Naeem Tahir and others.       … Petitioner s 
     Versus  
Jahan Shah alias Shah Jehan and others.    … Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioner s:  Mr. Kamran Murtaza, ASC.  
     Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR.  
 
For Respondents No. 1 -4 & 6:  Mr. Ahmed Ali, ASC.  
     Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR.  
 
For Respondents No. 13 -17: Mian Shafaqat Jan,  
Additional Advocate -General, KP.  
a/w M. Aslam, Tehsildar, D.I. Khan.  
Mr. Baran, Qanoongo, D.I. Khan.  
 
Date of Hearing:    04.01.2023 . 
 
ORDER  
1. Notices were issued to the respondents . The learned Mr. Ahmed Ali 
states that he represents respondents No. 1 to 4 and 6 and that he has filed 
Civil Misc. Application No. 9098 of 2022, through which he has filed a 
document which , according to him, shows that the petition has been 
belatedly filed. However, neither  said application nor affidavit in  support 
thereof mentions what the document is, let alone explains it.  The learned 
counsel stat es that documents are filed with a concise statement s or an 
application and as per prevailing practice this is done without any 
explanation.  
 
2. If there is a practice  of merely filing documents through a concise 
statement or an application  without any explanation, as contended  by the 
learned counsel,  it does not accord with the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 
(‘the Rules ’) nor with common sense . An application or con cise statement 
must mention the purpose of its filing. Rule 1 of Order XVIII of the Rules 
stipulates that ‘ concise statements of the facts of the case and the arguments 
upon which they propose to rely ’ are to be mentioned therein. And, Order Civil Petition No. 2633 of 20 19 
  
 2
XVIII is also applicable to supplemental proceedings , which would include 
applications.  Simply filing a document without explaining what it is and /or 
what is its effect would not put the other side on notice , as to purpose of its 
filing.  Documents which are filed either  through an application or a concise 
statement (save exhibits or pleadings) should be explained in the 
application /concise statement or in the affidavit in support thereof.  
 
3. The learned Additional Advocate -General, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
states that he was  directed to file a report which has been done through 
Civil Misc. Application No. 482 of 2022.  
 
4. The learned counsel for the petitioners states that he does not have a 
copy of CMA No. 9098 of 2022 and requests for adjournment to obtain a 
copy thereof.  
 
5. The learned counsel for the private respondents states that some of 
the respondents have died and he will inform the learned counsel for the 
petitioners , who shall bring their legal heirs on record.  
 
6. Copy of this order be sent to the Registrar who should inform the 
officers of this Court receiving  applications and concise statements that the 
same should be filed in accordance with the Rules, and as elaborated above 
in paragraph 2. This order has been approved for reporting  to bring 
paragraph 2 to the attention of litigants, learned Advocates of the Supreme 
Court and learned Advocates -on-Record.  
 
           Judge 
 
  Judge 
 
Islamabad : 
04.01.2023  
 
Approved for Reporting  
(M. Tauseef)   