JUDGMENT  
  Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi , J. I have had the privilege of 
perusing the majority judgment proffered by Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa , 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan . I generally concur with the same to the 
extent of affirming the constitutionality of the Supreme Court (Practice and 
Procedure) Act, 2023 (“ the impugned Act ”); however, my  disagreement , 
with the utmost respect,  pertains solely to the retrospective right of appeal 
as stipulated in section 5(2) of the impugned Act. This dissent is grounded 
in a conscientious examination of the potential consequences that such a 
retrospective operation may yield, both legally and practically . Being so , I 
am persuaded  to delineate and elucidate the rationale supporting my 
divergence from the majority opinion on this particular aspect.  For 
convenience's sake, the short order dated 11.10.2023 is reproduced below: 
-- 
“ORDER OF THE COURT  
 For reasons to be recorded later these petitions are 
decided as under:  
1. Subject to paras 2 and 3 below, by a majority of 10 to 5 
(Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, Justice Munib Akhtar, Justice Sayyed 
Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, Justice Ayesha A. Malik and Justice 
Shahid Waheed dissenting) the Supreme Court (Practice and 
Procedure) Act, 2023 (‘the Act’) is sustained as being in 
accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (‘the Constitution’) and to this extent the petitions are 
dismissed.  
2.  By a majority of 9 to 6 (Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan, Justice 
Munib Akhtar, Justice Yahya Afridi, Justice Sayyed Mazahar 
Ali Akbar Naqvi, Justice Ayesha A. Malik and Justice Shahid 
Waheed dissenting) sub -section (1) of section 5 of the Act 
(granting a right o f appeal prospectively) is declared to be in 
accordance with the Constitution and to this extent the petitions 
are dismissed.  
3.  By a majority of 8 to 7 (Chief Justice Qazi Faez Isa, 
Justice Sardar Tariq Masood, Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, 
Justice Ami n-ud-Din Khan, Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail, 
Justice Athar Minallah and Justice Musarrat Hilali dissenting) 
sub-section (2) of section 5 of the Act (granting a right of appeal 
retrospectively) is declared to be ultra vires the Constitution and 
to this ext ent the petitions are allowed.”  
 
2.  Before  the impugned Act, there was no right of appeal against 
the order passed by this Court in the exercise of the original jurisdiction 
under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution . But, the aggrieved 
person co uld have sought his remedy by invoking the review jurisdiction 
of this Court under Article 188 of the Constitution. The study of the Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
2 
 Constitutional history of Pakistan reveals that the power of Supreme  
Court to review any of its judgments or orders as given under Article 188 
of the Constitution is not new as the same power was granted to the 
Supreme Court under Article 161 of the Constitution  1956 and Article 62 
of the Constitution 1962. Initially, the Supreme  Court ’s power of review  
was regulated by the Federal Court Rules, 1950. However, after the 
promulgation of the Constitution, 1956 the Supreme Court, in the exercise 
of its rule -making power, mad e the Supreme Court Rules, 1956  and under 
its sub -rule 2 of r ule 1, the then existing Rules 1950 were revoked. The 
Order XXVI (R 1 to 7) of the Rules 1956 regulated the Supreme Court’s 
power of review. The Rues 1956 remained in force till the making of the 
Supreme Court Rules, 1980 ( “Rules 1980” ) by the Supreme Cour t, in the 
exercise of the power conferred upon it under Article 191 of the 
Const itution , 1973. Order XXVI (Rule 1 -9) of the Rules 1980 regulates  the 
Supreme Court’s power to review any of its judgments or orders . Being so, 
the aggrieved persons, from the v ery beginning, used to seek their remedy 
by resorting to the review jurisdiction of this Court, the only remedy 
available against the order passed by this Court in its original jurisdiction 
under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution.   
3.  It woul d not be out of place to mention here that the power of 
review under Article 188 of the Constitution is not wide enough rather 
definite and limited in nature and confined to the basic aspect of the case 
referred to at the review stage which was considered in judgment but if the 
grounds taken in support of the review petition were considered in the 
judgment and decided on merits, the same would not be available for 
review in the form of re -examination of the case on merits. Reference may 
be made to the cases of Ghulam Murtaza Versus Abdul Salam Shah  (2010 
SCMR 1883 ); Syed Wajihul Hassan Zaidi versus Government of the Punjab 
and others  (PLD 2004 Supreme Court 801 ); Pakistan International 
Airlines Karachi versus Inayat Rasool  (2004 SCMR 1737 ); Nook Hassan 
Awan versus Muhammad Ashraf  (2001 SCMR 367 ); Kalsoom Malik and 
others versus Assistant Commissioner and others  (1996 SCMR 
710) and Abdul Majeed and another versus Chief Settlement Commissioner 
and others  (1980 SCMR 504 ).  
4.  On the other hand, an appeal allows for a comprehensive  
re-examination of a case, unlike a review that  focuses on specific aspects 
of the original decision. More appropriately, the right of appeal and review 
are not analogous as an appeal is, the review is not the continuation of the Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
3 
 same proceedings. Thus, the legislature, i n light of the above holistic 
distinctions, has rightfully provided the right of appea l from an order of a 
bench of this Court, that has exercised jurisdiction under clause 3 of 
Article 184 of the Constitution  to a larger bench. Moreover, the right of 
appeal has been extended to the aggrieved persons against whom an order 
under the said Art icle of the Constitution has been made even before  the 
commencement of the impugned Act. The provisions of section 5 are 
reproduced hereunder for ease of reference:  
“5. Appeal . – 
 
(1)  An appeal shall lie within thirty days from an order of a 
bench of the Supreme Court who exercised jurisdiction under 
clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution to a larger bench of 
the Supreme Court and such appeal shall, for hearing, be fixed 
within a period not exceeding fourteen days.  
 
(2)  The right of appeal under su b-section (1) shall also be 
available to an aggrieved person against whom an order has 
been made under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution , 
prior to the commencement of this Act:  
 Provided that the appeal under this sub -section shall be 
filed wi thin thirty days of the commencement of this Act .”       
 
5.  The provision of the right of appeal to an aggrieved person 
against whom an order has been made under Clause (3) of Article 184 of 
the Constitution is one of the objects of the enactment of the impugned 
Act as  set out in the preamble thereof, which provides that “ [A]rticle l0A, 
of the Constitution , mandated right to fair trial and due process, Article 4 of 
the Constitution guarantees treatment in accordance with law, Article 25 of 
the Constitution prohibits discriminatory treatment and right of appeal is a 
universal fundamental principle of jurispru dence and Islam guarantees right 
of appeal, therefore, pursuant of Article 175 (2) read with Article 191 of the 
Constitution this law is being enacted .” By providing the right of appeal, 
the legislature has achieved its objective.  The conferment  of the rig ht of 
appeal is also in conformity with the injunctions of Islam as laid down in 
the Quran and the Sunnah  as held by this Court in the cases of Federation 
of Pakistan v. Public at Large  (PLD 1988 Supreme Court 202 ) and 
Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. The General Public  (PLD 
1989 Supreme Court 6 ). In these cases, the Shariat Appellate Bench of 
this Court declared that under the Islamic dispensation of justice , at least 
one right of appeal must be provided to an aggrieved person and that th e 
law barring such right to an aggrieved person is repugnant to the 
injunctions of Islam.  Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
4 
 6.  The issue regarding the constitutionality of the impugned Act 
as well as the competence of the legislature to enact the impugned Act and 
to provide a statutory right of appeal thereunder against the exercise of 
original constitutional jurisdiction by this Court under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution has exhaustively and comprehensively been deliberated in 
the majority judgment with sound reasoning, and I concur  with the 
arguments built therein. And, I further add that this legislative framework 
would uphold the principles of fairness, transparency, and justice within 
our legal system. Now , the independent judges, greater in numbers and 
uninvolved in the original  case, have the opportunity to rehear and decide 
the matter. This not only reaffirms the core values of impartiality but also 
strengthens the integrity of the legal system by allowing for a fresh 
perspective when justice may not have been adequately served  in the 
original proceedings.  
7.  There is no denial to the fact that e very sovereign legislature 
possesses the right to make retrospective legislation. The power to make 
laws includes the power to give it retrospective effect. However, normally, 
the legislation, which  is not of a purely procedural nature, will not be given 
retrospective effect so as to take away vested rights  of the parties . On a 
plain reading of the language of the afore -quoted provision, particularly, 
sub-section (2) of section 5 of the impugned Act, it becomes abundantly 
clear that the legislature’s intent is to provide the remedy of appeal against 
orders passed by this Court, even predating the enactment or 
commencement of the impugned Act. It is a settled principle of law that  
the righ t of appeal is a substantive right; hence, the retrospective 
expansion thereof raises significant apprehensions, as it threatens to 
disrupt the finality and certainty that has historically been attributed to 
judicial pronouncements. Such disruptions may ha ve deleterious 
ramifications, not only in terms of the orderly administration of justice but 
also with respect to the stability and predictability of legal decisions. For 
these  reason s, my disagreement with the majority and reservation to the 
extent of the  provisi on of the right of appeal retrospectively present  a 
palpable concern, as it would offend the fundamental rights of the parties 
because it has the potential to open a veritable floodgate of claims and 
appeals pertaining to past transactions and concluded legal matters.  
8.  At the same time, I cannot lo ose sight of the fact that the 
legislature has the power to impair and take away vested rights but within 
the limits set by Articles 4 , 8, 9, 10 and 10 -A in conjunction with Article s Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
5 
 24 and 25 of the Constitution. The limitation flows from the doctrine that 
the action of the State must be fair and reasonable. Thus, the question, as 
to the val idity of the retrospective law, is a matter to be judged on a 
consideration of the facts, the period of time, over which the retrospective 
law operates, the impact of the law on the vested rights, the public interest, 
the nature of the right, which is the subject matter of the law and the 
terms of the law. Even otherwise, the validity of a legislative enactment, 
whether with retrospective effect or otherwise, shall always be subject to 
judicial review on the well -recognized principles of ultra vires , non -
conformity with the Constitution or violation of the Fundamental Rights, 
or on any other available ground  as observed  by this Court in the case of 
Sindh High Court Bar Association through its Secretary and another versus 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice, 
Islamabad , and others  (PLD 2009 Supreme Court 879 ).  
9.  The notion of granting a right of appeal against earlier decided 
cases is not to be taken lightly, as it carries profound implications that 
extend far beyond t he immediate legal proceedings. We must be acutely 
aware that such a provision, while intended to ensure justice and fairness, 
can potentially cast a shadow of prejudice over past and closed 
transactions, as well as the rights and interests that have been secured 
under the judgments of this Court.  The legal system, as it stands, is built 
on a foundational principle of ‘finality ’. When the Court renders a decision, 
it offers parties involved a sense of closure and certainty, allowing them to 
plan their future actions and make informed decisions based on the 
judgment's legal precedent. This foundation of predictability is vital not 
only for the parties but also for the broader stability of our legal framework.  
It is, therefore, imperative that we proceed  cautiously when considering 
appeals against earlier decisions. We must recognize the delicate balance 
that exists between the pursuit of justice and the preservation of past 
transactions and previously accrued rights. Granting the right of appeals 
retrospe ctively must be done judiciously and only when compelling 
circumstances require it, as it threatens to disrupt the settled expectations 
of those who have acted in good faith based on the Court's prior rulings.  
10.  The present constitution came into force on 14.08.1973 ( see 
Article 266). Over the span of nearly five decades, so many cases have been 
adjudicated by this Court in the exercise of its power under clause 3 of 
Article 184 of the Constitution.  It is a common practice that the aggrieved 
person would  not be satisfied unless he  exhausts  all the remedies available Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
6 
 to him under the existing law. Even otherwise, the judgment or order 
passed under clause 3 of Article 184 of the Constitution, whether a review 
petition has been filed against it or if a perio d of thirty days has elapsed 
after the pronouncement thereof without a review filed by either party, 
could not be reopened and would be deemed to be a past and closed 
transaction. For this  reason , introducing a retrospective right of appeal 
now raises a profound concern. This could further compromise the 
principle of res judicata  and jeopardize the stability and predictability of 
the legal system . It would open a floodgate of litigatio n and potent ially 
overburden this  Court with the daunting task of reevaluating numerous 
pre-settled matters  or rights which had accrued on account of 
determination validly made under the then-existing  law. 
11.  A somewhat similar matter  came for consideration before this 
Court in the case of the Chief Land Commissioner, Sind, and others versus 
Ghulam Hyder Shah and others  (1988 SCMR 715 ), wherein , the validity 
of the Land Reforms Regulation (Sind Amendment) Ordinance, 1972, 
which was expressly made retrospective  and had the effect of nullifying 
the alienations of land previously held valid under the provisions of the 
un-amended Regulation, was challenged . A three -member bench of this 
Court unanimously made the following important obser vations:  
“11. Now on a plain reading of the language of the Amending 
Ordinance there is no ambiguity that the same was given effect 
retrospectively and by the mandate of the law the amendments 
were to be deemed to have taken effect on 11th March, 1972. 
However, doubt with regard to the retrospectively in this case 
has arisen, on account of the fact and in respect of the orders 
earlier passed by the Land Commission in exercise of powers 
vesting in it under the existing law whereby the alienations 
declared by  the two landholders were affirmed as valid 
transactions. As pointed out by the High Court the 
legislature has merely declared the amendments effected 
in the main Regulation to have taken place 
retrospectively and left the matter at that. No express 
provis ion was made in the amending statute to the effect 
that the new dispensation, totally prohibiting the 
recognition of any alienations in favour of non -heirs, will 
also affect and undo the orders passed under the 
existing law by the Land Commission prior to the date of 
the passing of the amending Ordinance.  In order to resolve 
this doubt the matter naturally falls within the domain of 
interpretation by the Court to determine whether the law as 
amended will also be applicable to past and closed 
transactions. T o put it differently the question is whether in this 
sense the amending Ordinance contains an express provision 
or this result is contemplated by the language of the amending 
Ordinance by necessary implication.  In this behalf the High 
Court proceeded on a correct principle of interpretation Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
7 
 that "no rule of construction is more firmly established 
than this, that retrospective operation is not to be given 
to a statute so as to impair an existing right or 
obligation" . The main and primary rule is that every s tatute is 
deemed to be prospective, unless by express provision or 
necessary intendment it is to have retrospective effect. Also the 
rule that no statute shall be construed so as to have 
retrospective operation affecting vested rights to a 
greater extent t han its language renders necessary is 
firmly established .” 
Emphasis Supplied.  
 Further observed:  
“12…Therefore, if the power vesting in the Commission, 
untrammeled by the prohibition, subsequently incorporated in 
the law, was once asserted and exercised, the result of such 
exercise of power will be a transaction past and closed qua the 
amending Ordina nce. It is in this context that the retrospectivity 
of the amending statute in this case has to be determined. 
Looking at the matter in this way we are in agreement 
with the conclusion arrived at by the Division Bench that 
there is no express or implied in tendment in the 
provisions that such past and closed transactions would 
be affected by the amendment. Under the law as it stood 
on the date when the earlier orders were passed by the 
Commission the same were perfectly legal and capable of 
creating rights i n favour of the donees of the gifts 
scrutinized under the provisions of the said law. 
Therefore, although the amending Ordinance is retrospective in 
the sense that it applies to alienations which had taken place 
before 11th March, 1972, the restrictions on  the power of 
the Commission stipulated by the amending law cannot 
be retrospectively applied to transaction duly 
scrutinized and affirmed before the date of the amending 
Ordinance. This is consistent with the rule of 
presumption that the legislature does not intend what is 
unjust or to reopen transactions which have already 
resulted in creating title to property to be re -opened or 
exposed to jeopardy .” 
Emphasis Supplied.  
 The Court finally held:  
“Therefore, the earlier orders by the Commission in favour 
of the non -heir transferees, having been lawfully passed 
could not be subjected to review by applying the 
dispensation created by the amending Ordinance to 
those orders, which amounts to unauthorisedly giving 
retrospective operation , to the amending law not permitted 
by the statute itself.”  
Emphasis Supplied.  
12.  Recently, in Badshah Gul Wazir versus Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa through Chief Secretary and others  (2015 SCMR 43 ), a 
similar situation again came for consideration before this Court. In this 
case, the appellant, a retired grade 21 officer, was appointed as the Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
8 
 Provincial Ombudsman, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, under section 3 of the 
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Ombudsman Act, 2010, for a period of four years, 
with effect from the date of his taking the oath of t he office of Provincial 
Ombudsman. Section 4(1) of the Act 2010 provides the tenure of the 
Provincial Ombudsman in the terms, " The Provincial Ombudsman shall 
hold office for a period of four years and shall not be eligible for any 
extension in his tenure o r for re -appointment as Provincial Ombudsman 
under any circumstances ." Later, section 4(1) of the Act 2010 was 
amended, which now provides, " The Provincial Ombudsman shall hold 
office for a period of four years or until the age of sixty -two years , 
whichever is earlier, and shall not be eligible for any extension in his tenure 
or re -appointment as Provincial Ombudsman under any circumstance ." 
Since the appellant had reached the age of 62 years, the Government of 
KPK de -notified the appellant's appoin tment as Provincial Ombudsman in 
the light of the above amendment. Being dissatisfied, the appellant 
impugned the notifications of the KPK government before the concerned 
High Court but remained unsuccessful; subsequently, he approached this 
Court. The cas e of the appellant was that he was appointed for a period of 
four years, and before the expiration of that period, the Government 
purported to "de -notify" him. Furthermore, the amendment made in 
Section 4 did not automatically cause the appellant to cease holding the 
said office. There was nothing in the Amendment Act to suggest that the 
amendment made in section 4 was retrospective in operation and/or 
would also apply to the appellant. This Court allowed the appeal while 
holding that the appellant would co ntinue to hold the office of the 
Provincial Ombudsman for a period of four years, which shall commence 
from the date he took the oath of office and made the following important 
observation:  
“11.       That the Act was enacted, "to provide for the 
establish ment of the office of the Provincial Ombudsman for 
protection of the rights of the people, ensuring adherence to the 
rule of law, redressing and rectifying any injustice done to a 
person through maladministration suppress corrupt practices 
and to ensure go od governance" (the first preamble of the Act). 
The Provincial Ombudsman has been empowered to investigate 
maladministration (section 9), therefore, to ensure that the 
watchdog status of the Ombudsman is not compromised and 
he does not succumb to pressure the legislature in its wisdom 
provided statutory protection to the person holding the office of 
Provincial Ombudsman and envisaged his/her removal only if 
he/she was guilty of misconduct or was physically or mentally 
incapacitated to perform his/her duties  as provided in sub -
section (2) of section 6 and its proviso. The appellant was 
appointed as the Provincial Ombudsman for a period of four Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
9 
 years and no step for removal of the appellant was taken 
pursuant to subsection (2) of section 6, therefore, he must be 
allowed to continue to hold the office till the expiry of such term. 
The amendment made to section 4 does not contain any 
element whereby the appointment of the appellant as a 
Provincial Ombudsman was revoked, repealed, 
withdrawn or cancelled ; the silen ce of the legislature in 
this regard is significant.  Therefore, in the absence of 
legislation, the tenure of the appellant cannot be curtailed in the 
exercise of administrative powers, but, unfortunately, the same 
was purported to be done by the first impu gned Notification.  
The Act grants security of tenure to the office of the 
Ombudsman and it cannot be undone by the Government as 
such power the legislature in its wisdom has not conferred upon 
the Government. Consequently, the first and second impugned 
Notifications are declared to be in contravention of the Act, 
illegal, without jurisdiction and of no legal effect . The appellant 
will continue to hold the office of the Provincial Ombudsman for 
a period of four years which shall commence from the date he 
took the oath of office of the Provincial Ombudsman Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa pursuant to notification dated 29th December, 
2010.  Resultantly, the purported appointment of respondent 
No. 4 as Provincial Ombudsman, at a time when the appellant 
was holding such office , is also declared to be illegal, without 
jurisdiction and of no legal effect.”  
Emphasis Supplied.  
13.  Similarly, the legislature in the impugned Act has merely  
declared that the right of appeal shall be available to an aggrieved person 
against whom an order has been made under clause (3) of Article 184 of 
the Constitution, prior to the commencement of this Act and has 
concluded the matter there.  No express provision was made i n the 
impugned Act to the effect that the new dispensation providing a right of 
appeal will also affect and reopen cases adjudicated by this Court under 
the existing law prior to the date of the passing of the impugned Act. To 
resolve this uncertainty, the  matter inherently falls within the purview of 
judicial interpretation, necessitating a determination by this Court as to 
whether the impugned Act is also applicable to the cases that have long 
been concluded and regarded as past and definitively closed tr ansactions.  
As certain valuable rights, e.g., right to property had accrued in favor of a 
party under the said past and closed transactions and are protected and 
guaranteed under Article 24 of the Constitution. The primary  rule of 
interpretation is that every statute is deemed prospective  unless by 
express provision or necessary intendment , it is to have a retrospective 
effect. At the same time, it is also a settled principle of interpretation that 
no statute shall be construed to have retrospecti ve operation affecting 
vested rights to a greater extent than its language renders necessary  as 
has observed  by this Court in Ghulam Hyder Shah’s supra .  Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
10 
 14.  By applying the afore -noted settled principles  of law , it has 
been found that t he provision of section 5(2) of the impugned Act 
unequivocally grants a right of retrospective appeal, a remedy that, by its 
very nature, has the potential to revisit and reopen all past and closed 
transactions. This aspect of the matter carries significant consequences, 
particularly the looming specter of injustice and prejudice that could be 
inflicted upon the parties in whose favo ur certain personal rights and 
liabilities have already rightfully been accrued and secured under the 
judgments or orders of this Court. The p rovision of the right of appeal 
retrospectively by itself is an infringement of fundamental rights which 
provide that every citizen shall be entitled to equal  protection of law and 
will not be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law as 
provided under Article 9 read with Article 25 of the Constitution. The 
potential for adverse consequences to the parties affected by this 
retrospective provi sion must be carefully weighed. It is worth mentioning 
here that it is  incumbent upon the legislature t o balance the scales of 
justice in its pursuit of providing the right of appeal while simultaneously 
safeguarding the fundamental right  i.e. right  to property, office , etc., and 
the principles of legal finality. I have no doubt in my mind that b alancing 
these competing rights/ interests is an inherent duty of this Court as well, 
as it strives to maintain the delicate equilibrium between justice and the 
safeguarding of long -established rights. Being so, this Court on many 
occasions has authoritatively held th at a transaction that has  been 
completed and is thus "past and closed" beyond the possibility of being 
affected by any subsequent law. There is a long line of authorities in 
support of this proposition of law. It is not necessary to refer to all these 
decisions, for I think it would be sufficient to qu ote some passages from 
some leading judgments of this Court:  
I) In P. G. Bhandari versus the Rehabilitation Authority, Lahore 
and 2 Others  (PLD 1961 Supreme Court 89 ), it was held that:  
 The argument is good so far as it goes, but it fails to 
meet the majo r argument of Mr. Mahmud Ali, namely, 
that with reference to the terms of West Punjab Act VII 
of 1948, construed with full regard to all the purposes 
and intentions underlying that statute, the restoration 
of the 10th May 1948, to Mr. Bhandari represented,  a 
transaction which had been completed and was thus 
"past and closed" beyond the possibility of being 
affected by any subsequent law . 
Emphasis Supplied.  Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
11 
 II) In Nagina Silk Mill, Lyallpur versus the Income -Tax Officer, 
A-Ward Lyallpur, etc.  (PLD 1963 Supreme Court 322 ), it was 
held that:  
 The Courts must lean against giving a statute 
retrospective operation on the presumption that the 
Legislature does not intend what is unjust. It is 
chiefly where the enactment would prejudi cially 
affect vested rights , or the legality of past 
transactions, or impair existing contracts, that the 
rule in question prevails . Reference may be made in 
this connection to page 206 of Maxwell on the 
Interpretation of Statutes, Eleventh Edition. Even if two 
interpretations are e qually possible, the one that saves 
vested rights would be adopted in the interest of justice, 
specially where we are dealing with a taxing statute. The 
appellant herein had already acquired the vested right 
of escaping assessment, by lapse of time, when t he 
1960, Ordinance was enforced. In all pro bability, the 
Legislature never intended that the period of limitation 
prescribed in the Act should become variable with the 
changes in the "financial year" or "year" inserted in the 
Act for certain other purpose s, namely, to accord with 
the new accounting year adopted by Government.  
Emphasis Supplied .  
III)  In Ahmad Ali Khan versus Muhammad Raza Khan and Others  
(1977 SCMR 12 ), this Court held as follow:  
 it seems to us that the High Court was right in the view 
it took, as has been pointed by this Court in the case of 
P. G. Bhandari v. The Rehabi litation Authority, Lahore 
(PLD 1961 SC89). A subsequent change in the law 
cannot affect past and closed transactions.  Even if 
the rules prescribed in 46 -A of the Rehabi litation and 
Settlement Scheme applied to the case of a deceased 
refugee owner (Sarfraz Khan could not be treated as a 
deceased right -holder), the petitioner could not have 
been allowed to re -agitate this matter after having 
earlier abandoned his appeal ag ainst mutation No. 25. 
After that abandonment in 1957, he could not maintain 
another appeal against mutation No. 25 in 1962 
because of the change in the law in 1960. The 
Rehabilitation Authorities were, therefore, clearly wrong 
in deciding his second appea l against mutation No. 25 
on the basis of the change in the law.  
Emphasis Supplied.  
IV) In Controller General of Accounts, Government of Pakistan, 
Islamabad and others versus Abdul Waheed and others  (2023 
SCMR 111 ), it was held that:  
 “7. According to Bennion on Statutory Interpretation 
(Seventh Edition), page 181 with regard to the 
retrospectivity effect of law, it was said that "principle is 
sometimes expressed in the maxim lex prospicit non 
respicit (law looks forward not back). As Willes J said in 
Phillips v Eyre retrospective legislation is 'contrary to 
the general principle that legislation by which the 
conduct of mankind is to be regulated ought, when Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
12 
 introduced for the first time, to deal with future acts, 
and ought not to change the character of  past 
transactions carried on upon the faith of the then 
existing law." Whereas in Crawford's Statutory 
Construction, Chapter XXV, germane to Prospective 
and Retrospective Operation, at pages 562 to 566 and 
622, the gist of the discussion is that retroacti ve 
legislation is looked upon with disfavor, as a general 
rule, and properly so because of its tendency to be 
unjust and oppressive. There is a presumption that 
the legislature intended its enactments to have this 
effect to be effective only in futuro. Thi s is true 
because of the basic presumption that the 
legislature does not intend to enact legislation 
which operates oppressively and unreasonably. If 
perchance any reasonable doubt exists, it should be 
resolved in favour of prospective operation. In other 
words, before a law will be construed as retrospective, 
its language must imperatively and clearly require such 
construction. Amendatory statutes are subject to the 
general principles discussed elsewhere herein relative 
to retroactive operation. Like origi nal statutes, they will 
not be given retroactive construction, unless the 
language clearly makes such construction necessary. In 
the case of People v. Dilliard (298 N.Y.S. 296, 302, 252 
Ap. Div. 125) Court held that " It is chiefly where the 
enactment would  prejudicially affect vested rights, 
or the legal character of past transactions that the 
rule in question applies. Every statute, it has been 
said, which takes away or impairs vested rights 
acquired under existing laws, or creates a new 
obligation, or imp oses a new duty, or attaches a new 
disability in respect of transactions or 
considerations already past, must be presumed, out 
of respect to the Legislature, to be intended not to 
have a retrospective operation ." 
Emphasis Supplied.   
15.  At the cost of repetition, it is stated that the legislature is 
undoubtedly competent to legislate with retrospective effect to take away 
or impair any vested right acquired under existing laws . However,  every 
law enacted may not necessarily be tenable on the touchstone of the 
Constitution. It is the sole jurisdiction of this Court, under the law and the 
constitution to look into the fairness and constitutionality of an enactment 
and even declare it non-est, if it is found to be in conflict with the provisions 
of the Cons titution. Therefore, legislative competence alone is insufficient 
to render a law valid; it must also withstand the test of constitutionality to 
be enforceable. Failure to meet this standard renders the law invalid and 
unenforceable. Normally the courts ma ke utmost efforts to save a piece of 
legislation from becoming invalid. However,  in certain cases, the courts 
also apply, inter alia , the doctrine of severance to remove a piece of 
legislation that distorts the scheme of a parent law or deviates from the  Cons t.P.06 of 2023  
13 
 provisions of the Constitution. Reference here may be made to the cases 
of Shahid Pervaiz versus Ejaz Ahmad and others  (2017 SCMR 206 ) and 
Younas Abbas and others versus Additional Sessions Judge, Chakwal and 
others (PLD 2016 Supreme Court 581 ). 
16.  Since the laws are enacted  under a written Constitution and 
have to conform to the does and don'ts of the Constitution, neither 
prospective nor retrospective laws can be made to contravene the said 
prescribed limitations , particularly , the fundamental rights , independence 
of judiciary or its separation from the executive.  An examination and 
empirical verification of the impugned law must demonstrate that it do not 
infringe upon any of the fundamental rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution. On the contrary, it not only facilitates their enforcement but 
also safeguards against their infringement by providing expeditious and 
inexpensive justice to the people at their doorstep. It does not remotely 
impinge upon the independence of the judiciary, nor does it militate 
against the concept of its separation from the executive. To my 
understanding, the law must concerned with today's rights and not 
yesterday's. A legislature cannot legislate today concerning  a situation that 
occurred  30 years ago and ignore the march of events and the 
constitutional rights accrued in the course of that period . That would be 
most arbitrary, unreasonable , and a negation of history.  Further, it is 
against the fundamental right of fair trial as enshrined in Article 10 -A of 
the Constitution. Today's equals cannot be made unequal by saying that 
they were unequal 30 years ago and we will restore that position by making 
a law today and making it retrospective. Constitutional rights, 
constitutional obligations , and constitutional consequences cannot be 
tampered with that way.  
17.  In view of the foregoing , it is declared that the provisions of 
subsection 2 of section 5 of the impugned Act providing the right of appeal 
to an aggrieved person against whom an order h as been made under 
clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution, prior to the commencement of 
impugned Act are ultra vires  under Article 8 of the Constitution as they 
offend  Articles 9, 10, 10-A, 24 & 25  thereof and are arbitrary and 
unreasonable . Therefore, they shall be deemed non-est from the day of 
their promulgation.  
18.  To this extent, the petitions are allowed, accordingly.  
 
Judge  