IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal Petition No. 370 of 2019  
(Against judgment dated 11.03.2019 of the 
Lahore High Court  Multan Bench  passed in  
Crl. Appeal No. 21/2018 ) 
 
 
Mushtaq Ahmad  
   …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State  & another  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Zulfiqar Khalid Maluka , ASC  
    
For the State  Mr. Muhammad Jaffar,   
 Additional Prosecutor General, 
Punjab.  
    
Date of hearing:  09.1.20 20. 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
            Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J.  Mushtaq Ahmed , 
petitioner herein,  surprised  on a tip off  by a police contingent ,  
within the remit of Police Station Mitroo District Vehari  was 
found in possession of 1460 grams of Charas  along with  weighing 
apparatus with some amount ; indicted before  a learned 
Additional  Sessions Judge  at Mailsi, he was  returned a guilty 
verdict;  convicted  under Section 9(c) of the Control of Narcotic 
Substances Act, 1997 , he was  sentenced to four years R.I. with 
fine, under -trial period inclusive , vide judgment dated 
22.12.2017 , upheld by a learned Division Bench of Lahore High 
Court at Multan vide impugned judgment dated 11.03.2018, 
vires whereof are being assailed on a variety of grounds,  allegedly  
a flawed forensic  report , being most prominent. The learned Law 
Officer has, c ontrarily, defended the impugned judgment .  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  Criminal Petition No. 370 of 201 9 
 2
3.  Prosecution  case is hinged upon the statements of 
Aamir Masood, TSI (PW -2) and Abid Hussain, 336 -C (PW -3); 
being officials of the Republic, they do not seem  to have an axe to 
grind  against the petitioner , intercepted  at a public place  during 
routine search. Contraband, considerable in quantity, cannot be 
possibly foisted to fabricate  a fake charge , that too, without any 
apparent reason ; while furnishing evidence, both the witnesses 
remained throughout consistent and confidence inspiring and as 
such can be relied upon without a demur . Argument that forensic 
report sans ‘ protocol ’ as mandatorily required in the case of State 
Vs. Imam Bukhsh (2018 SCMR 2039 ) is beside the point  and so 
is reference to Rule  6 of the Control of Narcotic Substance (Govt. 
Analysis) Rule s, 2001 , for the convenience of reference 
reproduced below: - 
 
“Report of result of test or analysis .—After 
test or analysis the result there of together 
with full protocols of the test applied, shall be 
signed in quadruplicate and supplied 
forthwith to the sender as specified in  
Form -II.” 
 
The above requires  reference to the  test applied for analysis, 
specifically  mentioned in Form -II thereof . We have perused the 
forensic report, relied upon by the prosecution , which 
substantially meets the legal requirements, in the following 
terms: - 
“Test Performed on Recei ved Item (s) of Ev idence  
 
1. Analytical Balance was used for weighing.  
2. Chemical Spot Tests were used for 
Presumptive Testing.  
3. Gas Chromatography -Mass Spectrometry 
was used for confirmation.  
 
  Results and Conclusions  
   
Item # 01   72.87 gram(s) of blackish brown 
resinous material in sealed parcel contains 
Charas. ” 
 
Details mentioned in the forensic report regarding procedure/  
tests applied  do not fall short of  ‘protocol’   as insisted by this Criminal Petition No. 370 of 201 9 
 3
Court in the supra case . According to the Oxford English 
Dictionary , 6th Edition , the expression ‘ protocol’ in relation to a 
forensic test means :-  
“A formal or official statement of a 
transaction or proceeding; spec. a record of 
(esp. scient ific) experimental observations”.    
  
Forensic report (Ex.PE) realistically qualifies to meet the required 
standards. Even otherwise, the Rule ibid , being directory in 
nature , does not preclude an accused to summon  the Expert so 
as to solicit specific details , if any,  required  by him  to vindicate 
his position . Onus c ast upon the prosecution  to drive home a 
criminal charge  has to be weighed in the scales of rationality ; it 
cannot be  required to satisfy  adversarial positions  farfetched and 
artificial  in nature , rooted into bald denials , clamoured  loudly . 
Findings concurrently arrived  by the Courts below , being well 
within the remit of law, do not call for interference . Petition fails. 
Leave declined.  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad   
9th January , 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 