SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:   
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa 
Mr. Justice Amin-ud-Din Khan 
Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed  
 
 
SUO MOTO CASE  NO.4 OF 20 22 
(Regarding grant of Additional 20 marks to Hafiz -e-Quran while 
admission in MBBS/BDS Degree under Regulation 9(9) of the MBBS and 
BDS (Admissions, House Job and Internship) Regulations, 2018 ) 
 
 
In Attendance :  
 
For PMDC   : Mr. Afnan Karim  Kundi , ASC 
 
On Court Notice  : Mr. Shehzad Atta Elahi,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  with  
Raja Muhammad Shafqat Abbasi, DAG  
 
Malik Naeem Iqbal, ASC  
(Amicus Curiae)  
   
Date of Hearing  : 15.03.2023 
 
ORDER  
 
Shahid Waheed , J. I have read the order ( “the order ”) proposed in 
this case. I regret greatly that I find myself in disagreement with my 
learned brethren .   
 
2.  Before I enter upon to express my opinion, it would be 
appropriate to mention the facts that led to the constitution of this 
Bench. On 10th of January 2022, Civil Petition No.397 -K of 2002 , 
came up for hearing before a Division Bench comprising Hon’ble  
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa and Hon’ble Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi and 
was dismissed with the following directions:   
“…..2.  However, this petitio n has brought to 
the fore regulation 9(9) of the Regulations 
and the awarding of twenty additional 
marks to those candidates who had 
memorized the Holy Qur’an. Whether the 
memorization of the Holy Qur’an is a 
relevant criteria for the determination of the 
candidates for an MBBS or BDS degree 
needs consideration. It also needs to be 
considered whether regulation 9(9) of the 
Regulations conforms with Article 25 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan. Therefore, while dismissing this 
petition we retain its paper -book to Suo Moto Case No.4 of 202 2 
 2
consider this aspect of the case. Notice be 
issued to the Pakistan Medical and Dental 
Council, which we are informed is now the 
Pakistan Medical Council, (‘ the Council ’) 
and the Council is directed to submit a 
concise statement which should address 
the aforesaid queries and to explain how 
the memorization of the Holy Qur’an makes 
a candidates more eligible for an MBBS or 
BDS degree. The Council should also file 
the decision which lead to the incorporation 
of regulation 9(9) in th e Regulations and 
the reasons, if any, for such incorporation. 
Notice be also issued to the Attorney -
General for Pakistan in terms of Order 
XXVII -A of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908”.  
 
3.  In compliance with the above directions, the office 
issued notices to the concerned persons for submission of a concise 
statement. The notices were not responded to  and this inaction was 
brought to the notice of the Hon’ble Judges of the Divisi on Bench by 
a note placed before them in their chambers, whereon the of fice was 
directed in the following terms:  
“… Since the concerned, despite four 
reminders, have adamantly refused to 
respond, it may be appropriate to fix this 
matter in court to the extent of the points 
noted in paragraph 2 of the order dated 
10th January 2022”.   
 
4.  Under the above, the office solicited the order of the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice as to whether “(a) a Civil Misc. Application may be 
registered for non -compliance of order dated 10.01.2022 and the matter be 
fixed before the Bench headed by Mr. Jus tice Qazi Faez Isa, at Principal 
Seat Islamabad , Or (b) any other order may be passed as deem ed 
appropriate ”. Upon this note the Hon’ble Chief Justice made the 
following order:  
“Treat the order dated 10.01.2022 as 
recommendation for invocation of suo moto 
jurisdiction. Allowed.”   
 
5.  In the above background, this Bench has been 
constituted by the Hon’ble Chief Justice under his administrative 
power s only to consider the points f ramed in the order dated 10th of 
January 2022 , issued in Civil Petition No.397 -K of 2002. Be it noted 
that during the proceeding of a ny case, a Court ordinarily passes  
three types of order s, the first type of order is that of regulatory 
nature whereby the proceedings of the case are regulated, managed , 
or controlled . The second type of order relates to a formal decision of Suo Moto Case No.4 of 202 2 
 3
a Court about a claim or dispute, and this may be called 
adjudicat ory order . While the third type is regulatory  cum 
adjudicatory order and it not only contains a formal expression  of 
any decision  of a Court on a particular issue but also a directi on for 
further progress of the case. Mindful of the above classification of 
the orders, it is to be seen what kind of order is necessitated in this 
case. When  we assembled for the hearing of this case, at the outset, 
the Attorney General for Pakistan sought an adjournment to file a 
concise statement, while the PMDC ’s counsel submitted that the 
impugned regulation has been withdraw n, and thus, sometime be 
granted to him to bring the amended reg ulation on record. So , in my 
view, the requests for adjournment alone were to be considered by 
the Bench, and our order ought to have been confined to it. This 
means a regulatory order was to be passed. On the contrary , I find 
that the said requests have been left unattended but certain other 
points have been discussed in the order which has led me to record 
this dissenting note . 
 
6.  The first point to be examined is wh ether the objection 
to the constitution of this Bench could be b rought under 
consideration in this case. I think it cannot for two reasons. One, a 
Bench, special or regular, is constituted by an administrative order 
of the Hon’ble Chief Justice , and as such , the present Bench in 
conformity with the principle settled in  Suo Moto Case No.4 of 2021 
(PLD 2022 SC 306) , has been lawfully constituted to hear this case . 
It is to be noted that judgment in the Suo Moto Case No.4 of 2021 is 
of a Five -Member Bench and thus, takes precedence over all 
precedents of this Court regardi ng the power of the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice to constitute any kind of Benches. It appears that for this 
reason neither the Attorney General for Pakistan nor the PMDC’s 
lawyer ha d any objection  to the constitution of this Bench . Given 
these circumstances, in my humble vi ew, none of the Judges of this 
Bench can object to the constitution of the Bench, and if they do so, 
their status immediately becomes that of the complainant, and 
consequently, it would not be appropriate for them to hear this  case 
and pass any kind of order thereon. This reasoning has the backing 
of the basic code of judicial ethics, to wit, no man can be a Judge in 
their own cause. It is important to state here that this principle 
confines not merely t o the cause where the Ju dge is an actual party 
to a case , but also applies to a case in which he has an interest.  Suo Moto Case No.4 of 202 2 
 4
Forbye, judicial propriety requires that if any Judge of the Bench 
has any objection, the proper course for him is either to recuse 
himself from the Bench or to refer  the matter to the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice with the concurrence of other Judges of th e Bench , so that 
the case is assigned to some other Bench.  Two, the administrative 
order of the Hon’ble Chief Justice regarding the constitution of the 
Bench becomes fait ac compli when a Judge in compliance thereof 
starts hearing the case. Hence , any Member of th is Bench , after 
having accepted the administrative order of the Hon’ble Chief 
Justice, is estoppe d to question the constitution of the Bench on the 
well known  doctrin e of estoppel . 
 
7.  I now  advert to the other question relating to the 
validity of  the Prohibition Order issued by the Pakistan Electronic 
Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) through which all satellite TV 
Channel licencees were forbidden to telecast anythi ng against State 
institutions and not to discuss the conduct of the Hon’ble sitting 
judges of High Court and Supreme Court, in any manner. Can this 
also be considered in this case. Again I am at odds with my learned 
brethren. To keep the record clear, I deem it pertinent to mention 
here that this question was not agitated by any lawyer, on the 
contrary, it was brought under discussion by the learned Senior 
Member of this Bench and cop ies of the Pro hibition Order was also 
presented by his Law Clerk to the other Members of the Bench , the 
Attorney General and to PMDC’s counsel . Although much can be 
said on this question , it suffices to say that it would be ot iose to 
discuss it here as it was neither ur ged by any counsel nor was it 
raised in the pleadings. In fact, no party  was on notice to address on 
this question . PEMRA was also not in attendance to present the 
rationale of the Prohibition Order. Therefore, in my view, the 
principle of fairness obliges  us not to express a definite opinion on 
this question until all concerned have had an opportunity of being 
heard .     
 
8.  The other reason which prevents  me from endorsing the 
observations/findings made by my learned brethren on the above -
stated second  question is that , I hold the view that no Court should 
try any question and also pass order thereon which is not directly 
and substantially in issue in a case pending before it. In the case at 
hands , the matter in issue is whether the memorization of the Holy Suo Moto Case No.4 of 202 2 
 5
Quran is a relevant criteria for the determination of the candidates 
for an MBBS or BDS degree. Indubitably, the above -stated second 
question is not related to the issue involved in this case, an d thus, it 
cannot be brought under debate, nor can any conclusion be drawn 
thereon . 
 
9.              I think, in the aforesaid circumstances of the case, the 
appropriate order would be to allow the Attorney General for 
Pakistan and the PMDC to file their r espective concise statements 
before the next date of hearing. Order accordingly.  
  
 
 
 
    (Shahid Waheed)  
             Judge  
 
Islamabad, the  
30.03.2023  
“Approved  for reporting ”. 
Sarfraz Ahmad /- 