IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
        (Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
    Present  
  Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
  Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
  
Constitution Petition No. 59 of 2011 and CMAs Nos. 326 and 633 of 2012 and  
Crl. O. P. 94 of 2012 in Const. P.  59/2011.  
(Petition under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution)  
 
Muhammad Ashraf Tiwana etc.    .…   Petitioner(s)  
    Versus  
Pakistan etc.        …    Respondent(s)  
 
For the Petitioner(s):   Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC (in both cases)  
    Assisted by Barriste r Momin Ali Khan (Advocate)  
   
In Const. P. 59/2011:    
For respondent s-1&3:  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC  
    Mr. Naveed Akhtar, S.O. Finance Division  
For respondents -2,5&6:  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC assisted by  
    Barrister Sajeel Sheryar and  
    Ch. Hasan Murtaza Mann (Advocates)  
For respondent -4:  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC assisted by  
    Malik Ghulam Sabir Advocate  
    Mr. Sameer Khose Advocate  
    Ms. Aneesa Agha Advocate  
    Malik Ahsan Mehmood Advocate  
    Ms. Zainab Qureshi Advocate     
  
In Crl. O.P.94/12:  
For respondent -1:  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC  
For respondent -2:  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC  
Amicus Curiae:    Nemo  
For SECP:    Mr. Muzaffar Ahmed Mirza, Dir. Litigation.  
Date of Hearing:   09.04 .2013  
 
 
 
    J U D G M E N T  
 
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  This is a petition filed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution. The Petitioner is a former employee of the respondent  No. 2, viz.  Securities 
and Exchange Commission of Pakistan  (SECP /Commission ). The other respondents in the 
case are the Federation through the Secretary, Finan ce Division (Respondent No.1), t he 
Chairman, Securities and Exchange Policy Board (Respondent No.3), Muhammad Ali 
Ghulam Muhammad, Chairman SECP (Respondent No.4), Tahir Mehmood, Commissioner Const. P. 59 of 2011  2
(Company Law Div ision) SECP (Respondent No.5) and Bushra Aslam, Director Human 
Resource Department, SECP (Respondent No.6). The respondents (other than respondent 
No. 3) were represented by the ir respective learned counsel.  
2. The petition was decided by means of a short  order announced on 12.4.2013 in the 
following terms: - 
“This petition has raised important questions of public importance relating to the 
enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed in Chapter I of Part II of the 
Constitution. The salient aspect of this p etition relates to the functioning and 
governance structure of the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP) 
which is the apex regulator inter alia, of the corporate sector and the capital markets of 
the country.  
2. Over the course of several d ays, we have heard and noted in detail, the 
submissions of learned counsel representing the parties. For reasons to be recorded we 
hold, declare and direct as under: - 
3. That: - 
(a) the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 namely, Muhammad Ali 
Ghulam M uhammad as Commissioner and Chairman SECP does not meet 
the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan Act 
1997 (the Act); 
(b) as a consequence, the notification No. SRO 21 (KE)/2011 dated 24th 
December 2010 appointing Mr. Muhammad Ali Ghulam Muhammad as 
Commissioner and Chairman SECP is set aside;  
(c) the Federal Government shall, without delay, make appointments to statutory 
positions in SECP which meet the requirements of the Act including Sections 
5, 6 and 7 thereof, in a credible, rigou rous, transparent and open manner, 
through a selection and appointment process undertaken with due diligence 
and deliberation which manifestly and demonstrably ensures that the 
appointees meet the requirements of law as enunciated by precedent, 
including m utatis mutandis, the principles of law determined in the case of 
Muhammad Yasin vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 132);  
(d) the insertion of section 5(5) in the Act through the Finance Act 2003 was 
violative of the Constitution and in particular Article 73 thereof;  
(e) Clause 3(1) of Chapter 11 of the SECP Service Rules (HR Handbook), which 
allow for termination simpliciter (without cause) of employees of SECP, is 
ultra vires the Constitution and inter alia, the Act; 
(f) the above Clause must be replaced appropr iately by provisions ensuring due 
process and adherence, inter alia to Articles 9, 10A, 14, 18 and 25 of the Const. P. 59 of 2011  3
Constitution and which are consistent with the provisions of the Act ensuring 
independent and objective decision making without fear or favour, req uired of 
an independent regulator;  
(g) the prayer in the petition for striking down the order dated 13.6.2011 
terminating the employment of the petitioner is disallowed as not pressed, but 
without prejudice to his rights/remedies, if any, before a competent fo rum in 
accordance with law;  
(h) respondent No.1 (Federation) and respondent No.2 (SECP) shall bear the 
costs of the petitioner.   
4. A copy of this Order shall be sent to each member of the Securities and 
Exchange Policy Board for action deemed appropriate by said Board in relation to the 
governance structure and decision making policies of SECP as per requirements of the 
Act and for consideration on issues of policy -making highlighted by the present 
petition and for the effective performance of the Board’s fun ctions under the Act, 
particularly section 21 thereof. The Board having, inter alia, the duty to “oversee the 
performance of [SECP] to the extent that the purposes of the [SECP] Act are 
achieved”, shall look into this petition and documents placed on file and after making 
such further inquiries as may be deemed appropriate by it, submit within 45 days, a 
report as to the performance of the SECP.   
5. A copy of this Order shall be sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Finance to 
enable the Federal Government to  remain compliant with the law and legal principles 
enunciated by this Court, in terms of Article 189 of the Constitution. The Secretary 
(Finance) shall also look into this petition and documents placed on file (including 
those filed by the Ministry itself ) to examine wrongdoings/shortcomings, if any, within 
the Ministry and the decision -making processes of the Federal Government under the 
Act. A report in this respect shall be submitted in Court within 45 days” .    
 
3. We give below,  the reasons in support  of the aforesaid short order.  
4. SECP has been established under the Securities and Exchange Commission of 
Pakistan Act, 1997 ( the ‘Act’ ). The powers and functions of the SECP are elaborated in the 
Act. The purpose of the Act as recorded in its preamble i s “to provide for the establishment of 
the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan for the beneficial regulation of the capital 
markets, superintendence and control of corporate entities and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto”. The SECP administers a number of statutes including the Companies 
Ordinance, 1984 , the Insurance Ordinance 2000, the Securities and Exchange Commission of 
Pakistan Act 1997, the Central Depositories Act, 1997 and the Securities and Exchange Const. P. 59 of 2011  4
Ordinance 1969. In addition to administering these and other statutes, the SECP is 
responsible for enforcing subordinate legislation comprised of rules framed in exercise of 
rule making powers mentioned in the statutes. Here we may add that in the performance of 
its funct ions, the SECP has from time to time issued a number of regulations, guidelines, 
orders, directives and policies. It is not necessary to enumerate all of these. However, a list 
of some such regulations etc. has been given in annex ‘A’ to the petition . 
5. The SECP as such is amongst the most important regulatory authorities directly 
impacting the economic life of the citizens of Pakistan. It may also be noted that amongst 
the various functions and powers of SECP which have been mentioned in section 20 of the  
Act, there a re a number of functions which relat e directly to the economic well -being of the 
people of Pakistan. By way of illustration  only , it may be mentioned that in section 2 0(6), 
the SECP has been specifically ordered and mandated inter alia, “to ma intain the confidence of 
investors in the se curities  markets by ensuring adequate protection for such investors” . The 
Securities and Exchange Ordinance, 1969 which, as noted above, is also administered by 
SECP deals with the capital markets in Pakistan. By virtue of that statute too, the SECP is 
required “ to provide for the protection of investors ” (Preamble) . It is worth noting that the 
market capitalization just through  the stock exchanges in Pakistan is in excess of 
Rs.4,00 0,000,000,000/ - (rupees four tr illion). The investments made in unlisted companies 
(private or public) and in other sectors such as insurance etc., regulated by SECP, is in 
addition to and may even be in excess of the said figure. Millions of Pakistani citizens and 
institutions and quit e a few foreign investors and their investments are directly affected by 
the quality of r egulation of companies, securities  markets and the statutes/rules etc. 
administered by SECP.  
6. It is in the context of the above circumstances that it can be stated t hat the SECP is 
the apex regulator in the economic sector in Pakistan. Its activities including aspects of its 
governance and functioning are clearly questions of public importance. These questions 
relate directly to the effective enforcement of fundamenta l rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution. In Muhammad Yasin vs. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 132) , we had held Const. P. 59 of 2011  5
that our Constitution “contains a whole range of Articles which have a direct nexus with good 
economic governance and fundamental rights. A t the very beginning in Article 3 there is, for 
instance, an oft -forgotten but eloquently stated directive: “The State shall ensure the elimination of 
all forms of exploitation and the gradual fulfillment of the fundamental principle, from each 
according t o his ability to each according to his work”. Then there is Article 4 which guarantees the 
protection of law, not just for life and liberty, but also for the body and property of citizens. 
Furthermore, there is a whole range of fundamental rights, such as the right to life (Article 9), the 
universal and non -derogable right to a life of dignity (Article 14), the right to engage in business 
(Article 18) and to hold and acquire property (Article 23), and the right to be governed equally and  
in accordance with law (Article 25) which have clear economic ramifications. When these articles are 
read together, we cannot escape the  conclusion that the Constitution envisages a political 
dispensation where good economic governance is a right of the people of Pakistan wh ich they cannot 
be deprived of. ” We ha d also held that ”there  is an ever -greater nexus between the proper and 
independent functioning of regulatory bodies and the economic life of the nation and its citizens. ” It 
is a self evident fact that persons making  investments in and through the capital markets of 
the country will either be attracted to the capital markets or shy away from such markets 
depending upon the trust and confidence which they have in such markets and this in turn 
depends upon the rigour an d quality of the regulator.  Moreover, i nvestment s made by the 
people, being property, are required to be protected through enforcement of the 
fundamental rights enumerated in the extract from the case of Muhammad Yasin  supra.    
7. Despite our asking, we we re not informed of the number of investors making 
investments through the capital markets in Pakistan nor were we given figures w hich 
would show that the number  of investors has increased or decreased  during the past few 
years.  Some figures which have come  on record  indicate that the number of companies 
listed on the stock exchanges  in Pakistan has declined over the past few years.  The 
importan ce of SECP in the economic well -being of the country and of the people of Pakistan 
and the direct relevance of the SECP in relation to fundamental rights guaranteed by the 
Constitution ought to be obvious from the very nature and extent of the statutes and 
activities regulated by the SECP. However, much was made by learned counsel for the Const. P. 59 of 2011  6
respondents by way of argument  that no questions of public importance relating to 
enforcement of fundamental rights arose in this petition. As such it was argued that the 
petition is not maintainable  in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution . We, therefore, 
firstly  take up and address the arguments made on this score by learned counsel 
representing the respondents.   
A – MAINTAINABILITY . 
8. We may start by referring to Civil Misc. Appeal No. 99 of 2011. When the present 
petition was filed, the Office raised an objection to the main tainability of the petition on the 
ground that it did not raise any issues of public importance affecting fundamental rights 
guaranteed under Chapter 1 Part II of the Constitution. This office order was challenged by 
the petitioner through the said Civil M isc. A peal No. 99 of 2011. On 23.8.2011, after hearing 
learned counsel for the petitioner , a Bench of this Court opined “that in the instant case 
question of violation of fundamental rights relating to the general public in respect of their right s and 
obligations is involved as the SECP is responsible to regulate the entire capital markets, NBFC, the 
whole Insurance Industries etc. which according to the learned counsel deals with about 58 
thousands companies …” . The objection raised by the office was thus over ruled. The petition 
was registered and notice was issued to the respondents. However, since the aforesaid 
order was passed on an office objection  and the respondents were not present,  at the time,  
we will address the objections to maintainability whic h have been urged before us on behalf 
of the respondents.  
9. Learned counsel for the respondent No. 4 drew the attention of the Court to an 
unconnected  petition filed by Muhammad Ashfaq Ahmed bearing Civil Misc. Appeal No. 
191 of 2012 in Const. P. No. Nil  of 2012 titled Muhamad Ashfaq Ahmed vs. Ali Arshad Hakeem  
wherein an objection to maintainability was raised by the office similar to the objections in 
the present case. The aforesaid petitioner then did not pursue  the matter further in this 
Court. Learne d counsel for respondent No.4, therefore, argued that the present petition also 
was not maintainable. This contention is misconceived because of the material and  obvious 
difference between the present  case and the case of Muhamad Ashfaq Ahmed vs. Ali Arsha d Const. P. 59 of 2011  7
Hakeem . As noted above,  in the present case,  a Bench of the Court after hearing the learned 
counsel , over rule d the office objection.  
10. We also found an apparent lack of clarity  and consistency  in the submissions 
advanced on behalf of the respondents on the question of maintainability. Though l earned 
counsel for the respondents vehemently opposed the m aintainability of this petition,  they 
did not draw a distinction between want of jurisdiction  under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution as opposed to the question of discretion  whereby the  exercise of such 
jurisdiction  may be regulated . This Court , it may be noted, may have  the jurisdiction but  
may still  choose to  regulate and decline the exercise of such jurisdiction. The jurisprudence 
of this Court has ev olved, particularly since 1988, on this important issue. The decision to 
decline exercise of such jurisdiction has always been taken based on th e facts and 
circumstances of each  case. T he nature of the respondents’ objection, as discussed below, is 
based m ore on  the propriety of exercise of jurisdiction in the light of  precedent  rather than 
the existence of jurisdiction . Bearing in mind the facts and circumstances, the nature, scope 
and extent of the activities regulated by SECP and also taking into account  its mandate to 
protect a large body of investors who have invested trillions of rupees in the economy of the 
country,  makes this a clear case in which there can be no doubt whatsoever that the 
governance structure of SECP and more specifically the appoint ment of its Chairman and 
Commissioners are questions of “public importance with reference to the enforcement of 
fundamental rights”.  
11. The main stay of the argument  of the respondents against the maintainability of the 
present petition , therefore, rest s on the framework established by precedent to regulate the 
exercise of this jurisdiction. On this score, learned counsel representing the SECP  and 
respondent No s. 5 and 6  argued that the petition was based on malice and was nothing 
more than an attempt at p ersonal aggrandizement of the petitioner with the object also, of 
settling  personal scores because his employment  as Executive Director had been terminated 
by SECP. Arguments of learned counsel for the SECP were also adopted by learned counsel Const. P. 59 of 2011  8
for responde nt No.4. Formulations which were framed by learned counsel for SECP reflect 
the thrust of his argument as to maintainability and are reproduced as under: - 
1. Could equitable jurisdiction of this HoC be invoked at the behest of a person whose hands 
are stai ned with malice ? 
 
2. Could this Hon’ble Bench deviate from the settled law of this Court including full 
court’s judgments that no action could be taken with regard to quo warranto petition 
filed by an individual having personal malice ? 
3. Whether a malafide  comp laint vitiates even the most solemn component of the same and 
could the doctrine of severance be applied to isolate good bad from bad faith?  
4. Could the grain be sifted from the chaff by the apex Court while exercising jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3)?  
5. Coul d an employment dispute  and primarily a “no notice dismissal petition” be clubbed 
with a quo warranto relief and would such a composite petition become maintainable?  
6. Could a sacked and disgruntled employee  be elevated to be considered as a whistle 
blower?  
7. Could a person having a personal malice , grouse  and a score to settle become a whistle 
blower and could his bad faith be totally ignored by disregarding the settled 
jurisprudence?  
8. Could the method of appointment of one regulator in isolation from method of  
appointment of most of the regulators be dealt with in isolation from the appointment of 
governor of state bank, judges of the superior courts notwithstanding the absence of 
statutory requirements?  
 
12. At the very outset it may be noted that the petition er categorically stated that he 
would not press the petition to the extent of the prayer for striking down the order dated 
13.6.2011 terminating his employment. Although it was argued on behalf of SECP that the 
hands of the petitioner “are stained with mal ice”, no such stain or malice was adverted to  or 
brought on record . The mere fact that the petitioner was aggrieved also of the order dated 
13.6.2011 does not in any manner amount to malice. The term “malice”  as used in the law 
has distinct and well develo ped connotation s as will be discussed shortly. However, t he 
submissions on this score on behalf of SECP were unnecessarily repetitive as is evident from 
the formulation s submitted in Court reproduced above. Formulation No. 8 framed  by the 
learned counsel f or SECP, however, itself indicates that this is a fit case in which jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution should be exercised.  In the common law tradition 
reflected in Article 189 of the Constitution and adhered to in our Courts, the provis ions of 
Article 184(3) have been interpreted. Recent judgments in Muhammad Yasin   supra and Const. P. 59 of 2011  9
Munir Hussain Bhatti v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 407)  have defined the extent and 
scope of Article 184(3) with reasonable clarity.  The present case falls  within the parameters 
so defined.    
13. We may with advantage refer to case law in the context of objections to 
maintainability of constitution petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . These 
precedents raise issues  of discretion and  propriety rather than  the constitutionality of 
petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution.  The concurring opinion of my learned 
brother Khilji Arif Hussain, J. in Muhammad Azhar Siddiqui v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 
SC 774 ), is most  helpful on the que stion . After surveying precedent  on the question , the 
learned Judge highlighted three categories of cases in which this Court has found that the 
test of maintainability is easily met. One of these categories includes cases which “pertain to 
appointments, promotions, dismissals  … of key executive officials , including but not limited to 
ministers, senior bureaucrats and heads of regulatory bodies  and statutory corporations”. He 
explained the reason for this, observing that “[t]he executive, especially its upp er echelons, is the 
first and foremost branch of the constitutional government which is entrusted with the execution of 
laws and framing and enforcement of policies which directly affect the citizens’ rights, including 
Fundamental Rights”. This should be a  sufficient response to the objection raised against the 
maintainability of the present petition which pertains, amongst other things, to the process 
of appointment of the Chairman of the SECP. Earlier, in Muhammad Yasin v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2012  SC 132),  the Court held that  “[v]ital autonomous institutions such as OGRA 
can function  “effectively and efficiently ” only if their autonomy is respected. This is the letter as well 
as the spirit of the law. Such autonomy is only possible when appointment s to key positions in these 
regulators are made in a demonstrably transparent manner; that is, by ensuring the implementation 
of the checks which the [law] lays down for such appointments” . This dictum applies equally to 
the SECP  which is the apex regulato r responsible for oversight, inter alia, of capital markets 
and the corporate sector .       
14. We can now consider the question of the petitioner’s alleged malice, which was 
raised on behalf of the respondents to bolster their  argument against the maintai nability of Const. P. 59 of 2011  10 
the present petition . Learned counsel for SECP  also made much of the bona fides  of the 
petitioner. He emphatically contended that the petitioner is merely a disgruntled employee 
who is motivated by ill -will towards his former bosses and is attempting  to abuse the 
process of this Court for his personal ends. He placed reliance upon some  precedents which 
caution the Courts against entertaining petitions  which smack of mala fides . Reliance was 
also placed on, inter alia , the following cases of the Supreme Court of India: Bholanath 
Mukherjee v. R.K. Mission Centerary College  (2011)5 SCC 464, Gurpal Singh vs. State of Punjab 
and Others  (2005)5 SCC 136, Dr. B. Singh vs. Union of India and Others  (2004)3 SCC 363, 
Dattaraj Nathuji Thaware v. State of Mah arashtra  (2005)1 SCC 590  and Ashok Kumar Pandey v. 
State of West Bengal  (AIR 2004 SC 280 ). Reliance was also placed on the recently decided case 
of thi s Court in Dr. Muhammad  Tahirul Qadri  vs. Federation of Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 461)  
15. We are in full agree ment with the ratio spelt out in precedents which caution against 
entertaining cases which are not really in the nature of public interest litigat ion but only 
masquerade as such. This is so because the Court’s jurisdiction  under Article 184(3) is 
discretio nary ; if the circumstances and facts of the case so warrant, the Court refrains from 
exercising it on account of the evident mala fides of the petitioner. This principle has most 
recently, been elaborated in Dr. Muhammad  Tahirul Qadri  vs. Federation of Pak istan  (2013 
SCMR 461) . However, it should be clear that such mala fides  can only be  judged on the basis 
of the facts of each case. In the present case, nothing has been placed on record which 
would indicate any mala fide  on the part of the petitioner, or w hich would suggest that the 
petitioner is seeking to exploit the process of this Court for purely personal gain.  
16. That the petitioner has been an employee of the respondent is not sufficient to 
establish his mala fides, as we clarified in Muhammad Yasin ’s case  supra. In fact, it is only 
understandable that if employees and other insiders, who naturally have the most 
understanding of the functioning of concerned institutions, are the ones who most 
frequently bring the issue s of public importance arising i n those institutions to the notice of 
the constitutional  Courts. Furthermore, in Muhammad Yasin’s case  supra , while  relying on  
Maulvi Iqbal Haider v. CDA  (PLD 2006 SC 394), we clarified that “the conten ts of a petition Const. P. 59 of 2011  11 
under Article 184(3) ibid will overri de concerns arising on account of the conduct or antecedents of a 
petitioner.” The questions wh ich the contents of this  petition have brought to light  are, 
without doubt,  matters of public importance and, as discussed above  relate directly to the 
enforceme nt of fundamental rights. Therefore, concerns about the conduct or antecedents of 
the petitioner, if any, would stand overridden by the contents of the petition.  We may also 
emphasize that exercise of jurisdiction under Article 184(3) ibid is not dependent  on the 
existence of a petitioner. Here it may also be added that the term “malice ” when used in 
law, has well defined connotations .  Black’s law dictionary clarifies that where as in ordinary 
parlance malice  refers to mere “[i]ll will or wickedness of hear t”, in legal contexts, it requires 
“[t]he intent, without justification or excuse, to commit a wrongful act .” In Bhagat Singh v. The 
Crown , (1930 The Punjab Law Reporter 73 ), the Lahore High Court, relying on Bromage v. 
Forsser , clarified the distinction t hus: “ Malice in common acceptation means ill -will against a 
person, but in its legal sense it means a wrongful act, done intentionally without just cause or 
excuse .” It seems clear that if the petition is to be struc k down on account of malice, there 
must be some evidence of a wrongful act. T he only wrongful  act which the petitioner is 
alleged to have committed is approaching this Court to seek a legal remedy. Clearly, this 
does not even remotely amount to malice as understood in law .  
17. While holding the  present petitions maintainable under Article 184(3) for the above -
mentioned reasons, we would like to clarify, as we did in M. Yasin’s case too, that that if 
similar cases ar ise in future, it is possible that t he High Courts may be in a position to 
decide  the same by applying the principles of law enunciated in this judgment, in terms of 
Article 189 of the Constitution.  While exercising jurisdiction in the present case we are also 
cognizant that the petition wa s filed as far back as 20.7.2011 . The adjudica tion was delayed, 
in part at least, by foot -dragging of respondent No. 1, considered below. In our view it 
would be unjust to dismiss this pe tition and tell the petitioner  to approach the High Court  
and to start his quest all over again before such Court .  
 
 
 
 Const. P. 59 of 2011  12 
B -  CHALLENGE TO THE APPOINTMENT  OF CHAIRMAN, SECP . 
 
18. The most important aspect of this case is the challenge leveled by the petitioner to 
the appointment of the  Chairman (Respondent No. 4) of the SECP. It has firstly been 
contended that since the  Chairman “belongs to the broker community ”, his appointment 
violates “ the spirit of Sections 16 and 17 of the Act, read with Section 35 thereof as also Sections 
15A to 15E ”. According to learned counsel, the appointment of a person from the broker 
communi ty, particu larly one who has had a direct  and active personal involvement in the 
business  of share brokerage until a short while before being appointed Chairman SECP, 
amounts to a “revolving -door policy ”. Elaborating on this it was contended that responden t 
No. 4 became Chairman of the SECP for a fixed tenure; before his appointment he was 
engaged in the capital markets as a broker and was likely to return to the same business 
after completing his tenure. Such arrangements, according to learned counsel, amo unted to 
regulatory capture i.e. the taking over of control of a regulatory body such as SECP, by 
those who are meant to be regulated by such regulator . To support his contention, reference 
was made by learned counsel to prominent acad emics and research in stitutions, such as 
Marver H. Bernstein’s work “Regulating Business by Independent Commission s” (Princeton 
University Press:  1955 ) and a recent working paper by Frederic  Boehm, “Regulatory Capture 
Revisited – Lesson from Economics of Corruption ” (Internati onal Centre for Corruption 
Research:  2007 ). The main thrust of the argument of learned counsel was that the SECP 
could not possibly retain its autonomy, independence and impartiality if its working 
environment was directed towards a segment of the regulate d activities such as brokerage 
and that such inclination must be inferred  on the basis that the respondent No. 4 had been 
in the brokerage business.  
19. Although there may be some academics and research supporting the submissions of 
learned counsel, there  may be equally prominent academics and research expressing  a 
different or less stringent opinion . While acting as a Court, we will need to look at the law 
itself because the statutory provisions will be more important than any opinion formed by 
academics and re searchers, particularly those from  alien social, cultural and legal Const. P. 59 of 2011  13 
environments. The Act, when examined, does not lend support to the argument advanced 
on behalf of the petitioner  based on the notion of regulatory capture . Section 5 of the Act in 
fact, expressly mentions the “experience and eminence in … the securities market”  as one of the 
possible qualifications of persons appointed as Commissioners of SECP. Section 18 of the 
Act gives a list of disqualifications for members of the SECP. Here too t here is no bar on 
industry insiders. Clause ‘ e’ of Section 18 of the Act provides against a person who “fails to 
disclose any conflict of interest …”  Although this is an express provision against conflict of 
interest , it does imply that the law does not pr ohibit the appointment of a Commissioner of 
the SECP who may have been a person regulated by  SECP  prior to his appointment . If 
indeed the legislature  had intended to exclude industry insiders from being appointed as 
Commissioners , it could either have disq ualified such persons or stipulated a cooling off  
period before appointment as C ommissioner SECP. The legislature  has chosen not to do so. 
As the statute presently stands, the fact that respondent No. 4 was heading a brokerage 
house before his appointment as Chairman, does not by itself violate the law.  
 
C -  SCRUTINY OF SELECTION PROCESS  LEADING TO THE APPOINTMENT OF 
RESPONDENT NO. 4;  
 
20. The second challenge made by the petitioner to the appointments of Commissioners 
and Cha irman SECP is far more weighty . It has by now become well settled that Courts will 
look into the process of appointments to public office. It is the process which can be 
judicially reviewed to ensure that the requirements of law have been met. In the case of 
Muhammad Yasin  supra, the p rocess of appointment to public office has been made the 
subject of judicial review to ensure adherence to the command of the law. This is also a 
requirement of good governance and has been a subject of comment from ancient times. 
Abu al -Hassan al -Mawardi  (d. 1058 A.D) , the famous scholar  from  Baghdad  devoted a 
substantial portion of his 11th century treatise on constitutional law, the al-Ahkam al 
Sultaniyyah , to the qualifications for holding public  office.  These are universal pri nciples of 
good governance  and are reflected in sections 5 and 6 of the Act which  lay down stringent 
crite ria for the kind of person the F ederal Government may appoint as Const. P. 59 of 2011  14 
Commissioner/Chairman SECP. Section 5(1) of the Act specifies that a Commissioner ” shall 
be a person  who is kno wn for his integrity, expertise, experience and eminence in any relevant field, 
including the securities market, law, accountancy, economics, finance , insurance and industry .” 
Under the law, the federal  Government has the authority to  appoint the Chairman and 
Commissioners of SECP. The F ederal Government, however, has no absolute and unbridled 
powers in this behalf. It is constrained by the aforesaid requirements of the Act . We have 
come a long way from the days of the whimsicality of Kings and Caesers, suc h as Caligula 
who could conceive of appointing his horse Incitatus as Consul of Rome . The element of 
subjectivity and discretion of the Government  has been severely limited by the legal 
requirement that an appointee must be a person having integrity, exper tise, eminence etc. 
This requirement imposes a duty on the Federal Government to put in place a process 
which ensures that the requirements of the law are met. As will be seen below, no attempt 
appears to have been made by the Federal Government to ensure compliance of sections 5 
and 6 of the Act .  
21. The argument adopted by learned counsel for the respondents was that the 
appointment of respondent No. 4 was made as per past practice and, therefore, should be 
considered lawful. This argument is without mer it. We are not aware that any previous 
appointment whether of Chairman or Commissioners SECP had been challenged or had 
come up before a Court on grounds which have been urged before us in this matter. It was 
also argued that  no process ha d been set out fo r such appointment s in the Act. This 
submission is not entirely correct. It is obvious that if the requirements of section 5(1) are to 
be adhered to, there has to be a process which ensures that the widest possible pool of 
qualified candidates is available  to the Federal Government. From this pool , through a 
transparent selection process, appointments can be made.  In our judgment in the case of 
Muhammad Yasin  supra , we had set out a three pronged  test for appointments to public 
office:  “(a) whether an objec tive selection procedure  was prescribed; (b) if such a selection procedure 
was made, did it have a reasonable nexus with the object  of the whole exercise, i.e. selection of the sort 
of candidate envisaged in [the law]; (c) if such a reasonable selection pr ocedure was indeed prescribed, Const. P. 59 of 2011  15 
was it adopted and followed with rigour , objectivity, transparency and due diligence to ensure 
obedience to the law.”  A comparison of the provisions of the OGRA stat ute and the Act can 
prove  useful. The  relev ant provision  of the OGRA Ordinance, 2002 is set out in section 3(4). 
It stipulates “ the Chairman shall be an eminent professional of known integrity and competence 
with a minimum of twenty  years of related experience in law, business etc … ”. These stipulations 
are very si milar to those of the Act.   It should be  clear  from this juxtaposition  that the most 
qualified appointee can only be identified if a process similar to the one set out in the case of 
Muhammad Yasin  supra  is followed.  
22. We asked learned counsel for the Federation to show us the process through which 
the name of respondent No. 4 came up for consideration before the Federal Government. 
We had sought relevant  information vide o ur order dated 13.09.2011  but this  was not 
complied with. In our order dated 13.0 6.12 our direction  was expressly repeated. In 
response, the petitioner filed CMA 2955/12 on 05.07.12, which provided only a fraction of 
the requisite departmental record. Therefore, on  13.09.12,  we reiterate d our  order, but to no 
effect . Ultimately, on 08. 11.12, the petitioner file d a contempt petition  to enforce our orders  
seeking the relevant record. It was only after  this extreme step that the Federation  finally  
submit ted some official record and  documents in Court through CMA 1342/2013 on  
13.03.13  and C MA 1562/2013 on 26.03.2013  filed during the course of the hearing . In CMA 
1342/2013,  it was also  repeated that the appointment of the respondent was in line with 
previous practice. However, it was, for the first time  added that the then Finance Secretary 
and Finance Minister had a meeting with respondent No.4 and “after due consideration his 
name was recommended for appointment to the Prime Minister of Pakistan” . We find this 
assertion in para 4 of CMA 1562/2013 to be wholly unsubstantia ted by any material on 
record.  It appears to be  false and misleading. The concise statement filed on behalf of the 
Federation on  25.10.2011 does not make any such averment . C.M.A 2955/2012 filed on 
05.07.2012,  also did not make any mention of the Finance Minister and Finance  Secretary’s  
meeting with respondent No. 4  nor is there any official noting to this effect . We, therefore, 
find it strange that CMA No. 1562/2013 which was filed on 26.3.2013 for the first time Const. P. 59 of 2011  16 
mentioned  any process at all. The averment aforesaid is also b elied by the noting on official 
files which preceded the appointment of res pondent No. 4 as Chairman, SECP, and which 
has been brought on the record through CMA 2955/2012, CMA 13 42/2013 and CMA 
1562/2013.  We may reiterate, based on the record which was provided by the Federal 
Government after much foot -dragging  spanning more than one year , that no process, let 
alone a credible, fair and transparent one was adopted by the Government.  We may add 
that, rather than recognizing the potential conflict between SEC P and respondent No. 4, a 
common Concise Statement was filed b y them. It was only at a subsequent stage that 
respondent No. 4 instructed separate counsel. Importantly , neither in the Concise Statement 
nor during the pr olonged hearing of the case  was any me ntion made, of any meetings or 
interview of respondent No. 4 with the Minister or Finance Secretary.  
23. A perusal of the above noted  CMAs shows that  the manner of the appointment  of 
respondent No. 4  is somewhat like this:   On 25.10.2010, a noting was made  recording that 
the term of the then Chairman, Mr. Salman Ali Shaikh was to expire on 29.11.2010. A 
proposal was record ed for consideration by the competent authority to the effect that the 
Chairman may be “ reappointed as Commissioner w.e.f 30.11.2010 and assigned the charge of 
Chairman SECP for second consecutive term from the same date with the approval of Prime Minister 
(through summary for the Prime Minister.) ” On 16.11.2010  , a Joint Secretary of the Finance 
Ministry noted that he had discussed the mat ter with the Finance Secretary and the two 
would discuss it again on 22.11. 2010 . On 06.12.2011, almost a week after the expiry of the 
term of Mr. Salman Ali Shaikh, the Finance Secretary directed that t he draft summary 
containing the  proposal  for the reapp ointment  of Mr. Shaikh  may be formally put up before 
him. On 09.12.2011, the Finance Secretary put up the file before the Finance Minister, 
seeking his approval, so that the summary may be put up befor e the P rime Minister.  That 
day onwards, the noting goes  mysterious ly silent and  when the next noting appears on file 
on 07.01.11, it is found  that the “ decision [has been] taken on another pile [of applications] ”.  
24. The Summaries submitted to us do give some idea of what went on in this silent 
month.  While  the Summary proposing Mr. Salman Ali Shaikh’s re -appointment was still in Const. P. 59 of 2011  17 
place , on 21.12.2010, the Finance Secretary, moved a nother  summary to the Prime Minister 
where he stated  that: “the Government has made efforts to find suitable candidates and after  due 
consideration , the following persons have been identified t o fill these positions:  (i) Mr. Muhammad 
Ali Ghulam Muhammad , (ii) Mr. Ashraf M. Hayat, (iii) Mr. Imtiaz Haider, (iv) Mr. Etrat Rizvi, (v) 
Ms. Nasreen Rashid... It is [also] recommended that M r. Muhammad Ali Ghulam Muhammad  may 
be appointed as the Chairman of the Commission with immediate effect.”  (Finance Division No. 
3(1) -Inv-II /2004 -2926  /F/FS/10) . The CVs of these five persons  were also attached with 
the Summary.  Two days later, o n 23.12. 2010, the Principal Secretary informed the Finance 
Secretary that “ [t]he Prime Minister has been pleased to approve the proposals.”  And  the next 
day,  on 24.12.2010, a notification was issued whe reby the respondent Mr. Muhammad Ali 
Ghulam Muhammad  was appoi nted both as Commission er and as Chairman. Interestingly, 
all the other persons  mentioned in the Finance Division’s summary  dated 21.12.10 , whose 
appointments the Prime Minister had been “ pleased to approve ”, never got any  such 
notification  of appointment . Later, through another Summary dated 09.06.11, the Finance 
Division withdrew the names of two of these previously approved persons. Instead, “ a new 
search was undertaken ” and it was “ considered appropriate to consult the newly appoint ed 
Chairman ” on this matter. As a result, two other names were added, who went on to be 
notified as Commissioners.   
25. When we pointed out to  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan these odd circumstances 
glaringly evident from the record he could not give any satisfactory explanation in 
response. When we enquired from him about what the “ effort s” mentioned in Summary 
dated 21.12.2010  really were , or how the “ search” mentioned in Summary dated 09.06.11 
was undertaken,  he was at a loss to give any details  although he had ample opportunity for  
this purpose . Since learned counsel was unable to explain the matter, we have had to 
fathom the circumstances  from the various CMAs filed before us containing official notings. 
From these, it is clear that the Federal Government  has not been adhering to any legally 
acceptable  procedure for making appointments of Commissioners and Chairmen of SECP  
nor has it cared to ensure adherence to the provisions of the Act relating to appointments . Const. P. 59 of 2011  18 
Instead, t he names of potential applicants  have been emerging  from all  sorts of questionable 
quarters;  sometimes CVs were volunteered by enthusiasts; at other times, CVs were 
forw arded to the Finance Division from  political ly active  quarters (the Deputy Speaker, 
National Assembly, for instance); and at yet other times, nomin ations were sought  by the 
Finance  Division  from influential figures  (Governor of the Punjab, for instance). Such 
practices cannot be condoned , being arbitrary and unsuited to the selection in a fair and 
transparent manner, of persons envisioned in sections  5 and 6 of the Act. Furthermore, the 
Federal Government has so far thought  it proper,  and in fact necessary, to consult the 
Chairman  in the matter of appointment of other commissioners. The office of the Chairman, 
it seems, has  had a considerable say in t he matter  despite the express provisions o f section 5 
of the Act which requires the Federal Government to make a selection based on the criteria 
set out therein . It should be clear that these practices are highly arbitrary, subjective and 
improper. Indeed,  the standards of diligence and objectivity observed here fall well short of 
the minimum standards required  by Section 5, and elaborat ely identified in precedents of 
this Court, including Muhammad  Yasin ’s case .  
26. Mr. Salman Akram Raja ASC representing r espondent No. 4 acknowledged that the 
legal principles enunciated in the case of Muhammad  Yasin  supra constituted a major step 
towards objective standards of selection of public servants and of good governance. He, 
however, submitted that respondent No. 4 could not be faulted for his appointment which 
had been made by the Federal Government. Secondly, he also argued that the appointment 
of the respondent had been made prior to the judgment rendered in the case of Muhammad  
Yasin  supra . On this basis it was s ubmitted that the respondent’s appointment as 
Commissioner and Chairman SECP may not be set aside and he be allowed to complete his 
tenure. We, however, note that apart from the serious short -comings in the appointment 
process, no attempt whatsoever was ma de by the respondents even after the filing of this 
petition and the judgment dated 25.11.2011 in Muhammad  Yasin ’s case  to rectify such short -
comings. Since the appointment of respondent No. 4 does not meet legal requirements, it 
would not be fair or prope r to condone/overlook the legal short -comings and thereby allow Const. P. 59 of 2011  19 
the respondent to continue in office. The arguments of learned counsel urging us not to 
strike down the respondent’s appointment have been further considered in a later part of 
this opinion.   
27. It must  be understood that the statute has vested the power of appointment in the 
Federal Government, not the SECP or its Chairman. The Fed eral Government cannot  
abdicate its duty and delegate this function to the SECP or its Chairman because  it is we ll-
settled  that a statutory delegate  cannot sub -delegate his powers . The very structure of the 
SECP as envisioned in the Act can be seen as requiring independent decision making by the 
Government in respect of each appointment  of Commissioners and Chairman . If the 
Chairman is to be given the role of consultee, it would taint the process of selection, firstly, 
because by doing so the Federal Government will be seen as abdicating its statutory duty 
and in effect outsourcing its own obligation and secondly, by  according a special status to 
the Chairman  in the matter of selecting the constituents of SECP . Furthermore, giving the 
Chairman so much  power, in the matter of appointment of other Commissioners would not  
be in line with  the independent, collegiate and d elibera tive relationship which is meant to 
exist amongst all  Commissioners , including the Chairman . From a reading of the statute, it 
seems clear that t he Chairman is only as much of a statutory and tenured office -holder as 
the other Commissioners . The obj ect of having at least five Commissioners and the 
requirement that such Commissioners be appointed by the Federal Government is meant to 
ensure that each Commissioner is appointed independently so that he can perform his 
functions in accordance with law wi thout being beholden to the Chairman for his 
appointment.   
28. Furthermore,  in view of the requirements of Section 5, there is a need to  devise a  
proper  mechanism for  target ing and attract ing a pool of qualified potential appointees.  
Randomly entertaining CVs, with or without the backing of political patrons, or seeking 
nominations from arbitrarily selected consultees do  not meet this requirement . The 
requirement can be  achieved through a number of different  means , be it by open 
advertisement,  or through the auspices  of talent scouts  who have the needed expertise and Const. P. 59 of 2011  20 
who ensure confidentiality to applicants or through any other sufficiently transparent and 
inclusive process .  The details of the mechanism are not our concern at pres ent; these  may 
be wor ked ou t by the Federal Government and recorded in the report which we have 
sought from the Government . What is clear, however, is that the process that went into the 
impugned appointment clearly does not meet the requirement of the law and the 
appointment has , therefore , been set aside and struck down.  
29. We have also carefully gone through the record placed before us. Apart from the 
circumstances, noted above, which show that no attempt whatsoever was made to attract 
the pool of potential talent having the req uisite statutory qualifications, we have been 
unable to find any exercise or effort whatsoever for determining if indeed respondent No. 4 
was a person kn own for his integrity or if he had the requisite expertise, experience or 
eminence. It may well be that  he may have these qualifications; equally, it may be that he 
does not possess these attributes. What is missing is due diligence or a fair and 
demonstrably transparent selection process. In the noting s on official files, as observed 
above, a wholly haphaz ard and un -structured culture of contacts , recommendations or 
sifarish appears to have pervaded  the corridors of Government in the matter of appointment 
of Commissioners. In this respect some names as noted above, were floated by random 
individuals such as  the Secretary Finance and the Governor Punjab based on no apparent 
process  and based on no apparent reason . When this glaring omission was pointed out to 
learned counsel representing the Federation and it was mentioned that individuals , political 
or other wise , even when well intentioned, could not be treated as arbiters  of integrity, 
expertise, experience and eminence of recommendee s, learned counsel was unable to give 
any satisfacto ry response. He merely repeated  his submission that the respondent’s 
appoi ntment was made as per past practice.   
30. It is obvious to us that such lack of process has irretrievably undermined the 
selection and appointment of the respondent as Chairman . This itself is a serious flaw in the 
selection and appointment process. The o nly document s attached to the summaries  were 
self generated CVs of these persons. Once again there is nothing at all on the record and Const. P. 59 of 2011  21 
there was no submission made by learned counsel for the respondents which would show  
that any inquiry let alone due dilig ence was undertaken to ascertain the correctness or 
otherwise of the contents of the CVs . So much so , even the most cursory exercise to verify 
such  contents from any source mentioned in the CVs, was not attempted by the 
Government. In the absence of such d ue diligence, we are clear that it would be impossible 
to ascertain objectively the qualifications of recommendees in the Summary as to integrity, 
expertise, experience and eminence etc. as required by section 5(1) of the Act.  
31. We may now take a look a t the Summary dated 21.12.2010. This  was neither 
complete nor self contained as required by the law  or by a common sense understanding of 
the purpose of a Summary . It may be noted  that Rule 15(2) of the Rules of Business, 1973 
made  by the Federal Governmen t under Article s 90 and 99 of the Constitution, stipulates  
that: “[a] case submitted to the Prime Minister for his orders shall include a self -contained, concise 
and objective summary  stating the relevant facts and points for decision…” The Secretarial 
Instructions issued  in pursuance of Rule 5(15) of the Rules of Business, 1973 for the disposal 
of business in the Federal Secretariat a lso reiterate that “when a case/file is submitted to the 
Prime Minister… [i]t shall include a self -contained, concise and ob jective summary stating the 
relevant facts and points for decision. ” (Instruction 44, Annex E, Secretarial Instructions, 2005). 
In a series of cases, including Makro -Habib’s case  (2010 SCMR 885), Tariq Azizuddin’s case  
(2010 SCMR 1301) and Muhammad  Yasin’s  case (PLD 2012 SC 132), this Court ha s 
emphasized the importance of summaries  as tools of governance and effective decision 
making. In a recent case,  the Lahore High Court has also clearly articulated this by stating 
that the “Rules of Business flow out o f the Constitution, and are the sinews of a workable 
government…  Rule 15(2) of the Rules requires a “self contained, concise and objective summary” to 
be placed before the Prime Minister… If the summaries put up before the Prime Minister lack in 
material particulars the discretion so exercise d … remai ns irreparably defective.” (per  Justice 
Manoor Ali Shah , in Barrister Sardar Muhammad Ali v. Federation of Pakistan, W. P. No. 
29005/2012) . Const. P. 59 of 2011  22 
32. Two days after the date of the summary , on 23.12.2010, the Princi pal Secretary to the 
Prime Minister conveyed to the Finance Secretary that “the Prime Minister has been pleased to 
approve both the proposals”  contained in the summary . The next day , on 24.12.2010, a 
notification was issued whereby the respondent Muhammad Ali Ghulam Muhammad was 
alone appointed both as Commissioner and Chairman. It is also worth while to note that the 
four other persons mentioned in the summary whose appointments had also been app roved 
by the Prime Minister, were  not notified as Commissione rs despite such approval . We have 
no clue as to the reason for such conduct.  We may also add that the Summary was 
prepared in violation of the express desire of the Competent Authority dated 16.03.2010 
requiring that for each v acant position a panel of names be proposed.  According to this 
noting , “[t]he Establishment Division  … [had]  proposed that Finance Division may propose a panel 
of suitable officers  having relevant qualification and experience for the post of Commissioner, SECP. 
Further, they should send such panels for all the vacant positions ”. It was also mentioned that the  
“Prime Minister has approved  the above recommendations of the Establishment Division.” The 
Summary dated 21.12.2010  which resulted in the appointment of the respondent as 
Chairm an was made i n violation of the  express direction of the Prime Minister  who was the 
competent appointing authority . 
33. When we inquired from Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan learned counsel for the 
Federation about the above matters, he failed to provide any satisf actory answer. Certain 
notifications  and notings on official files were placed on record after a lot of  foot-dragging  
and unjustified delay  of more than one year . These notings confirmed our impression that 
the selectio n of the respondent was done in  a hig hly, arbitrary, subjective and improper 
manner which was inherently unsuited for establishing the credentials/qualifications for 
Commissioners of SECP as set out in section 5(1) ibid. Once again, to  defend such a slipshod  
and non -transparent  manner of sele ction, the only argument proffered on behalf of the 
Federation  was that this had been the past practice. This does not provide justification fo r 
continuing with the flawed selection  even after the present petition was filed on 20.07.2011  
raising valid obje ctions to the appointment of respondent No. 4  and even after the Const. P. 59 of 2011  23 
parameters of selection and appointment to public office had been set out in th e case of 
Muhammad Yasin  supra.  
34. We also asked learned counsel for the Federation to explain  the reason as to  why only one 
out of the five  persons approved by the Prime Minister was appointed and the others despite 
approval were not notified. He did not give any explanation for this unusual  and whimsical action . 
We also asked him to state as to how it was that tw o legally distinct appointments i.e. the 
appointment of respondent No. 4 as Commissioner and his appointment as Chairman SECP were 
notified through the same notification. This question was raised  in view of the provisions of section 
6 of the Act which stip ulate  that “the federal Government shall appoint one of the Commissioners  
to be the Chairman [SECP] …”.  It is obvious from this statutory provision that the appointments (as 
Commissioner and Chairman) have to be sequential.  Firstly, Commissioners have to b e appointed . It 
is only thereafter that  the federal Government after another exercise undertaken by it objectively and  
transparently , is to appoint one of the Commissioners  to be the Chairman of the SECP . This 
exercise can  be under taken after the appointme nt of the statutory minimum number of 
Commissioners for the obvious reason that the most competent and qualified amongst them 
be appointed as Chairman . From the notification dated 24.12.2010, it is abundantly  clear 
that the law as set out in section 6 ibid was not adhered to while making the appointment of 
the respondent as Chairman. The sheer arbitrariness and failure to adhere to the law, 
renders the appointment unlawful  and also mars the fairness of the selection process.  
35. As a result, we felt it nec essary to direct the Finance Secretary to  examine 
wrongdoings/shortcomings, if any, within the Ministry and the decision -making processes of the 
Federal Government under the Act. We may also observe that the noting file submitted before us is 
full of cros s-marks; and there are distinct ruptures in the sequence of events  that comes out of it. It is 
quite possible that the file has been t ampered with . The Finance Secretary may also  inquire into and 
comment on this in the report sought from him . 
36. Near the very end of the oral arguments, learned counsel for respondent No. 4 argued that 
even if  the Court were to strike down the respondent ’s  appointment   as  violative  of  Section   5 of 
the Act,  such   an  order  should   be  given   prospective  effect .  In  effect,  his  argument   
amounted   to  the  submission   that  even  though    the  appointment   was  made   in Const. P. 59 of 2011  24 
violation of the law, it should be left untouched; And instead, the Court should restrict itself 
to laying down guidelines for how the Federal Governm ent should make such 
appointments in the future. Alternatively, he seemed to be seeking a grace period until 
which fresh appointments may be made; and contended that until such time, the present 
appointee may be allowed to continue. In support of this argu ment, he sought to place 
reliance on Al-Jehad Trust ’s case (PLD 1996 SC 324) which pertained to the appointment of 
judges of the superior court s and the recent judgment of this Court in Sh. Riaz ul Haq and 
others v. Federation of Pakistan  (Constitution Pet itions Nos. 53/2007 & 83/2012 ), pertaining to 
appointment s to services tribunals. Reliance was also placed on a large number of foreign 
precedents which, for the present, we need not consider at any length  because of the law 
and precedent in our own jurisd iction which provides adequate guidance in the matter 
before us . 
37. We do not find any force in the above  argument for a number of reasons. Firstly, if 
such a submission were to be fruitfully pressed, it is the appointing authority, the 
Federation, which should have sought the same . Had the Federation contended, forcefully 
and from the very beginning of this case, that its appointment procedure was based upon 
an interpretation of the law which was honest and plausible even if incorrect, the Court 
might hav e been inclined to consider such a submission. But the fact of the matter is that 
over the course of proceedings spanning more than two years, and down to the very last 
day of his oral arguments, learned counsel for the Federation never took this plea. Ins tead, 
he chose to defend the appointment itself. Beyond this reason, the re are also substantive 
grounds on account of which we are unable to accept this plea advance d by counsel for 
respondent No. 4.  
38. The cases which the learned counsel referred to are both clearly distinguishable .  In 
the Al-Jehad Trust  case, the Executive had been acting upon an interpretation of the articles 
of the Constitution pertaining to judicial appointment s, particularly the term “consultation” 
therein , which was flawed yet plau sible .  That interpretation was , for the first time ever,  
challenged by the petitioner s and consequently struck down by the Court. It was on account Const. P. 59 of 2011  25 
of th is factor that the Court found it appropriate to take a less stringent  view  of the matter 
and ga ve its  judgment prospective effect only. In Sh. Riaz ul Haq’s  case, the petitioners 
challenged the constitutional validity of a range of statutory provisions and rules pertaining 
to structural features of the service tribunals in the country, including Ss. 3(1),  3(3), 3(3)(b), 
3(4), 3(7) of the Service Tribunal Act, 1973, Rule 2 of the Service Tribunals (Qualifications of 
Members) Rules, 1974,  Rule 1 of the Federal Service Tribunal (Chairman and Members) 
Rule s, 1983 and S. 3(3)(b) of the Sindh Service Tribunals Act, 1973, S. 3(3)(b) of the KPK 
Service Tribunal Act, 1974 and S. 3(3)(b) of the Balochistan Service Tribunals Act, 1974. The 
Court held these legal provisions to be in derogation  of Article 2A read with Article 175, 
which, inter alia, secure the independ ence of the Judicature. The Court directed that new 
legislation be made within a period of 30 days in conformity with constitutional directives, 
until which time the impugned laws were allowed to continue in force. And since these 
laws continued to have ef fect, appointments made thereunder also continued to have effect.  
39. In the present case , we have not been called upon to engage in any novel question of 
constitutional or statutory interpre tation. The constitutional principles involved have been 
clear s ince long . At least since  Abdul Jabbar Memon and others, (Human Rights Case) (1996 
SCMR 1349), this Court, and in fact all courts in the country, have been emphasizing the 
need to do away with arbitrariness and capriciousness in the matter of appointments to 
public offices. Furthermore, Section 5 of the Act lays down specific criteria for appointment 
which the Federation obviously had the obligation to satisfy. I f there was ever any doubt in 
the matter, it should have been dispelled by our judgment in Muham mad Yasin ’s case  supra  
announced in November, 2011. Since, even in the wake of that judgment, the Federation did 
not avail the opportunity of rect ifying appointments which it had  earlier made without 
following the necessary process, it is hard to see how i t can now be granted any leniency in 
the matter. Furthermore, unlike in Sh. Riaz ul Haq’s case, we have not struck down any 
provision of the SECP Act, nor directed the framing of any new laws. We are only 
examining the acts of the Executive in the light of  the law which has been duly enacted and 
is in force . This law had to adhered to and obeyed; but the Federation failed to do so.  Const. P. 59 of 2011  26 
 
C - INSUF FICIENT NUMBERS  OF COMMISSION ERS . 
40. Before parting with this aspect of the case, it is necessary to comme nt on the 
statutory requirement  as to the composition of SECP  and the failure of the Government to 
fulfill its statutory obligation  and to ensure proper constitution of SECP in accordance with 
law. In section 5 of the Act it has been mandated that “the Commission sh all consist of such 
number of Commissioners, including the Chairman, appointed by the F ederal Government as may be 
fixed by the federal Government but such number shall not be less than five  and more than seven”.  
The minimum number of Commissioners by law could not be stated with greater  clarity. 
Even this Court had clarified in its judgment in C.P No. 447/2001 and 448/2001 that the 
SECP was not properly constituted because the minimum number of Commissioners had 
not been appointed. Learned counsel for the petitioner placed on record a table, reproduced 
below, which shows that barring a period of four years the constitution of the Commission 
was incomplete  during the previous 15 years,  as the minimum of five Commissioners had 
not been appointed. The r esponde nts have not denied the veracity of thi s table which 
reflects a patent  illegality and a flippant attitude towards statutory requirement s. In fact, in 
the Concise Statement filed on behalf of Respondent No s. 2, 4, 5 & 6, it is admitted that “ the 
number of C ommissioners in [SECP] has been less than five sin ce 2003.” A half -hearted attempt 
was also made to justify this on the ground that “there is no requiremen t of minimum quorum 
in the Act or Regulation s.” When these submissions are juxtaposed with Section 5 of the SECP 
Act, we cannot help but notice the  disregard for the law  on the part of the respondents  in 
the crucial matter of the very composition of SECP :   
     NUMBER OF APPOINTED SECP COMMISSIONERS  
 
Serial                                    Dates   Number  of 
Commissioners  
 From  To  
1. 01/01/1999  01/03/2000  4 
2. 01/03/2000  30/03/2000  3 
3. 30/03/2000  27/07/2000  4 
4. 27/07/2000  29/09/2001  5 
5. 29/09/2001  10/10/2001  4 
6. 10/10/2001  26/07/2002  5 
7. 26/07/2002  31/07/2002  4 
8. 31/07/2002  29/03/2003  5 Const. P. 59 of 2011  27 
9. 29/03/2003  19/08/2003  4 
10. 19/08/2003  31/12/2003  5 
11. 31/12/2003  18/10/2004  4 
12. 18/10/2004  30/07/2005  5 
13. 30/07/2005  11/11/2005  4 
14. 11/11/2005  12/01/2006  3 
15. 12/01/2006  24/07/2006  4 
16. 24/07/2006  26/11/2007  3 
17. 26/11/2007  17/07/2008  4 
18. 17/07/2008  11/01/2009  3 
19. 11/01/2009  21/03/2009  2 
20. 21/03/2009  30/04/2010  3 
21. 30/04/2010  07/09/2010  2 
22. 07/09/2010  26/11/2010  3 
23. 26/11/2010  29/11/2010  2 
24. 29/11/2010  24/12/2010  1 
25. 24/12/2010  24/08/2011  2 
26. 24/08/2011  17/08/2 012 4 
27. 17/08/2012  Till date  5 
 
 
D - INSERTION OF SAVING CLAUSE THROUGH A MONEY BILL .  
 
41. An attempt ap pears to have been made by the Federal Government  to rectify this 
anomaly. Through the Finance Act, 2003,  sub-section (5) was added to s ection 5 of the Act 
which states  that: “[n]o act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid by reason only of the  
existence of a vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the Commission. ” The petitioner has 
rightly challenged the insertion of this clause thr ough a money b ill. Article 73(2) of the 
Constitution defines the scope of a mo ney bill. The impugned amendment  does not even 
remotely fall in that scope.  In the case of  Sindh High Court Bar Association v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 879, 1112 -3), the Court clarified the narrow scope of Articles 73 
stating that: “ all substantial legislation is made by an Act of Parliament, that is to say, the passing  
of the relevant Bill by the two houses of Parliament as defined in Article 50 of the Constitution. On 
the other hand, a Finance Act, in general, is concerned with fiscal matters… ” As a result, an 
amendment made to the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1997, through the Finance 
Act 2008, was declared unconstitutional and, because of the peculiar circ umstances of that 
case, referred back to Parliament. In Mir Muhammad Idris v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2011 
SC 213), the Court struck down the reappointment of the Chairman, President and other 
members of the Board of National Bank of Pakistan, which ha d been made through a Const. P. 59 of 2011  28 
money b ill, since it did not fall within the scope of Article s 73 and 75. The insertion of 
Section 5(5) in the Act, through Finance Act 2003, is no different. It has , therefore , been 
struck down being  unconstitutional. We may clarify that, at present, we are concerned only 
with the vires  of Section 5(5) and not with the legal effect of such a “saving clause” if it were, 
to begin with, validly enacted.  
E - CHAL LENGE TO THE POWER TO TERMINATE WITHOUT CAUSE . 
 
42.  In the petition filed b y him, the petitioner challenged the termination of his service 
on the ground that it was arbitrary and had been made without giving any reason. The 
petitioner also challenged the legality of the termination simpliciter clause contained in the 
employment p olicy (HR Handbook) of SECP. The order dated 13.06.2011  terminating the 
employment  of the petitioner does not provide any reason  for the termination  but states 
simply “please be informed that your services/appointment as Executive Director have been 
termin ated with immediate effect i.e. June 13, 2011 under sub -clause (b) of clause 3(1) of Chapter 11 
of the [SECP’s]  HR Hand Book, 2007 by the competent authority .” The HR Handbook  contains 
the employment  policy  of SECP  which the petitioner consented to as a pa rt of his 
employment contract. Clause 3(1) of Chapter 11 of the HR Handbook, which we may refer 
to as  the “termination simpliciter  clause”, states that “[a]fter confirmation, the 
appointment/services can be terminated by either party without assigning any reason thereto …”. 
This wording suggests that clause 3(1) ibid is sourced in section 8(2) of the Act  discussed 
below . It may, at this point, be noted that at the time the petitioner received this notice, he 
was working as an Executive Director, which is th e highest level of employment in the 
SECP after the Commissioners. The Executive Director was responsible for performing 
functions which enabled SECP to fulfill its obligations under the Act, c onsidering that SECP 
is meant to perform its functions independ ently. Presumably, o ther employees of the SECP , 
including those at the highest levels, are also working under similar contracts.  The personal 
aspect of the petitioner’s case need not to be commented upon because the petitioner did 
not press his individual claim and has opted to pursue his personal remedies in any 
appropriate  forum available under law. Ther e are, however, at least two important Const. P. 59 of 2011  29 
institutional aspects of the case which were strongly urged on behalf of the petitioner and 
which we find necessary  to address.  
43. During the course of the hearing  we drew the attention of the counsel for 
respondents  Nos. 2 and 6 to the fact that the termination order h ad been signed by Bushra 
Aslam R espondent No. 6 who is Director H uman Resource  and is, in effect, ju nior to the 
petitioner in the SECP’s employee hierarchy. Since the order purports to have been made at 
the behest of the “competent authority”, we inquired as to who the competent authority was. 
We never received a satisfactory answer to this question. One thing however is certain from 
the facts on record and the contents of the HR Handbook; the “competent authority ” 
referred to in the termination order is some person or body other than the SECP , as per 
definitions given in clause 2 of the HR Handbook. This  fact has great relevance in the 
present c ontext as will become apparent shortly.  
44. Nothing  has been placed on record, nor was any submission made on behalf of 
SECP as to who had directed the termination of the petitioner ’s employment , how this had 
been done and why.  Likewise n othing has been stated as to the necessity or desirability of 
such termination with immediate effect . We, however, need not  depend on the respondents 
to te ll us who the “competent authority ” is in matters of employment or terminatio n of 
services of employees . The Act itself provid es ample guidance in respect of  such matters . 
According to sub -section (1) of Section 8 of the Act “the Commission  may, from time to time, 
employ persons to be employees of the Commission who shall … hold th eir employment on such 
terms and conditions as may be determined by the Commission with the approval of the Board” . Sub -
section (2) of section 8 then stipulates that “the employees of the Commission shall hold office 
during the pleasure of the Commission ”. The authorization for appointing as well as firing 
employees of  the Commission has thus been conferred  by the law on the SECP  itself . The 
question as to whether this authorization can be further sub -delegated and secondly, if it is 
a matter falling within  the ambit of section 10 of the Act , wh ich provides for delegation of 
“powers” and “ functions ”, of SECP  is examined below . Const. P. 59 of 2011  30 
45. At this stage, we find it useful to refer to some other provisions of the HR 
Handbook. Clause 2(d) thereof defines the term Commissio n to mean the SECP estab lished 
under the Act. The term “ competent authority ” is separately defined in clause 2(f) of the HR 
Handbook as SECP or any other authority to which SECP delegates its power. As will be 
evident from the discussion below, the referen ce in the termination order dated 13.6.2011 to 
the “competent authority”  is not  a reference to the SECP. Had it been the SECP  the relevant 
decision  ought to have been placed on record to show that the SECP had indeed met as a 
collegiate body and deliberate d collectively on the matter in order to arrive at its decision to 
terminate the employment of the petitioner. This in fact is not the case pleaded on behalf of 
SECP. Moreover, it is unfortunate that  despite our questioning of learned counsel for SECP 
and despite our directive s to the Director and the Director General  of the legal department 
of SECP to place on record the relevant minutes/resolution of SECP, this was not done. It is 
apparent from the provisions of section 8 of the Act ibid that the terminat ion of services of 
an employee (even if a literal, unbridled and limitless  meaning is given to the words 
“pleasure of the Commission”) , that such power is meant to confer on SECP a discretion 
which can be exercised by SECP alone and by none else.  
46. A “competent authority ”, whatever or whoever this may be, or a person such as 
Bushra Aslam (respondent No. 6) can at best perform the ministerial function of 
conveying/imple menting the decision of SECP: S uch person or even a Commissioner or 
Chairman cannot pos sibly know what the pleasure of SECP is, let alone decide, on behalf of 
the SECP, as to what its pleasure would or should be . It is well settled in our jurisprudence 
that a discretionary a uthorization  conferred on a person or body by statute, cannot be 
delegated. It has repeatedly been held by our Constitutional Courts  that the exercise of such 
discretionary function is in the nature of entrustment and the statutory functionary who is 
entrusted with exercising his judgment, acts as a fiduciary. Apart from t he fact that such 
fiduciary is obliged to exercise discretionary decision -making functions himself, it is also a 
necessary concomitant of such fiduciary performance of duties,  that the same are exercised 
in good faith for furtherance of the objectives of t he statute. The extent and scope of section Const. P. 59 of 2011  31 
10 of the Act  relating to delegation of the “ powers and functions ” of the SECP is examined 
below. However, it will be noted that s ection 8 ibid and similar provisions are repeated in 
various laws in Pakistan  and have been the focus of attention in precedent . In some statutes 
such as the Trusts Act there are express provisions (Section 47) which codify such 
principles. Even laws relating to companies, which are administered by SECP itself are 
based on express or im plied precepts highlighting the non -delegable nature of 
discretionary/fiduciary decision -making functions of bodies corporate  and their 
directors/governing b oards . Such bodies include corporate entities such as SECP where 
collective deliberation is re quire d for decision -making.   
47. In the present proceeding s, while we do not wish to record conclusion s about the 
impugned termination order, we do consider it necessary to note  that the hiring and firing 
of employees, particularly those who assist SECP in the performance of its decision making 
function , is a highly significant matter  involving personal judgment  of the Commissioners 
and Chairman constituting the SECP . It is a statutory authorization which has been 
conferred  by the legislature on  SECP  through section 8 ibid and cannot be further  sub-
delegated . As note d above, the  legislature in clear terms has required decisions by  a 
deliberative and collegiate body, and not by individuals  who purport to be delegates or 
who may personally be members of SECP as a  body corporate . Clause 1 of Chapter 2 of the 
HR Handbook acknowledges this principle, but also adds that for a certain “ class of 
employees ” SECP may delegate its power of hiring to “ the Chairman or any of the 
Commissioners or a committee or any office r authorized to be the appointing authority.”  This 
provision in the HR Handbook is  not in accordance with the law, as has been explained 
above . The SECP may for the purpose, of facilitating itself, constitute committees of its 
functionaries or even engage the se rvices of outside recruiting agencies to identify and 
short -list candidates for hiring. H owever, such functionaries and “ head -hunters ” cannot 
actually hire a person because this is an authorization vested in SECP by the Act and not in 
such functionaries or  recruiters . Likewise is the case of firing/termination and disciplinary 
action as per section 8(2) of the Act . A Committee  or functionary of SECP may be delegated Const. P. 59 of 2011  32 
the function of fact finding etc. or even to make a recommendation  for dismissal of an 
emplo yee, based on an inquiry , but section 8(2) ibid does not envision any person or 
authority (other than SECP) as a “competent authority ” for the purpose of terminating the 
employment of an employee of SECP.   
48 The misconception about who the “competent aut hority ” in the matter of hiring and 
firing is, may also arise out of a lack of proper appreciation for the  scope of section 10 of the 
Act. This provision  expressly allows the Commission to delegate some of its “ powers  and 
functions ” to “one or more Commiss ioners or any officers of the Commission. ” What, it may be 
asked, are these powers and functions which fall within the ambit of section 10 and are, 
therefore, capable of sub -delegation ? The Act itself provides a clear answer. The, “ powers 
and functions of the Commission ”, which Section 10 refers to, are those which are expressly 
listed in Part VI, particularly in Section 20  of the Act . The words “ function ” and “ powers ” 
which have been used in section 10 have to be given meaning  in accordance with the Act . 
For this we can look at Part  VI of the Act which is titled “ Powers and Functions ”. Sec tion 20 
also bears the heading “ Powers and Fu nctions of the Commission” . Sub -section (1) of 
section 20 stipulates that “[t]he Commission shall have all such powers as may be necessary to 
perform its duties  and functions  under this Act ”. Section 20(4) lists the duties of the SECP by 
stipulating that it shall be responsible for the performance of the functions enumerated 
therein. Nowhere  in this  copious  list of 23 items do we  find any mention of “ hiring and firing 
of employees ”. This can hardly be attributed to a careless omission. That t he framers of the 
Act chose to deal with this matter  in a separate section of the  statute  makes  it clear  they 
intended to distinguish between , on the one hand,  power s and functions of the SECP which 
are listed in Section 20 and are, by virtue of Section 10, delegable , subject to limitations  and, 
on the other hand,  the authorization to hire and fire employees (section 8) granted to the 
SECP  whic h, as discussed ab ove, constitute s the non -delegable  discretionary authority of 
the SECP  involving the individual input , consideration, evaluation and judgment of each 
Commissioner and Chairman . In other words, a holistic  reading of the Act and Section 10 
shows that it does not provide cover for delegation of this core function of hiring and firing Const. P. 59 of 2011  33 
of employees ; the SECP  itself as a collegiate body must take  decisions on it . In addition, the 
general principles applicable to construction of instruments and t exts relating to delegation 
of authority can appropriately be applied to Section 10 read with section 20 of the Act. 
Accordingly such texts are to be strictly construed and no delegation of authority is to be 
assum ed or inferred if it is not expressly prov ided for  or which may be required by 
necessary implication .   
49. Here it is helpful to reemphasize  the general principle of our law that all statutory 
authority  is fiduciary in nature ; it is vested in the functionary or body specified in the 
statute  and i s therefore, as a rule  non-delegable. The maxim delegat us not potest d elegare sums 
it up: the delegate cannot further sub-delegate.  A leading authority on administrative law, 
states the rule thus: “ It is a well -known principle of law that when a power  has been confided to a 
person in circumstances indicating that trust is being placed in his individual judgment and 
discretion, he must exercise that power personally unless he has been expressly empowered to 
delegate it to another.” (DeSmith, S.A. Judicial Re view of Administrative Action,  p. 263, 3rd 
Ed. London: 1973) . In his treatise on constitutional law, relying on Vine v. National Stock 
Labour Board  [(1956) 3 All ER 939] , Justice (r .) Fazal Karim, a former Judge of this Court and 
a leading legal scholar an d academic summarizes the position thus: “ In deciding whether a 
person has the implied power to delegate, one has to consider the nature of duty and the character o f 
the delegating person… [T]here are powers which, though administrative in nature, cannot n ormally 
be delegated. For example, power of appointment to an office , and disciplinary powers, such as non -
entitlement to pay, suspensions or dismissals cannot be delegated .” (Justice (r.) Fazal Karim, 
Judicial Review of Public Actions , Vol I, p. 399, Kara chi: 2006) . The Act is structured in 
accordance with this general  statement of the law. S ection 10 ibid has to be read in 
juxtaposition with sections 8 and 20 of the Act  as has been explained above .  
50. We can only conclude  that, under the Act  the hiring and firing of employees is a 
decision which the SECP  alone can take  and that too through a collective and deliberative 
exercise.   There is a conclusive indicator of this in section 8(2) of the Act. The te rm “pleasure 
of the Commission”  and its limitations have been discussed above . However, even if the Const. P. 59 of 2011  34 
term is taken to mean a literal, absolute and unconstrained ability to fire an employe e, it 
will be evident that the “ pleasure ” has to be the pleasure of SECP. No delegate of SECP can 
possibly know what the “pleasure ” of SECP (the collegiate body) is. The deliberative 
process itself envisions a consultation between at least five Commissioners and is essential 
for the purpose of expressing the will and pleasure of the Commission. This would also 
necessarily ensure that the “pleasure”  is reasoned to advance the objects of the Act and is 
not despotic.   
51. That the interpretation of the Act given above represents the correct construction of 
the Act even according to SECP, is borne out from specific decisions take n by SECP in 
relation to delegation of its “powers and functions”. The first of these decisions is recorded 
in the notification of the SECP dated 18.10.2005 bearing No. SRO. 1061(I)/2005. This 
notification has been issued “in exercise of powers conferred b y section 10 of [the Act] read 
with section 20(4)(o) thereof”. The Commission has chosen to delegate such of its “powers 
and functions” to its Commissioners and other officers as have been specified in this 
notification. The notification is spread over 47 printed pages and contains a long list of the 
powers and functions of SECP which have been delegated to its Commissioners, Executive 
Directors and other officers. The notification shows recognition on the part of SECP that the 
authorization which has been given in section 10 of the Act has a direct and  immediate 
nexus with section 20(4)  of the Act. This nexus has been considered in fair detail above. Its 
significance is that in this long list setting out in detail the powers and functions of SECP 
which have  been delegated to its Commissioners and Officers, no mention has been made of 
hiring and firing of employees of SECP.  
 
F - VIRE S OF THE SERVICE RULES . 
52. The petitioner has also challenged the very legality  of the termination  simpliciter 
clause  as it exi sts in the HR Handbook .  We propose to examine this claim in some detail. In 
this regard, reference may once again  be made to Section 8(1) which authorizes the 
Commission to hire employees “on such terms and conditions as may be determined”.  Section 42 
of the Act stipulates that the employees of the Commission shall be “deemed to be public Const. P. 59 of 2011  35 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Pakistan Penal Code” , but they shall not be 
“deemed to be in the service of Pakistan or … be regarded or treated as  civil servant [s]”. Section 8(2)  
as noted above  states that “ employees of the Commission shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Commission… ” A disjointed reading of these provisions appears to have been  invoked  by 
the respondents  as a possible justificatio n for the SECP’s no -cause termination policy. To 
repel this contention, it is  necessary to construe the Act holistically, and to bear in mind the 
general p rinciples of our law.  
53. Firstly, some attention needs to be paid to Section 22(5)  of the SECP Act which  
states that “ [s]ubject to the compliance of the provisions of sub -section (3), section 24A of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply to any order made or direction given under this Act.”  Section 
24A of the General Clauses Act, 1897, obliges every  person exercising powers conferred by a 
statute, to act “ reasonably, fairly, justly and for the advancement of the purpose of the enactment .” 
It also stipulates that the person making any order under the power conferred by any 
enactment shall, so far as n ecessary or appropriate, “give reasons for making the order”. 
Therefore, a n unreasoned order of termination (without cause) such as that urged by the 
respondents  under the impugned clause of the HR Handbook,  would be violative of section 
22(5) of the Act r ead with section 24A of the General Clauses Act. The effect of Section 24A 
came under discussion in a series of precedents . In Government of Pakistan v. Farheen Rashid  
(2011 SCMR 1), also a service matter, the Court reiterated that “ [a]fter addition of sec tion 24 A 
in the General Clauses Act, it is the duty and obligation of public functionaries to decide the case s of 
their subordinates after application of mind with cogent reasons within reasonable time as law 
[already] laid down by this Court.”   
54. Second ly, the termination simpliciter clause  seems to have been made  unde r the 
highly unrealistic impression that for creating an independent and effective SECP , it is 
sufficient to provide the  five to seven Commissioners any sort of employment protections, 
whil e all others working for the SECP , including those who assist in the performance of 
decision making and law enforcement functions, remain open to termination at any time, 
and for any reason or even without any re ason. Were that so, even absurdities  such as : Const. P. 59 of 2011  36 
“You’re doing excellent work, diligently but I don’t think you should be working so diligently ” or “ I 
had a dream last night …” or “ You’re not obedient to me and do not give the legal opinions desired 
by me ” would be considered legitimate. Such a draconia n employment policy cannot 
possibly foster  an independent and lawful institutional environment. If employees do not 
have safeguards against arbitrary or mindless termination, they would, to retain their jobs, 
be inclined towards toeing the line of the SECP  or even the Commissioner under whose 
administrative control, an employee may be working . As a result, employees would lose the 
independence necessary for the effective functioning of SECP as a regulatory body .  The 
Commissioners are, by law, required  to be persons of unques tioned  “integrity, expertise, 
experience and eminence ”; yet, it has been thought fit to further bolster their  integrity and 
independence by providing them security of tenure.  The employees of the Commission, it 
should be borne in mind ma y not necessarily  be as strong -willed or free from fear and 
temptation  by disposition . They stand in  need  of a strictly  law-abiding  institutional 
environment , if they are to withstand the temptations and intimidations that public servants 
often encounter . Since the petitioner has chosen not to press his personal claim in this case, 
we do not intend to record any definitive finding about the circumstances in which his 
services were terminated. Suffice it to say that the facts available on record suggest that  his 
termination and indeed the disbanding of the whole Law Division, may have been 
connected with a streak of  independent thinking .  Be that as it may, we do not find it 
necessary or appropriate to definitively determine the causes of the petitioner’s ter mination 
in these proceedings. I t is a matter which the Policy Board may look into, in the report 
which it is due to submit, in accordance with our short order.   
55. It must be stated  that in a civilized dispensation which is rule based and is aimed at 
good governance, such whimsicality cannot be countenanced. Such autocratic practices may 
be in consonance with the legacy of our colonial past wherein the prevalent  monarchical 
disposition subjected senior state functionaries, even judges, to holding office a t the 
monarch’s  pleasure. But, as we noted in Muhammad Yasin’s case, our law has come a long 
way from those days. It does not allow for dismissal of “ public servants ” in such an Const. P. 59 of 2011  37 
imperious and arbitrary manner.  There is another important reason why this can not be 
done. We have repeatedly held that all functionaries of the state, be they Civil Servants or 
senior echelons of corporate/statutory bodies such as SECP are above all, fiduciaries of the 
people. As such they can only exercise their pow ers in good fai th in the public interest and 
not on the basis of personal likes or dislikes or on the basis of whims and fancies. Thus, the 
power to terminate i mplies within it that it is not the power of a despot, tyrant, seth or 
wadera , but the power of a trustee and f iduciary in the service of the people. A seth, in the 
unbridled laissez faire world of private business could perhaps terminate the services of an 
employee on the ground that the employee is too honest, upright and law -abiding for the 
success of the busine ss or that he does not defer to the seth’s  opinion . Such attitude and 
thinking have no place in a statutory public body such as SECP, which only exercises 
delegated authority under section 8 ibid when it “from time to time employ(s) persons to be 
employees  of the [SECP]” .  It is essential that officials taking decisions in the SECP or 
enforcing rules, regulations and policies are not lef t at the whims of a capricious and 
unreasoned SECP . It is also important to bear in mind that the powers vested in the 
Com missioners/Chairman SECP are institutional and not personal. These powers whether 
express or implied can only be exercised in furtherance of the objects for which SECP has 
been established.  
56. To sum up the discussion in this part , when we read the Act in the light of principles 
elaborated repeatedly in our precedents, it become s clear that the SECP  cannot simply be 
terminating the services of its employees at its whims and pleasure, wi thout having 
recourse to valid reasons . It can only terminate an emplo yment when it has reasons to do so  
which are fair and just and advance the purposes of the Act. Both law and public policy 
require this. This is why, in our short order, we declared Clause 3(1) of Chapter 11 of the 
SECP Service Rules (HR Handbook), which a llows for termination simpliciter (without 
cause) of employees of SECP, as ultra vires the Constitution and inter alia, the Act. We had 
also directed that the above clause be replaced appropriately by provisions ensuring due 
process and adherence, inter al ia to Articles 9, 10A, 14, 18 and 25 of the Constitution and Const. P. 59 of 2011  38 
which are consistent with the provisions of the Act ensuring independent and objective 
decision making without fear or favour, as required of an independent regulator.  
 
G - A STRING OF UNFINISHED  INQUIRIES . 
57. Before parting with this judgment, we may mention one more aspect of th is petition. 
The petitioner has placed on record a number of documents to support his claim that the 
SECP  and its  Chairman /Commissioners  failed to discharge their  legal duty to pursue 
several high -profile inquiries, despite the opinion of relevant commissioners and certain 
highly -placed officers performing important executive and even judicial or quasi judicial 
functions such as (in the case of the petitioner) rendering l egal opinions on matters of 
criminal or civil prosecutions. The documents placed on file pertain, primarily, to five 
inquiries  though it was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that there were other matters 
also which needed looking into .  
58. Firstly, t here is the matter of an inquiry against Azgard Nine Ltd (ANL) for creating 
misleading appearance of active trading and doing wash sales. According to the documents 
placed on record, the SECP  ordered an investigation against ANL in 2007. A fully  detailed 
final investigation report, also placed on record, was submitted to the then Chairman in 
April 2009. A few days later, the term of the then Chairman expired and a new Chairman 
came in. He sough t an opinion on the matter from the Legal Department, which, in a 
“preliminary opinion ” dated 28.05.2009, “ formulated on the basis of a factual summary provided by 
SMD ”, concluded that  “[a] strong case [is] made out for filing criminal prosecution under Section 
24 read with Section 25 of the Ordinance…  [and] the Commis sion … is duty bound to proceed with 
filing a complaint before the competent court of jurisdiction. ” Later, in an opinion dated 
17.02.2010 , the Commissioner (Legal) asserted  that “ every effort has been made to bury [this]  
investigation… ” and that “ a brill iant effort made by the officers of the Commission” had been 
brought to naught. Counse l for SECP admitted that no  further action or proceedings on the 
basis of the aforesaid  opinions had been taken . (C.M.A No. 4238/2011 and C.M.A No. 
655/2013) . Const. P. 59 of 2011  39 
59. Secondl y, there is the case of Hala Enterprises Limited  (Hala) . In a memorandum 
dated 17.02.2010, the Commissioner (Legal) ha d brought on record his opinion  that the 
previous Chairman “ influenced the Enforcement Depart [sic] to change its recommendations for 
not filing the criminal prosecution,” ostensibly because he had remained a Director of Hala 
from 1993 to 1996, the period in which the offense being inquired into allegedly took place. 
(C.M.A No. 4238/ 2011)  
60. Thirdly, there is the case of Beema Pakistan Lim ited (BPL). Documents placed on 
record bring out the allegation, which a fact -finding committee accepted, that the inquiry 
into the affairs of BPL could not reach its conclusion because of the act or omission of a 
specifically named SECP official, who rece ived a cheque for Rupees 1.5 million from the 
Chairman of BPL. (C.M.A No. 4238/2011)  
61. Fourthly, there is the case of Chenab Limited , Pakistan  (CHBL). Documents placed 
on record show that between 11.03.2010 and 2.04.2010, the share price of CHBL almost 
trebled. This happened to be the period in wh ich some holders of  cumulative preference 
share s – mostly financial institutions - were due to convert  their preference shares into 
ordinary shares.  Because of the ramped up price , they had to value  CHBL shares a t a much 
higher rate and suffered a massive loss. Upon their complaint, the SECP appointed 
investigation officers on 3.05.2010 to probe into the matter. The Inquiry Report dated 
08.08.2010, also placed on record, concluded that “ [b]ased on the detailed ana lysis and review of 
the documents, information received during the course of investigation and statements, it has been 
observed that there is a violation of [various] security laws… [and appropriate legal] action may be  
initiated against the relevant offic ers, directors, of CHBL, CSL and AKD, Muhammad Irfan Maqbool 
and Sohail Badar…” In its Inter -Office Memorandum dated 11.10.2010, the Legal 
Department, concluded that “ there is enough evidence on record to initiate prosecution…motive is 
also clea r and the b eneficiaries of the fraudulent practice are also clearly established… [and] their 
links established through evidence are undeniable… ”  (C.M.A No. 655/2013, Part II)  
62. Finally, there is the matter of Tr akker Private Limited (TPL) and TPL Trakker (Pvt) 
Limited (TTPL). The two companies agreed to a Scheme of Arrangement pursuant to which Const. P. 59 of 2011  40 
they filed a joint petition in the Sindh High Court which was granted on 07.05.2009. 
Thereafter, TTPP moved for public listing. The SECP refused, on the ground that TTPL’s 
valuation included “goodwill” which, under Rule 8 of the Companies (Issue of Capital) 
Rules, 1996, could  not be counted towards its valuation. TTPL’s case was thus turned down. 
In Interoffice Memorandums da ted 4.01.2010 and 09.06.2010 , the Legal Department  
recorded its reasons for taking the position that  goodwill may not be counted towards a 
company’s valuation  for the purpose of listing . It has been alleged the 1996 rules were 
subsequently amended only to favour TTPL. (C.M.A No. 633/2012 and C.M.A 1374/201 3). 
63. During the proceeding s of the case, Ms. Shazia Baig,  a serving officer of the SECP  
made a request fo r being impleaded as a party .  She claim ed to have  conducted a range of 
enquiries  for the SECP  into the a ffairs of the securities market  and alleged  that she was 
being subjected to undue disciplinary proceeding s on account of  her diligent investigative 
efforts . During the oral arguments, however, realizing the narrow scope of the present 
proceedings, learned counse l representing her withdrew her appli cation  for becoming a 
party . Nonetheless, through C.M.A No 654/2013  two “preliminary inquiries” dated 
31.10.2011 and 14.11.2011 have been brought on the record, which trace, in some detail, 
certain trading patterns observed in the shares of SSGC and SNGPL around September -
October 2011. These  trading patterns would have alerted a diligent and independent 
regulator to probe the matter further to find out if ther e had been any actionable wrong -
doing. These  preliminary inquiries, we have been told, were never p ursued any further.  
64 Adjudication on the guilt or innocence of any of the parties named in these inquiries  
is beyond the scope of the present proceedings. We would, however  be remiss in  our duty 
of enforcing the fundamental rights of the people of Pakis tan, if we ignored the material 
brought on the record. Most of the documents  placed on file  are official documents of the 
Commission, not mere press reports or mere allegations. The v eracity of the document s has 
not been disputed . The material now before u s does give rise to serious concerns about 
whether and to what extent the SECP has been  discharging its statutory duties as the apex 
regulator of the securities sector. Therefore, in our short order, we felt constrained to direct Const. P. 59 of 2011  41 
the Securities and Exchang e Policy Board to look into this petition and documents placed on 
file and after making such further inquiries as may be deemed appropriate by it, submit 
within 45 days, a report as to the performance of the SECP.  The Policy Board, it may be 
noted , is a b ody created by Section 12 of the SECP Act. It has been given important duties of 
oversight under the Act and in particular, section 21 thereof.  
65 The foregoing are our reasons in support of the short order passed by us on 
12.4.2013.  We wish to add that is sues of appointments to senior positions in public bodies, 
which have been highlighted in this petition and in other cases which have come up before 
us, have under -scored  the need for a transparent, inclusive and demonstrably fair process 
for the selection  of persons to be appointed to such senior positions. The Federal 
Government may consider the necessity of putting in place independent mechanisms and of 
framing open, fair and transparent processes  so that the objectives for which public bodies 
are establ ished can be efficiently achieved and at the same time the pernicious culture of 
arbitrariness, favouritism and nepotism is eliminated. A copy of this reasoning may be sent 
to the office of the competent appointing authority  and the Law Ministry .      
  
 
         Judge  
 
 
 
 
         Judge  
Islamabad, the  
 
Announced on 12.4.2013.  
A. Rehman  
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING .  