IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
 Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar    
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.2 OF 2022  
(Re: restraining Political Parties from holding Public Meetings in  
Islamabad before Voting on No -confidence Motion)  
 
Supreme Court Bar Association of Pakistan 
through its President   
…Petitioner(s)  
     Versus  
 
Federation of Pakistan through  
M/o Interior Islamabad and others    
…Respondent(s)  
      
For the Petitioner(s)  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, ASC.  
Mr. Ahsan Bhoon, ASC thr. VL Lahore.  
Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik, Secy. SCBA.   
   
For Federation of Pak  : Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan.  
a/w Ahsan Younas, IGP Islamabad &  
Mr. Muhammad Ayub,  
Addl. Secretary Interior.   
 
For Govt. of Sindh  : Mr. Rafiq Raj orvi, Addl. AG Sindh.  
   
Date of Hearing  : 19.03.2022  
 
O R D E R  
 
  The learned counsel for the petitioner has read to us 
the first prayer in his petition which is to the following effect:  
“Direct all Sate functionaries to act strictly in 
accordance with the Constitution and the law and 
they be restrained from acting in any manner 
detrimental to and unwarranted by the Constitution 
and the law.”  
 
2.  Certain unpleasant happening s that occurr ed last 
evening at the gate of the Sindh House, situate in the Red Zone in 
Islamabad, have been mentioned to the Court. The learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan, present in Court, was candid Const.P.2/2022  2
enough to express deep regre t, particularly the resort to violen ce by 
the protestors  who caused damage to and pulled down the gate of 
the Sindh House. He informs that a FIR No.179 of 2022 dated 
18.03.2022 about the said occurrence was lodged by SHO of Police 
Station Secretariat, Islamabad under Sections 149, 147, 18 8, 186 
and 427 of PPC. This was followed by the arrest of 13 persons. The 
offences mentioned above are all bailable and this morning all the 
accused persons have been released on bail by the Executive 
Magistrate, Islamabad. He also informs us that the Federal  
Government is filing a Reference under Article 186 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“ Constitution ”) 
seeking delineati on of the scope and meaning of certain provisions 
contained in Article 63A of the Constitution.  
3.  The petitioner, S upreme Court Bar Association, is 
before us in aid of public interest  to assure that the rights of 
Parliamentarians are exercised in accordance with the Constitution 
and the law . The Attorney General for Pakistan has assured us of 
the Federal Government’s c ommitment to the process under Article 
95 of the Constitution to be followed strictly in accordance with 
law. Whilst express ing his regret on behalf of the Federal 
Government about the events that took place last evening , he 
affirms the Government ’s resolve for the law to take its course with 
respect to the offences that were committed  during the said 
incident . The Inspector General of Police, Islamabad is directed to 
file a report on the action taken by Islamabad Police regarding the 
said incident and the present status of the case. Notice is also 
issued to the respondents  in this petition  for their assistance in Const.P.2/2022  3
this matter of ensuring a smooth, lawful and peaceful completion 
of the process under Article 95 of the Constitution . 
4.  Insofar as the pol itical aspect of the proceedings under 
Article 95 of the Constitution is concerned , that is a non -legal 
matter which does not relate to jurisdiction of this Court. With 
respect to  the proceedings under Article 95 of the Constitution 
being conducted in acco rdance with the Constitution and the law , 
except the incident of the last evening , there is presently nothing 
before us  that invites our attention either in the public interest or 
on account of the violation of constitutional principles. Be that as 
it may,  the said political process involves certain political parties . It 
is important that th e political parties which are not before  us 
presently be issued notices  for rendering their assistance in the 
matter . Accordingly, notice be issued to Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf, 
Pakistan Muslim League (N), Pakistan People ’s Party, Jamiat 
Uleme -e-Islam(F), Balochistan National Party (Mengal) and Awami 
National Party through their respective Secretary Generals, who 
shall be heard only through their counsel on their behalf.  
  To come up for hearing of this petition along with a 
Reference, if any , that is f iled under Article 186 of the Constitution 
on 21.03.2022 at 1:00 pm .         
 
 
 
   Chief Justice   
 
 
  
  
 
Islamabad  
19.03.2022  Judge  
 
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING . 