IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, CJ  
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
 
 
 
Constitution Petition No. 39 of 2019  
(Against Extension of Tenure of Chief  of Army Staff)  
 
 
 
The Jurists Foundation through its Chairman  
  …Petitioner  
     versus  
 
Federal Government through Secretary Ministry of Defence, 
etc.  
…Res pondent s 
 
 
For the  petitioner : Nemo.  
  
For the respondents:  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Attorney -
Gener al for Pakistan  
Mian Asghar Ali, Deputy Attorney -
General for Pakistan  
        
Date of hearing:  26.11.2019  
 
ORDER  
 
 
 Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, CJ. :  The Court -Associat e has 
produced before us a hand written application statedly submitted 
by the petitioner seek ing permission to withdraw this petition. The 
petitioner has failed to appear in person nor anybody else has 
appeared on his behalf. The application received does not carry 
any date and the same is not accompanied by any affidavit. There 
is nothing before us to  accept  or to presume that the said 
application has actually been submitted by the p etitioner himself 
or that he has  submitted the same voluntarily. Be that as it may Constitution Petition No. 39 of 2019  2
the petition in hand invokes Article 184(3) of the Constitution and 
the subject matt er of the petition involves  a question of public 
importance with reference to enforcement of fundamental rights  
and, thus, the individ ual capacity of the petitioner pales into 
insignificance e ven if he decides not to pursue the present petition.  
The applic ation attributed to the petitioner is, therefore, not 
entertained.   
 
2. The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan is in attendance 
on his own and he has presented before us photocopies of many 
documents leading to an order  passed  by the President approving  
the summary sent to him by the Prime Minister along with his 
advice for extension /re-appointment of General Qamar Javed 
Bajwa, Chief of the Army Staff for a fresh term of three years in 
that office after expiry of his first term in that office. With the 
assistance of the learned Attorney -General for Pakistan we have 
gone through  the said documents and have ex facie noticed the 
following things:  
 
i) A summary had initially been moved by the Ministry of 
Defence for extension of the term of office of the Chie f of 
the Army Staff and subsequently he was appointed as 
Chief of the Army Staff for a second term of three years 
after completion of his first term in that office but the 
learned Attorney -General for Pakistan has not been able to 
refer to  any provision in  any legal instrument regarding 
extension in service of a Chief of the Army Staff upon 
completion of his first term in  that office or for his re -
appointment to that office after completion of his first 
term.  
 
ii) In the case in hand the Prime Minister had himself passed 
an order appointing the current Chief of the Army Staff for 
a second term in that office on 19.08.2019 whereas under 
Article 243 of the Constitution  it is the President who is 
the appointing authority  for that office . Apparently that 
mistake  came to notice straightaway and on the same day, 
i.e. 19.08.2019 a summary was moved from the Prime 
Minister’s office to the President for extension/re -
appointment of the incumbent Chief of the Army Staff and 
on that very day, i.e. 19.08.2019 the Presiden t was 
pleased to approve the summary in that regard and , 
hence, the advice of the Prime Minister was apparently 
accepted and acted upon. It appears that even that 
process was  found to be  flawed  and on that very day it 
was realized that the Prime Minister o r the President could 
not take the above mentioned actions without the Constitution Petition No. 39 of 2019  3
approval of the Cabinet and, thus, on the next da y, i.e. 
20.08.2019 a summary was moved in the relevant regard 
for approval of the Cabinet and on 21.08.2019 the Cabinet 
was said to have  approve d the said proposal through 
circulation. The opinion of the Cabinet recorded in this 
regard, photocopies whereof have  been produced before 
us, shows that there are 25 members of the Cabinet and 
out of those 25 members only 11 had agreed to the 
proposal which shows that the majority  of the Cabinet had 
not approved the said proposal . Yet another peculiar 
aspect is that after the purported or so -called approval of 
the Cabinet regarding extension/re -appointment of the 
incumbent Chief of the Army Staff the matter was never 
sent to the Prime Minister or the President again for the 
purpose s of a fresh advice or a fresh order of the Prime 
Minister and the President respectively .  
 
iii) After our repeated queries the learned Attorney -General 
for Pakistan has referred to Regulation  No. 255 of the 
Army Regulations (Rules) according to which a retirement 
of an Army officer can temporarily be suspended or 
limited . By placing reliance upon the  said Regulation the 
learned Attorney -General for Pakistan has maintained  
that the Federal Government has the requisite  authority  to 
re-appoi nt or extend the services of an  incumbent  Chief of 
the Army Staff  prior to his retirement if the exigencies  of 
the service so require  or the public interest so demands. A 
bare perusal of Regulation  No. 255, however, prima facie 
shows that the said provision can be invoked after an 
officer has already retired from service and  that is  why the 
said Regulation  speaks of suspension of retirement or 
limiting of retirement. Suspending a retiremen t or limiting 
a retirement  before  the retirement has actually taken 
effect may  amount to putting the cart before the horse. 
The learned Attorney -General for Pakistan has, however, 
very candidly submitted before us that in the entire body 
of law s pertain ing to the Pakistan Army there is no 
express provision available regarding re -appointment or 
extension in  the service  of a Chief of the Army Staff .  
 
iv) The state d purpose for the proposed  re-
appointment/extens ion in the term of office of the 
incumbent Chief  of the Army Staff is “ regional security 
environment ”. The said words are quite vague and if at all 
there is any  regional security thre at then it is  the gallant 
armed forces of the country as  an institution which are to 
meet the said threat and an individu al’s role in that regard 
may be minimal. If the said reas on is held to be correct 
and valid then every person serving in the armed forces 
would claim re -appointment /extension in his service on 
the basis of the said reason.   
 
3. The points noted above call for a detailed examination of the 
matter of extension/re -appointment of General Qamar Javed 
Bajwa, Chief of the Army Staff  and, therefore, he  is hereby made a 
respondent to this petition and the office is directed to carry out 
the necessary addition  in the memorandum of  this petition . Let 
notice of this petition be issued to all the respondents for Constitution Petition No. 39 of 2019  4
tomorrow , i.e. 27.11.2019 , as requested by the learned Attorney -
General for Pakistan. I n the meanwhile the op eration of the 
impugned order/Notification in respec t of extension /re-
appointment of General Qamar Javed Bajwa, Chief of the Army 
Staff for another term in the said office shall remain suspended.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
26.11.2019  
Not a pproved for reporting .  
Arif 