CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  1 
Qazi Faez Isa, J.    I have read the judgment authored by my distinguished colleague 
Justice Mian Sa qib Nisar, but with profound respect I cannot bring myself to agree 
therewith.  Before proceeding to highlight the points of disagreement , it would be 
approp riate to set out the background and certain material facts.  
  
Backgroun d - Constitution of a larger Bench  
2. The judgment dated 19th August 2015 (“ the judgment under review ”) was 
decided by a three Member Bench.  I authored it and the other Members were th e then 
Chief Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja and Justice Dost Muhammad Khan , after which  the 
then Chief Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  retired .  When these cases came up before a 
three Member Bench on 10th December 2015  my distinguished colleagues were of the 
view th at, “considering the questions involved in the matter , we request the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice to constitute a larger bench ”, without elaborating what such questions  
were or why the determination thereof may require the constitution of a larger bench. I 
disse nted.  It would be appropriate to reproduce the following extract from my dissent:  
“The matter is relatively simple and there is hardly any 
justification for the constitution of a larger Bench.  Moreover, no 
application for the constitution of a larger Ben ch has been 
submitted nor even a verbal request has been made in this regard. 
Therefore, with profound respect, I cannot bring myself to agree 
with the recommendation for the constitution of a larger Bench. 
It would also be appropriate to reproduce Rule 8 of Order XXVI 
of the Rules, which provides that:  
 
“8. As far as practicable the application for 
review shall be posted before the same Bench that 
delivered the judgment or order sought to be 
reviewed .” 
 
I can do no better than to reproduce the following ex tract from 
the judgment of my distinguished colleague from the case of 
Reviews on behalf of Justice (Retd.) Abdul Ghani Sheikh and 
others  (PLD 2013 Supreme Court 1024):  
 
“2. There is great wisdom in law, that the 
review, generally and ordinarily should be heard by 
the same Court and the Court in this context is an 
interchangeable term with the Judge . The object 
behind the above principle is, that the Court/Judge 
who has heard and decided the matter has a full 
comprehension as to what was argued before him; 
what was debated upon at the time of hearing of the 
matter (order under review) and what was the 
understanding of the Judge while adverting and 
attending to the pleas raised before him at the time 
of hearing of the matter and passing the 
order/judgment. It  is so because while exercising the 
review jurisdiction, which otherwise has a limited CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  2 
scope, the judgment/order under review could be 
analyzed and heeded to by the Court/Judge, inter 
alia, in the light of the above considerations. ” 
(pages 1032 -3)  
 
“…the Hon’ble Judge who were not the part of the 
Bench which heard the matter would not like to sit 
as a court of appeal, while considering the review 
matter. ” (at page 1034)  
 
In the above cited case there was some justification for the 
constitution of a larger Bench since the learned judges were not 
unanimous in their esteemed views and as the matter was of 
immense constitutional and legal importance, involving as it did 
the treatment to be meted out to those who had been judges of 
the superior courts.  However,  the said judgment of this Court, 
the review whereof is sought, was a unanimous judgment. Larger 
Benches may also be constituted when there are conflicting 
judgments of this Court and such conflict needs resolution, but 
here we are not faced with conflicti ng judgments. With utmost 
respect, the matters to be considered in these review petitions are 
not of a nature that may have required a departure from the Rules 
and the longstanding continuous practice of this Court. 
Therefore, I would humbly request the Ho n’ble Chief Justice to 
let these matters be heard by the same number of judges who had 
earlier heard the case, i.e. three members, incidentally two of 
whom (including myself) are still on the Bench.”  
 
 
Despite my abovementioned note , a larger Bench of five  Members was 
constituted to hear these matters.   To paraphrase, it was noted, that: (1) no request for 
the constitution of a larger Bench was made, (2) Rule 8 of Order XXVI of the Supreme 
Court Rules (“ the Rules ”) required review petitions to be ordinarily  heard by the same 
Bench, (3) the reasons (for not constituting larger Benches ) were most ably enunciated 
in the referred to judgment of my learned colleague, (4) it wasn’t the practice of this 
Court to constitute larger Benches to hear review petitions an d (5) that a larger Bench 
hearing a review would be effectively sitting as a court of appeal.  
 
3. Mr. Kamran Murtaza, t he learned counsel for one of the respondents , objected to 
the formation of the Bench , however, m y distinguished colleagues over-ruled the 
objection  in the following terms:  
“Rule 8 of Order XXVI of Supreme Court R ules, 1980 stipulates 
that as far as practical the review will be heard by the same 
Bench.  The Rule provides a flexibility in constitution of the 
Bench, and rightly so, as there m ay be situation where the 
constitution of the same Bench may be impossible for the reason 
beyond the control of anyone, as in case of retirement of a judge 
or his indisposition on account of failing health.  The objection 
therefore, is misconceived and acc ordingly repelled.”  
 CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  3 
4. Article 188 of t he Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“the 
Constitution ”) provides how review of the judgments and orders of this Court are to be 
attended to, which is reproduced hereunder:  
“188. Review of judgments o r orders by the Supreme Court. -
The Supreme Court shall have power, subject to the provisions 
of any act of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)  and of any rules made 
by the Supreme Court, to review any judgment pronounced or 
any order made by it.”  
 
 
Article 188 ma kes it clear that the powers of review are subject to Federal law 
and of any rules made by the Supreme Court. There is no Federal law on the subject . 
However, th e Supreme Court  has enacted  the Supreme Court Rules 1980 (“ the Rules ”) 
and Rule 8 of the Order XXVI of the Rules (“the said Rule ” or “ Rule 8 ”) is in respect 
of review applications and provides that, “ As far as practicable the application for 
review shall be posted before the same Bench  that delivered the judgment or order 
sought to be reviewed ” [emp hasis added].  Once rules as envisaged under Article 188 of 
the Constitution have been enacted with regard to the review jurisdiction  such rules , that 
is the Rules, have great sanctity. Since  Rule 8 clearly states  that the application for 
review should be posted for hearing as far as practicable  before the same Bench  
therefore  compliance is required to be made with the said provision, unless there are 
compelling reasons  for not doing so.  As Chief Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  had retired  
before the review petit ions were filed / heard  another Judge of this Court  was required 
to take his place.  Rule 8 however does not envisage the constitution of a larger Bench.  
It is also the consistent practice of this Court to post review petitions before Benches of 
the same s trength  as decided the judgment under review. Another practice is not to 
unnecessarily disrupt the normal work of the Court, therefore, review petitions are 
placed before a Bench of numerically the same strength  of which the author judge 
(unless he has ret ired) is always a Member , though the Bench may not include the other 
Members of the Bench who had earlier heard the case.   Since a larger Bench was 
specifically constituted to hear the review petition there was no justification to exclude 
a Member who had earlier heard the case. However, Justice Dost Muhammad Khan , 
who had earlier heard the case and who by the Grace of the Almighty is not suffering CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  4 
from  “indisposition on account of failing health ”, has been excluded.  The objection 
taken by Mr. Kamran Mu rtaza reiterated what Article 188 of the Constit ution read with 
Rule 8 provided, therefore in my humble opinion , it would not be correct to categorize 
it as “misconceived ” or which merited “ to be repelled .”  Moreover, in t he present case , 
to quote from the maj ority judgment,  a “situation where the constitution of the same 
Bench may be impossible ” has not arisen .  
 
5. In my earlier note of dissent I had specifically reproduced the afore -quoted 
extract from the judgment of my distinguished colleague (Justice Mian  Saqib Nisar) 
however, neither the reasoning contained therein nor the other points noted in my earlier 
dissent have been attended to. By constituting larger Benches to hear review petitions 
we ventur e into unchartered waters . When larger Bench es are const ituted  to hear review 
petitions this Court would,  to borrow the phrase of my illustrious colleague, “ sit as a 
court of appeal ” falling into the very pitfall that was to be avoided.   
 
6. Before proceeding to consider the merits of the matter there are a few additional 
legal issues that require atten tion. 
 
Entertaining the Government of Balochistan’s Time -Barred Review Petitions  
 The majority judgment (in paragraph 21) states that even though the civil 
petitions for leave to appeal (“ CPLA s”) filed by the Gove rnment of Balochistan against 
the judgment of the learned Judges of the High Court of Balochistan were barred by 
time they should have been entertained . In this regard the judgment in Mehreen Zaibun 
Nisa v. Land Commissioner, Multan  (PLD 1975 SC 397)  has b een referred  to.  It would 
therefore be appropriate to reproduce the following paragraph from the said judgment , 
which attends to the matter  in hand : 
“Some of these appeals, namely, Civil Appeals Nos. 23, 39 and 
40 of 1974, are barred by time in varying de grees but we would 
condone delay for the reasons stated in the relevant applications, 
as well as for the reason that they involve substantial questions 
of law of public importance which have in any case to be 
decided in the other appeals before us.”  
 
 CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  5 
In the above mentioned case, application s seeking to condone delay w ere 
allowed , as presumably the reasons stated therein were sufficient to do so .  However, 
we had dismissed the said CPLAs because no valid reason for condoning delay was 
mentioned  in the appli cations submitted in this regard .  Our order dismissing the same 
is reproduced hereunder:  
“Civil Petition No. 20 -Q/2015: - This petition is time barred.  An 
application seeking condonation of delay has been filed but no 
valid reason has been given therein t o justify late filing of the 
petition.  This petition is dismissed being barred by limitation. ” 
 
“Civil Petition No. 21 -Q/2015: -. This petition is time barred.  
An application for condonation of delay has been filed but the 
same does not contain any valid ground which would justify late 
filing of the petition.  This petition is dismissed being time 
barred.”  
 
 
CPLA Nos. 20 -Q and 21 -Q of 2015  filed by the said Government were barred  
by time  and t he applications seeking to condone delay (CMA Nos. 22 -Q and 24 -Q of 
2015) didn’t mention a valid reason to justify the ir belated filing.  As per t he said 
applications , the Government of Balochistan had learnt on 17th December 2014 about 
the judgment which had been announced on 27th November 2014 , by the Balochistan 
High Court . Even if this statement is accepted then too the said Government had more 
than sufficient time to prepare and file the petitions  assailing the judgment of the High 
Court .  Therefore, the applications seeking delay to be condoned were rightly dismis sed 
and nothing has been stated that may justif y us to review the said orders.  
 Merely because petitions on similar matters are to be heard does not mean that 
other time -barred petitions are automatically entertained too ; the judgment in the case of 
Mehree n Zaibun Nisa  (above) does not state so, and i f this precedent is established Rule 
1 of Order XII of the Rules , which prescribes the period (of sixty days ) for filing 
petitions for leave to appeal , would be made redundant .  In addition , the discretion 
vesting in this Court to condone delay in appropriate cases would be rendered 
meaningless , if the pendency of a similar matter was sufficient reason to entertain time -
barred petitions.  There is yet another aspect , once this Court has exercised its discretion 
not to condone delay the same cannot be subject ed to review , because the exercise of 
such discretion is not within the ambit of review jurisdiction.  CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  6 
Civil Review Petition No. 600 of 2015  
 
7. This petition cannot be categorize d as a ‘review petition ’ as it has not been filed 
by the Additional Advocate General Sindh, who was earlier heard on behalf of the 
Province of Sindh and two others.  Mr. Farooq H. Naek has sought permission to 
represent the petitioners. The application (CMA No. 6828/2015) submitted in this 
regard does not disclose why the said law officer of the Government of Sindh could not 
file a review , consequently, in my order dated 10th December 2015  the following 
preliminary questions were formulated:  
“Q. Whether (1) The Province of Sindh, throug h Chief 
Secretary, Government of Sindh, (2) The Secretary, Forest, 
Wildlife & Environment Department, Government of Sindh 
and (3) The Conservator Wildlife Sindh, Wildlife 
Department, Government of Sindh, Karachi can engage 
private counsel when the concerne d Law Officer of the 
Province of Sindh is available?  
 
Q. Whether the tax -payers should be burdened further to 
enable the official respondents the benefit of private 
counsel?   
 
Q. Whether the petition is maintainable without attaching the 
certificate of the  Advocate Supreme Court / Law Officer 
(Rules 4 and 6 of Order XXVI)  who had been heard? ” 
 
 
Unfortunately , the aforesaid queries  remained unanswered . Since the said 
‘review petition’ has not been filed by the learned counsel who had earlier argued the 
matte r nor the requisite certificate (in terms of rule s 4 and 6 of Order XXVI of the 
Rules ) of such counsel has been attached, therefore, the ‘review petition’ is not 
maintainable and is dismissed.  
 
Civil Review Petition No. 604  of 2015  
8. As regards this civil  review petition it would be appropriate to reproduce the 
following extract from my order dated 10th December 2015 : 
“This review petition is barred by four days. The application 
(CMA No. 7491/2015) which seeks that the delay be condoned 
does not give any r eason, save that the petitioner was “ unaware ” 
of the said judgment.  The petitioner was also not a party to the 
said cases wherein the said judgment was passed.  Therefore in 
this matter too, the following preliminary questions need to be 
answered:  
 
Q. Whether the petitioner being ‘unaware’ of the said 
judgment is a sufficient ground to condone delay?  
 CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  7 
Q. Whether the petitioner, who was not a party to the cases 
that were decided, can seek a ‘review’ of the said 
judgment?    
 
Q. Whether the petitioner is adve rsely affected by the said 
judgment?”  
 
 
 The l earned counsel representing the petitioner in this review petition however 
did not respond to any of the aforesaid queries.  The petitioner has not shown himself to 
be adversely affected by the judgment  and he was also not a party to the case .  
Moreover, t he petitioner being “unaware ” of the judgment is hardly sufficient ground to 
condone the delay in filing the review petition.   Consequently, the said review petition 
is dismissed.  
 
Civil Review Petition No. 607  of 2015  
 
9. It would be appropriate to reproduce the following extract from my order dated 
10th December 2015  which dealt with this review petition : 
“The petitioner had filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 
253/2015 assailing the judgment dated 27th November 2014 of the 
Balochistan High Court (in Constitution Petition No. 17 of 2011), 
however, the said CPLA was dismissed vide judgment dated 19th 
August 2015 of this Court for the reason that: “ the petitioner was 
not a party in the petition before the  High Court nor was a 
necessary or proper party thereto and is also not personally 
affected by the said judgment, therefore, CPLA No.253/2015 is 
dismissed ”. This review petition is also barred by sixty -one days. 
The petitioner has filed an application to c ondone delay on the 
ground that, “ the delay so caused were neither intentional nor 
deliberated  [sic]”. The following preliminary questions need to be 
answered before the matter is considered on merit:  
 
Q. Whether the delay in filing the petition can be co ndoned 
merely because the delay was unintentional?   
 
Q. Whether the petitioner, who was not a party to the cases that 
were decided, can seek a ‘review’ of the said judgment?    
 
Q.    Whether any fundamental right of the petitioner is violated if   
Houbara Bustards are not hunted? ” 
 
 
The d elay cannot be condone d merely because it was unintentional.  In any event 
the petitioner was not a party to the case and cannot seek review of the said judgment , 
particularly when he is not adversely affected by  it.  Conse quently, the said review 
petition is dismissed.  CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  8 
 
Enlargement of Jurisdiction  
 
10. The majority judgment has also decided to enlarge the scope of the dispute as it 
wants to examine the “ objects of wildlife legislation in respect of all vulnerable and 
threa tened ga me species including the Houbara Bustard ” (paragraph 24).  The stated 
objective may be otherwise commendable , but  such enlargement of jurisdiction (when 
hearing review petitions ), is not contempla ted by the Constitution or the R ules. 
 Undoubtedly, this Court under Article 184 (3) of the Const itution has 
jurisdiction, that has come to be categorized as suo m otu jurisdiction, but even resort 
thereto cannot be had to expand the scope of a review petition.  Whereas new and novel 
concepts may be welcomed  in certain disciplines the legal edifice should not be 
subjected to such vagaries.   We must endeavour to ensure that the interpretation of the 
Constitution and the laws is long-lasting  and sustainable.  A constitutional or legal 
provision once interprete d, explained and elucidated should not be lightly  revised .  A 
stabl e and durab le legal system  is built upon firm foundations.  
 
Ordering Hearing Afresh  
 
11. The majority j udgment concludes as under:  
  
“25. In such view of the matter there is an apparent er ror on 
the face of record.  We therefore, allow these review petitions, 
set aside t he judgment dated 19.08.2015.  T he Civil Petitions and 
the Constitution Petition shall be listed for hearing afresh.”  
 
 
We had heard these matters for quite a few hours over  three days (6th, 7th and 8th 
January 2016) therefore I am mystified at the aforesaid outcome.  If there is “ an 
apparent error on the face of record ”, (in the judgment under review, ) and it is “set 
aside ” then why are the cases “ listed for hearing afresh ”?  Neither the Constitution nor 
the Rules permit or contemplate this course of action and for good reason.  T he Bench 
“hearing afresh ” could conclude that the judgment under review did not merit a review 
or negate something which had been ‘ decided ’ by the m ajority judgment.  The decision 
given after the “ hearing afresh ” would also be subject to review.  Would the review be 
heard by the same Bench or yet a larger one?  The judgment then under review could 
also be set aside and the case ordered to be reheard, as has been done by the majority CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  9 
judgment.  As a result the legal certitude and the authoritativeness expected from the 
decisions of the Suprem e Court undermined.   
It is also not clear whether the “hearing afresh ” will include on the Bench the 
author of th e judgment under review .  
 
Review Petition Nos. 568 to 570 of 2015 Filed by the Government of Pakistan  
12. These three review petitions have been filed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  
I enquired from the learned Attorney General for Pakistan, who was representing the 
petitioners, whether with regard to the Act, the provincial wildlife laws, CITES and 
CMS the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is the concerned Ministry?  In the absence of a 
response , the learned Attorney General’s kind attention was drawn to t he Rules of 
Business, 1973 (enacted pursuant to Article 99 of the Constitution ).  The said R ules of 
Business distributes the business of the Federal Government “ in a distinct and specified 
sphere ” (Rule 2(vi)) amongst the “ Ministries and Divisions shown in  Schedule I ” (Rule 
3).  Matters attended to in the Act, the provincial wildlife laws, CITES and  / or CMS do 
not fall within the domain of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  These review petitions are 
therefore filed by an unconcerned and unaffected party, i .e. the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs.  Such filing also transgress es the Rules of Business, 1973 , therefore, as  these 
review petitions are not maintainable they are dismiss ed.  I may observe that i t is a 
matter of grave concern that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is facilitating the 
transgressi on of the Act, which is a Federal law, and the wildlife laws of three 
provinces.  
Code of Conduct for Hunting Houbara Bustard  
13. The learned Attorney General and Mr. Farooq H. Naek referred to the “Code of 
Conduct fo r Hunting Houbara Bustard” (“ the said Code ”) issued by the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs to show that considerable care regarding over hunting of the Houbara 
Bustard has been taken in the said Code.   The said Code has been issued by the Deputy 
Chief of Proto col, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Islamabad .  As noted in the foregoing 
paragraph the matter did not fall within the domain of Ministry of Foreign Affiars, 
therefore, an officer of the said Ministry too had no jurisdiction to issue the said Code.  CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  10 
In respo nse to my query it was also confirmed that the said Code had no statutory 
backing of any law, rule or regulation .  The said Code stipulates that only a hundred 
birds can be hunted, “ through falconry and use of firearm is prohibited ”.  What would 
be the con sequence if a foreign dignitary hunts double the stipulated number or even ten 
times the number or uses firearm s?  Apparently n othing , because t he said Code is bereft 
of statutory cover .   
Seasonal Hunting  
14. The learned law officers and other learned cou nsel also stated that hunting of 
Houbara Bustard is permitted for a very short duration and the rest of the year it is 
prohibited when the bird remains protected.  The Houbara Bust ard is a migratory specie 
and only winters in Southern Pakistan, having flow n thousands of kilometers from 
colder regions. Therefore, to state that its hunting has been made permissible only for a 
short period is disingenuous at best, and misleading at worst .  It is expected that in a 
technical matter , which counsel may not have r equisite knowledge of, they  avail basic 
information about the subject  from experts , rather than submitting arguments which are 
based on incorrect technical information before the highest Court of the land.  
 
Does the Judgment Merit a R eview ? 
15. The re view  jurisdiction of this Court is a necessary one as it enables the judge s 
to correct material mistake s or error s in their judgment s. It provides an excellent 
opportunity to make amends. The question which needs consideration is whether the re 
was any material error in the judgment under review?  My distinguished colleagues 
thought so and set aside the judgment dated 19th August 2015 for the reasons (as stated 
in paragraph 23 of the majority judgment) reproduced hereunder:  
(a) “This Court while placing a complete b an on hunting of 
Houbara Bustard has seemingly overlooked the anomaly 
created by it”,  as “the laws” do not envisage a permanent 
ban on hunting; and   
(b) “We also need to examine if a direction can be issued to 
the legislature by the superior courts to legislat e on a 
particular subject as has been so directed in the judgment 
under review”.  
 CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  11 
16. The judgment under review ( has been reported as Province of Sindh v Lal Khan 
Chandio , 2016 SCMR 48) considered the provincial wildlife laws and T he Pakistan 
Trade Control  of Wild Fauna and Flora Act, 2012 (“ the Act ”) (in paragraph 5) . The Act 
was enacted , “to give effect to the provisions of the Convention on International Trade 
in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ” (“CITES ”). Section 27 of the Act 
stipulates that, “the provisions of this Act or rule made there under shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law ”, i.e. it would prevail over the 
provincial wildlife laws .  However, e ven if the Act did not s tate this, Article 143 of the 
Constit ution mandates that if a provincial law , or any part thereof , is repugnant to a 
Federal law the provincial law , or the contravening part thereof , shall be void.  
The majority judgment  refers  to the Act, but discount s it by stating, that it is, 
“not applica ble to the present controversy ”. Even though it provided legal cover to 
CITES and the Houbara Bustard is listed in Appendix II of CITES.  The majority 
judgment also referred to the , “Balochistan Act, 2014 and KPK Act, 2015 [and that 
these two laws] recogniz es CMS ”. 
The laws of Pakistan and of the provinces specifically re cognize  both CITES 
and CMS, which categorize Houbara Bustard respectively as “ threatened with 
extinction ” and whose conservation status is “ unfavourable ”. The judgment under 
review had howev er noted that these laws are also backed by both Federal and 
provincial laws, however, certain provisions of the wildlife laws of the provinces 
Balochistan, Sindh and Punjab violated / infringed the Act, CITES and CMS . With 
respect to my colleagues no “ anomaly  [was] created ” by the judgment under review, 
but the anomalies (as mentioned in the judgment) were in the wildlife laws of three 
provinces. In this context it was recorded, that, “A bird’s eye view of the aforesaid laws 
highlights the contradictions a nd inconsistencies in the laws of Balochistan, Sindh, 
Punjab and the Republic of Pakistan. The treatment meted out to this migratory bird 
(Houbara Bustard) will depend on where it alights in Pakistan. ”   
Therefore, (i n paragraph 23 (iv) of the judgment und er review ) it was stated that, 
“The Provinces to amend their respective wildlife laws to make them compliant with 
CITES and CMS and not to permit the hunting of any species which is either threatened CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  12 
with extinction or categorized as vulnerable .” The need to make the laws complaint 
with CITES and CMS was eminently justified in view of the fact that Pakistan is a 
signatory to CITES and to the Convention on Migratory Species of Wild Animals 
(“CMS ”) and as these two conventions were recognized / incorporated b y our laws .  
It may be mentioned that the contention of Mr. Farooq H. Naek, recorded in the 
majority judgment, that CMS is not ratified by the Parliament was wholly 
inconsequential, so too the reference to the case of Societe Generale De surveillance 
S.A v . Pakistan through Secretary, Ministry of Finance  (2002 SCMR 1964), which is in 
respect of treaties that did not have any municipal law cover.    
 
17.    It is thus clear that  this Court did not direct the provincial legislatures to legislate 
on a particul ar subject in a vacuum, instead to resolve the prevalent contradictions 
within the provincial laws and the ir conflict with The Pakistan Trade Control of Wild 
Fauna and Flora Act, 2012 .  If the provinces do not to make the requisite changes in 
their laws th en the direction contained in paragraph 23 (ii) of the judgment under review 
would remain in the field and, “Neither the Federation nor a Province can grant license  
/ permit to hunt the Houbara Bustard ”.  Paragraph 23 (iv) of the judgment under review 
provided an opportunity to the provinces to permit hunting of the Houbara Bustard 
provided it was no longer “ threatened with extinction or categorized as vulnerable ” 
under CITES and CMS, failing which the ban on its hunting would remain in place . 
 
18. The majo rity judgment however states that the judgment under review had 
called upon the legislature to “ legislate on a particular subject ”. Respectfully this was 
not the case , instead requisite amendments to existing laws  were required to be made. 
Therefore, the q uestion posed for consideration  (reproduced as (b ) in paragraph 15 
above) did not arise. In any event there are a number of precedents of this Court  
wherein directions to legislate were issued .  In the case of Government of Balochistan v 
Azizullah Memon  (PLD 1993 Supreme Court 3 41) this Court  (the judgment was 
authored by Justice Shafiur Rahman)  unanimously directed to “ amend ” laws relating to 
the courts, judiciary and its officers “ within a period of six mo nths.” A m ore recent 
example include s the case of Election Commission of Pakistan v Province of Punjab  CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  13 
(PLD 2014 Supreme Court 668) . The unanimous judgment in this case was authored by 
the then Chief Justice (Tasssaduq Hussain Jillani,  CJ),  “direct [ting]  the Federal 
Government to make necessary enactments  to empower the Election Commission of 
Pakistan to carry out the delimitation of constituencies of Local Government.  The 
Government of Punjab is also directed to make corresponding amendments in the 
Punjab Local Government Act, 2013 .”  In the very recent case of Mandi Hassan v 
Muhammad Arif  (PLD 2015 Supreme Court 137), is another unanimous judgment, the  
author of which is my distinguished colleague Justice Mian Saqib Nisar and the Bench 
included the present Hon’ble Chief Justice .  This Court had directed,  “to take immediate 
steps for  [making] amendment in the provisions of Limitation Act, 1908 ”.  It is also not 
too long ago that the Full Court in the case of Nadeem Ahmed v Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 201 0 Supreme Court 1165) had called upon Parliament to a mend Article 175A of 
the Constitution in certain precise “terms”.  Since Parliament did the needful the matter 
concluded.  
In view of the aforesaid precedents and whilst exercising review jurisdiction, I 
may respectfully state that there was no reason to f ormulate the said question for 
determination.  
A similar case decided by the US Supreme Court  
19. In these cases though the Houbara Bustard is not arrayed as a party, who may 
have articulated its contentions or engaged counsel to represent it, yet we are t o 
determine whether it can be hunted or not.  Therefore, extra care is required in deciding 
such cases. Some of the learned counsel who sought review of the judgment categorized 
it as a “natural resource”.  One of God’s creations with a beating heart can n ot be 
described as a “natural resource”. The Supreme Court of the United States of America 
(“US”) in the case of (State of) Missouri v Holland  (252 U.S. 416), decided in the year 
1920, held that the state ’s “assertion of title to migratory birds, - an asse rtion that is 
embodied in statute ” would not entitle the state to claim title in the birds:  
“To put the claim of the state upon title is to lean upon a slender 
reed. Wild birds are not in the possession of anyone, and 
possession is the beginning of owners hip. The whole foundation 
of the state's rights is the presence within their jurisdiction of CRP Nos. 561/2015, etc.  14 
birds that yesterday had not arrived, tomorrow may be in another 
state, and in a week a thousand miles away. ” 
 The Migrat ory Birds Treaty Act of 1918 was  enacted p ursuant to a treaty between the 
US and Great Britain which protected migratory birds. The question before the US Supreme 
Court was whether it could be enforce d as  it was contended to be an unconstitutional 
interference with the reserved rights of the state s and which also contravened their statutes.  
Since the case has certain common features with the cases we heard i t will be useful to 
reproduce the following extract from the decision of the US Supreme Court rendered by Justice 
Oliver Wendell Holmes :  
“Her e, a national interest of very nearly the first magnitude is 
involved. It can be protected only by national action in concert 
with that of another power. The subject -matter is only 
transitorily within the state, and has no permanent habitat 
therein. But fo r the treaty and the statute, there soon might be no 
birds for any powers to deal with. ” 
 
20. For the aforesaid reasons there is 3 no legal or factual justification to review the 
judgment of this Court dated 19th August 2015.  Consequently, all the petition s are 
dismissed.  
 
Qazi Faez Isa  
Judge  
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
(Zulfiqar )  
 