IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
     
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA, CJ.  
MR. JUSTICE DOST MUHAMMAD KHAN   
MR. JUSTICE QAZI FAEZ ISA  
 
Const.Petition No.46/2013  
(Application by Abdul Hakeem Khoso)  
 
Civil Misc.Application No.  278-Q/13  
(Application by Sardar Abdullah Jan)  
 
Human Rights Case No.36052 -S/2013  
(Application by Abdul Ghafoor)  
 
Civil Misc. Application No.2696 of 2014  
(Application by Abdul Hakeem Khoso)  
 
Civil Misc. Application No.6084/14  
(Application by Residents of Village Mitho Khoso 
Tando Adam regarding deplorable condition of 
Road)  
 
Civil  Misc. Application 6104/14 in  
(Application by Mr. Maqbool Ahmed regarding 
violation of Quota System by Organizations working 
in Kamber Shahdad Kot)  
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the  petitioner(s)/applicant(s) :   Mr. Roshan Ali  Lakhan, in person  
       (in CMA NO.613 -K/13)  
      Mr. Muhammad Asif Khan Dumar  
      (in CMA 278 -Q/13)  
 
For the Federation:     Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:    Mr. Muhammad Ayaz Swati, Add l. A.G.  
      Mr. Abdul Qadoos Khan, Director  
 
Government of KPK:    Mr. Mujahid Ali Khan , Addl. A.G.  
       
 
For Govt. of Punjab:     Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, Addl. A.G.  
      Irfan Javed, SO, (O & G) Energy Deptt.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh:     Mr. Shehyar Qazi, Add l. A.G  
      Mr. Tariq Ali Shah Shah, Director Energy Dep.  
      Mr. Zoahib Mushtaq, ADC -II, Sanghar  
 
For M/O Petroleum & NR:    Mr. Saeedullah Shah, D.G. PC  
Mr. Nazir Ahmed  Malik , Director (L)  
Mr. Hassan Mehmood, Director  
Mr. Afzal Malik, Dy. Director  Const.P.46/13 etc.  2 
Pirzada Shamsher Ali, A/O  
Mr. Arif Baig, A.D  
Mr. Ghulam Akbar, APS to Director (L)  
 
For OGDCL:      Mr. Abdul Rauf Khajak, GM, CSR  
      Mr. Bashir Ahmed, Asstt.Manager  
      Mr. Nasir Shabbir, Asst. Law Officer  
 
For SSGC:      Mr. Abid Hassan Minto, Sr. ASC  
 
For UEPL:      Nemo  
 
Date of hearing:     26-27.8.2015  
      
ORDER  
 
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.   Mr. Muhammad Ayyaz Swati, Additional 
Advocate General  of Balochistan , has filed CMA 5752/2015 containing a letter of 
the Chief Ministe r, Balochistan dated 15.04.2014, t he Summary for the Chief 
Minister dated 29.03.2015 , letter dated 11.07.2015 of the Chief Minister and its 
reply by the Federal Government dated 13.07.2015. These documents reveal the 
displeasure of the Province with the Federal Government with regard to th e 
unilateral extension of a natural gas  mining lease after its expiry by efflux of 
time. The Province has rightly drawn the attention of the Federal Government to 
Article 172  (3) of the Constitution which stipulates that, “mineral oil and natural 
gas withi n the Province or the territorial  waters  adjacent thereto shall vest jointly and 
equally in that Province and the Federal Govern ment.” If the Federal Government has 
disregarded this  constitutional provision the Province has rightly aired its 
grievance. The  learned DAG however has refe rred to letter dated 13.07.2015 of 
the Federal Minister for Petroleum which states  that, “it is the intent of the Federal 
Government to take the Government of Balochistan on board ” therefore if time is 
granted the matter will b e resolved. To ensure the functioning of the Federation 
in accordance with the Constitution we expect that every provision of the 
Constitution , including Article 172  (3), will be given effect to  and  the matter 
resolved by the next date.  
 
2. In the order p assed as far back as on 27.12.2013  it had been noticed by the 
Court that very substantial amounts by way of marine research fees, social 
welfare obligation s and production bonus, which were due and payable by the 
oil and gas companies, who had obtained pro specting licenses or mining leases, 
were outstanding and had not been recovered from them despite contractual 
commitments. As a result of the order in this Suo Moto case, we were informed Const.P.46/13 etc.  3 
yesterday by the Director General Petroleum Concessions (‘DGPC ’) that a total 
amount of Rs.111 billion, which is equivalent to 109 million dollars , was 
recovered from the oil and gas companies .  
3.  In our order of 27.12.2014 we had also directed the DGPC to devise a 
monitoring mechanism for the projects set up from the af oresaid amounts that 
had been recovered. The DG PC states that although a mechanism has been 
devised and receipt of revenues under the heads of social obligations, marine 
research fee and production bonus are being monitored by himself , it is not 
possible f or him to actually monitor individual projects and the amount being 
spent on the same. We had also noted that one of the reasons for this was that 
there are no local governments in place in the three Provinces of Pakistan, other 
than Balochistan .  
4. The D GPC states that 3,400,000/ - dollars are lying with the Government 
of Balochistan from the aforesaid heads , but the same have not been spent , and 
that the projects which may  be implemented would not be monitored.   A similar 
situation prevails in the provinc e of Sindh where an amount of 3.2 billion rupees 
has been received , but there is no effective monitoring system in place for the 
purpose of evaluating the projects and the amount spent thereon in the various 
districts of Sindh.  Likewise in  Khyber Pakhtunk hwa ( KPK ) a sum of  1.2 billion 
rupees has been  received , but presently Mr. Mujahid  Ali Khan,  learned Law 
Officer is not in a position to state as  to how much amount has been spent in the 
districts from  which oil and gas is being extracted. In Punjab a tota l sum of  437 
million  rupees  has been received by way of production bonus and social welfare 
obligation s. Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, t he learned Law Officer , states that he has filed 
a report in this behalf. The provinces of Sindh, Balochistan and KPK shall also 
file reports. These reports should specify in detail the monitoring mechanism for 
amounts spent and the projects initiated or completed. The Secretary Law and 
Justice Commission of Pakistan shall also look into the above matters and devise 
a monitoring and  evaluation framework so that the amounts received from the 
oil and gas prospecting and mining companies are properly spent in accordance 
with the policies of the Governments.  
5.  We were also informed that initially the I.T. Department of Government 
of K PK had taken upon itself the responsibility for devising a mechanism , but it 
has not ful filled this commitment. Let DG PC also submit a report  in this regard . Const.P.46/13 etc.  4 
6. Copy of this order be sent to the Minster and Secretary, Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Reso urces, Chief Minister and Chief Secretary, 
Government of Balochistan.   
 Re-list after two weeks.  
 
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the   
27th August, 2015  
Nisar /- 