IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
Civil Petition No.  42/2024 
(On appeal a gainst the judgment dated 
10.01.2024  passed by Peshawar High Court,  
Peshawar , in WP No. 6173 -P/2023 ) 
 
  
Election Commission of Pakistan through Special 
Secretary, Islamabad   
…Petitioner  
                                  
Versus  
 
Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf, Islamabad through its 
authorized person and others   
…Respondents  
  
For the Petitioner : 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               Mr. M. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC  
Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC  
Mr. Arshad Khan, DG ( Law) ECP  
Mr. Masood Sherwani, DG (P/F) ECP  
Mr. Khurram Shehzad, Addl. DG (Law) 
ECP 
 
 
For the F ederation:  Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
 
For Respondents  1,2 & 4 : 
 
 Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
Syed Ali Zafar, ASC  
Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC and  
Mr. Ajmal Ghaffar Toor, ASC  
Mr. Niazullah Khan Niazi, ASC  
Mr. M. Sharif Janjua, AOR  
assisted by Mr. Abdullah Malik, Advocate  
High Court  
  
For Respondent 10: Syed Ahmed Hassan Shah, ASC  
assisted by Mr. Badar Chaudhry, Advocate  
a/w Mr. Akbar S. Babar  
  
For Respondent s 3, 5 to 9, 
13 to 15, 19 to 22:   
N.R. 
  
For Respondent 11:  Ms. Noureen Farooq Khan  
  
For Responde nt 12:  Mr. Mehmood Ahmed Khan  
  
For Respondent 16:  Mr. M. Muzammil Sandhu  
  
For Respondent 17:  Mr. Yousaf Ali  
  
For Respondent 18:  Mr. Bilal Azhar Rana  
 
Date of Hearing:  13.01.2024  C.P. No. 42/2024  2 
 
 
ORDER  
 
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . The Election Commission of Pakistan (‘ ECP’) had 
issued a notice on 24 May 2021 to Pakistan Tehreek -e-Insaf (‘ PTI’) to 
hold intra party elections, which was followed by a show cause notice 
stating that section 208 of Elections Act, 2017 (‘ the Act ’) mandates 
that intra party elections in PTI must be held and it had been five 
years since the last one was held , and ECP stipulated the 
consequences, mentioned in the Act, which would follow if elections 
were not held. PTI did not dispute that elections had not been held but 
submitted that because of Cov id-19 the time for holding its intra party 
elections may be extended by one year. Time was granted and PTI was 
directed to hold intra party elections no later than 13 June 2022 and 
told that ‘ no further extension will be granted ’. 
 
2. Intra party elections  are stated to have been conducted by PTI 
on 8 June 2022, however, the ECP vide its order dated 13 September 
2023 held that PTI had ‘ failed to hold transparent, just and fair intra 
party elections ’ and that, instead of invoking the provisions of section 
215(5) of the Act, ‘ a lenient view has been taken with direction to the 
respondent party to hold its intra party elections strictly in accordance 
with the prevailing party constitution, within twenty days positively ’ 
failing which it ‘ would be ineligible to obtain an election symbol for 
elections. ’ PTI assailed ECP’s order before the Lahore High Court 
(‘LHC’) in Writ Petition No. 81171/2023, which was initially heard by a 
Single Judge, but on PTI’s request for constitution of a Full Bench it 
was listed for he aring before a five -member Bench together with WP 
No. 332/2023. While both these petitions were pending adjudication 
before the LHC, PTI contended that it had conducted its intra party 
elections on 2 December 2023 , but it did not withdraw WP No. 
81171/2023 . 
 
3. A number of complaints were received by ECP alleging that intra 
party elections were not held in PTI and the ECP issued notice to PTI, 
upon receipt whereof WP No. 5791/2023 was filed before the Peshawar 
High Court (‘ PHC’), and an ad interim order was  obtained against the 
ECP that it should not pass a final order till the determination of WP 
No. 5791/2023. Subsequently, WP No. 5791/2023 was disposed of by 
the PHC by directing the ECP to decide the matter by 22 December 
2023. The ECP passed order dated 22 December 2023 in which it held C.P. No. 42/2024  3 
 
that PTI had not complied with the directions issued by the ECP, and 
had failed to hold intra party elections in accordance with PTI’s 
constitution, the Act and the Election Rules, 2017 with the 
consequence that section 21 5(5) of the Act would be attracted 
pursuant to which PTI was ‘ declared ineligible to obtain the Election 
Symbol ’ which it had applied for.  
 
4. The order of ECP dated 22 December 2023 was assailed before 
the PHC in WP No. 6173 -P/2023, which was allowed vide short order 
dated 10 January 2024, detailed reasons whereof were given 
subsequently.  
 
5. Two representatives of PTI had filed another writ petition in the 
LHC bearing No. 287/2024 against the ECP which was disposed of by 
learned Single Judge vide order da ted 3 January 2024, holding that 
the prayer sought therein could only be granted if section 215(5) of the 
Act was declared ultra vires  the Constitution but since the same was 
not challenged the relief sought could not be granted. It was also 
mentioned that  a petition was pending in the PHC. An intra -court 
appeal was filed against the order of the learned Single Judge, 
however, a Divisional Bench of the LHC upheld the order of the 
learned Single Judge.  
 
6. WP No. 81171/2023 and 332/2023 remain pending in LHC . WP 
No. 6173 -P/2023 filed in the PHC did not disclose that WP No. 
81171/2023 was pending adjudication before a five -member Bench of 
the LHC, even though it pertained to the very same matter, that is, the 
holding of intra party elections in PTI. WP No. 617 3-P/2023, filed 
before the PHC, was not maintainable because the same issue, of intra 
party elections, had already been assailed by PTI before the LHC. If 
two and more courts have concurrent jurisdiction, while a petitioner 
may elect to avail of his remedy  before either court, but having chosen 
a particular court the same dispute cannot then be taken to the other 
court.  
 
7. ECP has been calling upon PTI to hold its intra party elections 
since 24 May 2021; at that time the PTI was in the Federal 
Government a nd in some provinces. Therefore, it cannot be stated that 
ECP was victimizing PTI. Nonetheless, we wanted to satisfy ourselves 
that the ECP had not acted mala fide  or for ulterior reasons or that PTI 
was discriminated against. It transpired that ECP had pa ssed orders C.P. No. 42/2024  4 
 
against thirteen other registered political parties which were far more 
severe than the order passed against PTI; one such case, of All 
Pakistan Muslim League, came before this Court on 12 January 2024 
and the order of the ECP, delisting the sa id political party, was upheld.  
 
8. ECP wanted to ensure that PTI holds intra party elections. The 
mere production of a certificate stating that such elections were held 
would not suffice to establish that intra party elections had been held 
when a challen ge was thrown to such an assertion. Nor, in our 
opinion, should ECP concern itself with minor irregularities in the 
holding of a political party’s elections. However, in the instant case not 
even prima facie evidence was produced to show that a semblance o f 
elections had been held. Fourteen PTI members, with stated 
credentials, had complained to ECP that elections had not been held. 
These complaints were brushed aside in the writ petition by simply 
asserting that they were not members of PTI and thus not en titled to 
contest elections, but this bare denial was insufficient, particularly 
when they had credibly established their long association with PTI. 
And, if any member of a political party is expelled it must be done in 
accordance with section 205 of the A ct, but no evidence in this regard 
was forthcoming.  
 
9. Democracy founded Pakistan, a fundamental aspect of which is 
the ability to put oneself forward as a candidate and to be able to vote, 
both within a political party and in general elections. Anything less 
would give rise to authoritarianism which may lead to dictatorship.  
 
10. The ECP is a constitutional body and amongst its duties are 
those mentioned in the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan (‘ the Constitution ’), Article 219(e) of which  stipulates that 
ECP must also undertake such functions  as prescribed by law, which 
would include those mentioned in the Act. Section 208 of the Act 
mandates that political parties must hold intra party elections 
periodically, and that a period not exceedi ng five years elapse within 
two elections. It further stipulates that every member of a political 
party ‘ be provided with an equal opportunity of contesting election for 
any political party office. ’ Members of PTI were not provided 
nomination papers when t hey went to get them nor were any intra 
party elections held. Incidentally, the notice issued by the PTI 
Secretariat state d that the elections were to be held in Peshawar but C.P. No. 42/2024  5 
 
did not mention the venue, and then the venue was shifted to 
Chamkani, which is a  village adjacent to Peshawar.  
 
11. Neither before the LHC nor before the PHC any provision of the 
Act, including section 215(5), was challenged. The observation of the 
learned Judges that the provision of the law was absurd  was uncalled 
for, particularly when no provision thereof was declared to be 
unconstitutional. Surprisingly, no declaration was sought, nor given, 
that intra party elections were held in PTI, let alone that the same were 
held in accordance with the law. If it had been established that 
elections had been held the n ECP would have to justify if any legal 
benefit to such a political party was being withheld, but if intra party 
elections were not held the benefits accruing pursuant to the holding 
of elections could not be claimed.  
 
12. We also  do not agree with the learned Judges that the ECP did 
not have ‘ any jurisdiction to question or adjudicate the Intra Party 
Elections of a political party. ’ If such an interpretation is accepted it 
would render all provisions in the Act requiring the holdi ng of intra 
party elections illusory and of no consequence and be redundant.  
 
13. Therefore, for the aforesaid and detailed reasons to follow, this 
petition is converted into an appeal and allowed by setting aside the 
impugned order and judgment of the PHC , passed in WP No. 6173 -
P/2023; resultantly, the order of the ECP dated 22 December 2023 is 
upheld.  
 
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD  
13.01. 2024  
(Farrukh)   
Approved for Reporting  