 
 SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Bench -V: 
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Shahid Waheed  
C.P. 4835/2019  
(Again st the judgment of the  Punjab Service Tribunal (at Rawalpindi) , 
dated 21.10.2019 , passed in Appeal No.3087 of 2019 ) 
 
 
Ijaz Akbar  
... Petitioner  
 
Versus  
 
The Director General (E xt.) L&DD, Punjab, Lahore and others  
 
... Respondents  
For the petitioner : Mr. M. Bashir Khan, ASC . 
For the respondents : Mr. Sanaulla h Zahid, Add l. A.G., Punjab.  
  Dr. Farooq, Additional Director , L&DD, Punjab . 
  Mr. Wasim Ahmed, Superintendent , L&DD,  
  Punjab . 
Date of h earing:  30.01.2023  
ORDER  
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. - The petitioner seeks leave to 
appeal against a judgment of the Punjab Service Tribunal, date d 
21.10.2019 (“impugned judgment”) , whereby the Tribunal while 
maintaining the findings of the departmental authorities as to his guilt 
on the charge of willful absence from duty,  has partly allowed h is appeal 
by reducing  his penalty from forfeiture of two -year service to forfeiture of 
one year service .  
2. Briefly, the  facts of the case are that the petitioner  was a 
Junior Clerk  in the Department of Livestock and D airy Development 
(L&DD), Government of Punjab , and posted in the office of the District  
Officer Livestock, Chakwal . He remained absent from his duty from 
02.02.2016 to  11.06.2016 . Upon  report of the inquiry officer holding the 
petitioner guilty of  the charge of willful absence from duty and 
recommending for the imposition of a major penalty, t he departmental 
competent authority imposed the major penalty of dismissal from service 
on the petitioner under Section 4(b)(vi) of the Punjab Employees 
Efficiency, Discipline and Accountability Act 2006  (“PEEDA Act”) . The 
departmental appellate authority , however, on appeal of the petitioner CP No.4835/2019  2 
 
 converted the penalty of his dismissal from service into forfeiture of his 
past two -year service and reinstated him in service. The departmental 
appellate authority also ordered that the intervening period from the 
starting date of his absence from duty, i.e., 02.02.2016,  to the date of his 
rejoining service  upon reinstatement  would be treated as an 
extraordinary leave without pay.  The petitioner preferred a service appeal 
to the Tribunal, which was partly allowed to the ex tent of reducing  his 
penalty from forfeiture of two-year service into  forfeiture of one-year 
service , by maintaining the findings of the departmental authorities as to 
his guilt on the charge of willful absence from duty . The petitioner , being 
not satisfie d with the judgment of the Tribunal , has filed the present 
petition for leave to appeal.  
3. The sole contention made before us by the learned counsel 
for the petitioner is that as the departmental appellate authority  had 
ordered to treat the period of abse nce of the petitioner from duty as an 
extraordinary leave without pay, therefore, the petitioner could not have 
been held guilty of misconduct and punished for the said absence from 
duty. He has  placed reliance , in support of his contention,  on LDA v. 
Nade em Kachloo  (2006 SCMR 434 ), Director -General, I .B. v. Muhammad 
Javed (2012 SCMR 165 ) and Sharif Abbasi  v. WAPDA  (2013 SCMR 903 ). 
4. On the other hand, the l earned counsel for the respondents 
submits that once the departmental appellate authority had conver ted 
the penalty of dismissal for service  into that of forfeiture of his two-year 
past service and had thus reinstated the petitioner into service , the 
period of his absence from duty had to be given so me treatment for the 
purpose of  regularizing  his reinst atement  in service , and such treatment 
does not wash out the guilt of the petitioner . In this regard , he has relied 
upon DIG, NH& MP v. Ghulam Mustafa  (2019 SCMR 95 ) and NAB v. 
Muhammad Shafique (2020 SCMR 425 ). 
5. We have considered the contentions of the learned counsel 
for the parties, read the cases cited by them and examined the record of 
the case.  
6. The u nauthorize d absence of a civil servant from his duty is 
an act which is prejudicial to ‘good order ’ and ‘service discipline ’, and 
thus constitute s misconduct  for taking disciplinary action against him .1 
Section 2(n)(vii) of the PEEDA Act has explicitly  included the  act of 
                                                
1 Imtiaz Lali v. Returning  Officer PLD 2008 SC 355; Muhammad Ali Bukhari v. Federation of Pakistan 
2008  SCMR  214. CP No.4835/2019  3 
 
 ‘absence  from duty without  prior approval  of leave’  in the definition of 
‘misconduct’ for the purpose of  application of that Act. An d, as per Rule 
2.11 of the  Punjab Civil Services Pension Rules  1955 , a Government 
servant forfeits h is past service in case of his absence from duty without 
leave.  Similarly, Article  420 of the Civil Service Regulations  states that a n 
interruption in the s ervice of an officer entails forfeiture of his past 
service subject to certain exceptions mentioned therein. In view of this 
legal consequence of the absence from duty, a disciplinary authority , or 
an appellate  authority,  tribunal  or court , when imposes a penalty lesser 
than dismissal or removal from service on a delinquent civil servant for 
his misconduct of being absen t from duty, it has to make an incidental 
order as to what treatment should  be given to the period of his absence  
for the purpose of giving  continuity to his service ; otherwise , the whole 
past service of the civil servant will  stand forfeited , which would be the 
imposition  of an additional penalty neither prescribed by the law nor 
imposed by the authority . The best possible incidental order , which may 
be made in such a situation,  is therefore to make  a fictional arrangement  
to account for such period  of absence  from duty in the service record of 
the civil servant by treating (deeming) the same  as an extraordinary leave 
without pay, rather than  any other kind of leave ; as in case of treating 
the said period as a leave of some other kind of leave  (even if found due),  
the delinquent civil servant may  claim pay of that period also, which  
would amount  to awarding  him a benefit rather than awarding a  penalty  
for his fault. Thus, after imposing a penalty other than dismissal or 
removal from service, the making of an incidental order as to treating 
(deeming) the period of absence from duty as an extraordinary leave 
without pay , in no way, wash es out the  misconduct committed.  It may be 
underlined here that a lthough Section 4(b) (iii)  of the PEEDA Act provides 
for the penalty  of forfeiture  of pas t service for a specific period , it has also 
limited the same to  a maximum of five year  period and thus does not  
permit the forfeiture of the whole past service exceeding  a period of five 
years.  In the present case, had the departmental  appellate authority not 
ordered  to treat the period of absence of the petitioner from his duty  as 
an extraordinary leave without pa y, his whole past service would have 
been forfeited , instead of the imposed penalty of forfeiture of past service 
of two years (reduced to one year by the Tribunal).  
7.  In case of an unauthorize d absence of a civil servant  from 
his duty , two courses are o pen to the departmental authority : (i) to 
condone the unaut horized absence by accepting his  explanation  (if found CP No.4835/2019  4 
 
 justified)  and sanction the  ex-post fact o leave under the relevant leave 
rules , or (ii) to initiate the disciplinary proceedings against him and 
impose a penalty  for the misconduct.  Therefore, a civil servant who 
remains absent from his duty  may apply for condonation of the absence 
by offering an explanation and seek the sanction  of ex-post facto  leave for 
that period. If the departmental author ity is satisfied that there was a 
sufficient cause for his  absence, it may condone the absence and 
sanction the leave ex-post facto . If leave is so sanctioned, then the 
departmental authority cannot initiate disciplinary proceedings against 
the civil serva nt for that absence from duty.  However, w here the civil 
servant who is unauthoriz edly absent does not re sume duty and offer 
any satisfactory explanation, or wher e the explanation offered by him is 
not satisfactory, the departmental authority is to  initiate the discip linary 
proceedings  and impose an appropriate penalty , which may range from a 
major penalty of  dismissal or removal from service to a minor penalty of 
censure  or withholding  of increment  for a specific  period,  mainly  
depend ing upon the nature of service, the position  (duty) of  the civil 
servant in that service , the period of a bsence and the cause  for the 
absence.  Where the penalty imposed on the delinquent civil servant is 
dismissal or removal  from service , it may not be necessary to pass any 
incidental order  relating to the period of absence , unless it is deemed 
necessary to recover any amount of pay, or other service benefit s, 
received by the civil servant during the period of his absence from duty; 
but w here any other penalty is awarded for the unauthoriz ed absence  
from duty , it will be necessary to pass some incidental  order as to how 
the period of absence should be accounted for and dealt with in the 
service record  of the civil servant . If the unauthorized absence from duty 
remains unaccounted  for, it will result in an interruption  in service  of the 
civil servant , thereby forfeiting his whole past service and affecting his  
seniority, pension etc. Such incidental  order directing how the perio d of 
absence should be treated i n the service record of  the civil servant  is 
thus an  administrative arrangement , which does not affect or superse de 
the order imposing the penalty .2 
8. The learned two -membe r benches of this Court in Nadeem 
Kachloo , Muhammad Javed  and Sharif Abbasi  referred  to by the  learned 
counsel for the petitioner  have, it is most respectfully  observed , 
mistakenly  mingled the two distinct  concepts  of : (i) the grant of ex-post 
facto leave to the  civil servant who remained absent from his duty, by 
                                                
2 State of Punjab v. P.L. Singla AIR 2009 SC 1149.  CP No.4835/2019  5 
 
 accepting his  explanation  (if found justified) , and  (ii) the fictional 
treatment given to the period of his absence from duty after holding him 
guilty of the misconduct for that absence  and imposing a penalty other 
than his dismissal or removal from service, for continuity of his service. 
The statemen t of law made therein , that by treating the period of absence 
from duty as an extraordinary leave without pay, the ground of 
unauthorized absence no more remains available for awarding any 
penalty , does not state the correct legal position . These cases, so  as far 
as they make the said statement of law  either expressly or impliedly, are 
overruled, while the contra view of a three -member bench of this Court in 
Muhammad Shafique  is respectfully agreed  to. Muhammad Shafique  has 
differentiated between t he retros pective  grant of e xtraordinary leave  
without pay for the absence under Rule 9(3) of the Revised Leave Rules 
1980 and the treatment given to the period of absence after imposition of 
the appropriate penalty for the misconduct of being absent  from d uty, 
and rightly held that treating the period of absence in the latter case as 
extraordinary leave without pay does not undo the penalty imposed.3 
9. In view of the  above legal position, the contention of the 
learned counsel for the petitioner is found me ritless. The impugned 
judgment does not  call for any interference. The  petition is therefore 
dismissed  and the leave to appeal, declined . 
  
 
 
 
Islamabad,  
30th January, 2023  
Approved for reporting  
Asif  
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
  
 
                                                
3 Muhammad Shafiq case has  been followed in the cases of Federation of Pakistan v. Mamoon Malik 2020 
SCMR 1154 (2 -MB) and NBP v. Zahoor Mengal 2021 SCMR 903 (3 -MB).  