 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
   (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
  Present:  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
 
 
CONSTITUTION  PETITION NO.77 OF 2010  
(President Balochistan High Co urt Bar Association  
vs. 
Federation of Pakistan, etc.  
AND  
H.R.C. NO.13124 -P/2011  
(Application by Altaf Hassan Qureshi)  
AND  
H.R.C. No. 40403 -P/2011  
(Application by Syed MajeedZaidi)  
AND  
H.R.C. No. 40220 -G/2011  
(News clipping)  
AND  
H. R. C. No. 43103 -B/2011  
(Application by Haji Abdul Qayyum)  
AND  
H.R.C. 27045 -K & 27619 -G/12  
(Abduction of Dr. Ghulam Rasool)  
AND  
C.M.A. No. 42 -43 OF 2012.  
(Enquiry report of Kharootabad Incident)  
AND  
C.M.A. NO.178 -Q OF 2012  
(Appeal for missing persons cases of Balochistan)  
AND  
C.M.A . NO. 219 -Q OF 2012.  
(Application by Maj. (R) Nadir Ali)  
AND  
C.M.A. NO. 431 -Q OF 2012.  
(Target Killing of Mr. Zulfiqar Naqvi, ASJ)  
AND  
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.107 OF 2012  
Nawabzada Talal Akbar Bugti  
VS.  
Federation of Pakistan, etc  
 
For the petitioner(s)   Mr. Kamran Murtaza, ASC  
Malik Zahoor Shahwani, Advocate/  
    President Balochistan High Court Bar.  
Mr. Sajid Tareen, Advocate/Vice President  
    Mr. Hadi Shakeel Ahmed, ASC (in Const.P#107 of 2012)  
 
For the Applicants/  : Mr. Salahuddin Mengal, ASC (in C MA 253 -Q/12)  Const. P. 77/10 etc.  2 
(complainants)    Mr. Nasrullah Baloch, (In CMA 178 -Q/12)  
    Maj. Nadir (in CMA 219 -Q/12)   
Amicus Curiae:   Mr. M. Zafar, Sr.ASC  
 
For Fed. of Pakistan:  Malik Sikandar Khan, DAG  
     
 
For M/o Defence:   Mr. Asif Yasin Malik, Secretary   
Mr. M. Irf an, Wing Commander/Director (L)  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. Amanulah Kanrani, A.G.  
Mr. Babar Yaqool Fateh Muhammad, Chief Secy.  
Mr. Naseebullah Bazaie, Home Secretary  
    Mr. Tarik Umer Khattab, IGP     
    
    Mr. Kambar Dashti, Commissioner Quetta  
Mr. Hussain Karar Kh. Addl. IGP  
    Mir Zubair Mehmood, CCPO, Quetta.  
Mr. Hamid Shakeel, DIG (Investigation)  
    Mr. Saleem Lehri, DIG/CID  
 
For IG FC:    Raja Muhammad Irshad, Sr. ASC  
    Major Sohail, HQ, FC  
    Major Shahid, FC  
 
For Mobile Operators:  Nemo.  
 
For PTA   : Syed Ikhlaq Hussain Musavi, Zonal Director.  
 
Date of hearing  : 08.09.2012.  
  
    O R D E R   
 
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ . The Secretary Home stated at the 
bar that Farhan s/o Ahmar Din Agha aged about 15 years, despite of hectic 
efforts s o far had not been recovered. However, further efforts are under way to 
achieve the object.  
2. The Commandant FC, Dera Bugti is not in a ttendance. Maj. Sohail, DAG, 
HQ, FC  stated that IG, FC has cancelled his leave on 7.9.2012 informed him about 
the order of the Court . He was in his native place Malakand from where 
according to their information he has left by road. However, we have directed 
Maj. Sohail to place on record the order of the cancellation of the leave and the 
time when the same was dispatched t o him so we may ascertain that despite the Const. P. 77/10 etc.  3 
directions as to why he is not in attendance. Maj. Sohail has filed the order of 
cancellation of leave of the Commandant which is to the following effect:  
“CANCELLATION OF LEAVE (.) LEAVE IN RESPECTS OF PA – 
28344  COLONEL ARSHAD HUSSAIN, COMMANDANT 
BAMBORE RIFLES FROM 31 AUGUST TO 15 SEPTEMBER 2012 
HAS BEEN CANCELLED (.) APPROACH THE OFFICER TO 
REPORT HQ FC QUETTA FORTHWITH (.) FOR GHQ AGs’ 
BRANCH PS DTE ONLY (.) REQUEST APPROACH OFFICER 
THROUGH UNITS DEPLOYED IN 1 1 CORPS AREA OF 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR CANCELLATION OF LEAVE CMM 
REPORT TO HQ FC WITH IMMEDIATE EFFECT (.) MATTER 
MOST URGENT”.  
3. Kaho, the person who is disappeared, has also not been produced despite 
of our direction s. Appropriate  orders in this behalf sha ll be passed on the 
appearance the Commandant FC, Dera Bugti. In the meanwhile, directions are 
repeated to the Commandant to affect the recovery of Kaho and produce him 
before the Court without fail.                 
4. To be loyal to the State is the basic duty of all  citizen and they have to be 
obedient to the Constitution and the law, wherever they may be. Similarly, it is 
also invio lable obligation of every person  for the time being within Pakistan. 
Thus, adherence to the Constitution and the Law by the c itizens, who are officials 
or otherwise, is mandatory. Non -compliance of the Constitution and the Law 
makes a citizen liable for action, in accordance with law. Government is bound to 
enforce fundamental rights i n the context of the scenario in  Balochistan , 
providing security of life, property and liberty,  in accordance with law. Non 
enforcement of such rights of the citizens call s for the superior Court s to issue 
directions to the Federal as well as Provincial Governments to protect the life and 
property o f all the citizens equally.  Const. P. 77/10 etc.  4 
5.  Hearing of the se petitions on different dates, from time to time  has  
persuaded us to issue direction s to the Federal and the Provincial Government s 
through their Chief Executives, the President and the Governor respectively  to 
make commitment, to which they are obliged to fulfill under the Constitution as 
well as in terms of the statement so made on their behalf on 31st July, 2012 by 
filing a written statement, which reads thus: - 
“In compliance of Hon’ble Supreme Court of Pa kistan order dated 24th July, 2012, 
passed in the subject petition, the Federation of Pakistan and Government of 
Balochistan submit as under: - 
 
That the Federation and the Provincial Government are highly conscious about 
their constitutional obligations wi th regard to the security of life and property of 
citizens as envisaged in Article 9 of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan.  
 
That the Federation and Provincial Government through their LEAs and 
intelligence Agencies will make all out efforts  to ensure early and safe recovery of 
missing persons, take steps and measures to identify and arrest the culprits 
involved in the target/sectarian killings, kidnapping for ransom and put them to 
justice and will further strengthen/enhance the level of coo rdination at the highest 
level amongst the different stakeholders to efficiently discharge with their 
constitutional obligations and restore peace and harmony amongst all the segment 
of society in the province and create conducive environment for the econo mic 
development, well being and prosperity of the Province.  
 
Sd/-    Sd/- 
Secretary    Secretary  
M/o Interior    M/o Defence  
Islamabad    Rawalpindi  
 
 
Sd/-    Sd/- 
Chief Secretary   Inspector General of Police  
Govt. of Balochistan   Balochistan  
 
 
Sd/-    Sd/- 
Secretary Home &   IG, FC  
Tribal Areas Deptt.Quetta”  
 
6.  3rg
1.t had been endeavo3rg
1.ing to exercise restraint at all levels, inasmrg
1ch 
as not taking interest of the Federation to provide assistance through the 
Attorney General has also been tolerated by following the one mechanism or the 
other. The invo3lvement of the functionaries as per the contents of the written 
statement, noted hereinabove, was nothing but to apprise them about their 
constitutional obligations. Unfo.tunately, both Federal and the Prov incial Const. P. 77/10 etc.  5 
Governments avoided for one or the other reason to honour the above statement. 
As a result whereof: - 
1. No missing person has been recovered;  
2. Target killing of innocent citizens, particularly for sectarian 
consideration including killing of the members  of the Ahl-e-Tasheih and 
other denominations continue and day by day it s numbers are 
increasing ; 
3. An Additional District Judge and two senior Police Officers had been 
killed alongwith so many other members of the law enforcing agencies 
including the Police , F.C., Levies and Costal Guards but wi thout 
adopting preventive measures by both the Governments;  
4. Abduction for ransom in the province of Balochistan has become a 
trade and this offenc e is being committed everywhere in the province, 
inasmuch as the profes sionals like the doctors and teachers are not 
safe. The people do come b ack on their own after paying r ansom from 
their pockets. The children, both male and female are reportedly being 
kidnapped for which, as well, no resistance has been shown.  
 
7.   Insp ector General of Police had submitted report, which is s elf 
explanatory .  
8.  The Secretary Defence was invo lved to achieve multiple  purposes 
including to assist civil administration and to ensure that if anyone, as alleged, is 
in the custody  of the agenci es, he may facilitate their release, as the citizens are 
alleging involvement of the F.C. and other agencies in this behalf but he had not 
shown any seriousness except attending the Court on 06.9.2012 and left for 
Islamabad without any excuse. He appeared today as per directions and had 
filed statement in writing .  
9.  The Secretary Interior, despite clear directions, failed to attend either on 
the ground of his illness or being busy in some meeting over there.  
10.  The Chairman F.B.R. was also asked to at tend the Court as it is general 
impression that on account of availability of massive arms & ammunitions  and 
non-custom paid vehicles (k abali) the offence of missing persons, target killing as Const. P. 77/10 etc.  6 
well sectarian killing an d abduction etc. is committed with  suc h vehicles. 
Unfortunately allegation i s against the agencies like ISI, M I etc. which are issuing 
Rahdaries  to the persons who possess prohibited arms & ammunitions in non -
custom paid vehicles and whenever any law enforcing agency apprehend them , 
they put u p resistance  on the basis of Rahdaries  and go scot free .  
11. These are the facts, which are the root causes for non -implementation of 
the Constitution and the Law.  
12. Attendance of Attorney General, in view of the facts and circumstances 
noted in the o rder dated 4th May, 3rd September, 4th September and 5th 
September, 2012 had been made conditional and no request from him nor either 
of these Secretaries had been made to allow him to attend the Court, therefore, 
we direct the Chief Secretary of the gover nment of Balochistan to bring all these 
facts in the notice of the Prime Minister, Governor as well as the Chief Minister 
and the Head of the Agencies and outcome of this discussion be reported to us at 
Islamabad on 19th September, 2012. All the functionar ies, who had signed the 
statement, reproduced hereinabove, are directed to remain in attendance.  
     
         Chief Justice  
   
                 Judge  
 
              Judge  
 
Quetta,  
8th September, 2012  
Nisar /* 
Not approved for reporting.  