IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah     
        
Const. Petition No. 21 of 2022  
 
Imran Ahmad Khan Niazi   …Petitioner(s)  
  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Law 
and Justice Division, Islamabad and another  …Respondent(s)  
                                      
 
For the Petitioner(s)  : Mr. Kh. Haris Ahmad, Sr. ASC  
Dr. Yas er Aman Khan, ASC  
Assisted by  
Ms. Zaynib  Ch. Adv  
Mr. Hashim Butt, Adv  
   
For the Federation  : Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Saad Hashmi, ASC  
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AG  
   
For the NAB : Ch. Mumtaz Yousaf, Addl. PG  
Mr. M. Sattar Awan, DPG  
Barrister Syeda Jugno Kazmi, Spl. 
Prosecutor  
   
Date of Hearing  : 29.08 .2023 
ORDER  
   At the outset of the hearing, the learned counsel for 
the parties, namely, Mr. Khawaja Haris Ahmad, Sr. ASC and Mr. 
Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC were requested to make  their 
respective submissions on the question raised by one of us 
(Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah) in his separate note dated 
18.08.2023 regarding the perceived effect of the Supreme Court 
(Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  (“Procedure Act” ) on the 
further proceedings in the instant petition. The Procedure Act has 
brought about two fundamental changes in the practice and 
jurisdiction of the Court: firstly, it has created a Committee Const. P. No. 21 of 2022   
   2
comprising the Chief Justice and the two next most senior Judges 
of the Cour t for fixing ‘every cause, appeal or matter’ before a 
Bench constituted by it (refer Section 2 of the Procedure Act). The 
effect of this provision is that administrative powers vested in the 
Chief Justice under the Supreme Court Rules, 1980 ( “1980 
Rules” ) stand transferred to the Committee. Secondly, the 
Procedure Act has provided a right of appeal against the 
judgments/orders of the Court passed under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution (refer Section 5 of the Procedure Act).  
2.    The vires of the Procedu re Act were challenged in 
Constitution Petition Nos.6 -8/2023 etc. Vide order dated 
13.04.2023, as affirmed by the order dated 02.05.2023, an Eight 
Member Bench of the Court suspended the operation of the 
Procedure Act. Briefly, the grounds for granting suc h an 
injunction were that:  
i. Section 2 of the Procedure Act appears to be premised on 
the approach that  the 1980  Rules  framed by the Full Court 
under Article 191 of the Constitution are subordinate to 
and thereby trumped by the Procedure Act. Such an 
approach interferes with the functioning of the Court in the 
matters of fixation of cases and formation of Benches that 
are regulated by the 1980 Rules. That amounts to a serious 
encroachment into the independence of the Judiciary.   
ii. Section 5 of the Procedure Act has been enacted under 
Article 191 of the Constitution which only allows 
Parliament to regulate the Court’s proced ure. However, 
Section 5 has conferred a substantive right of appeal 
against judgments/orders of the Court passed in matters 
decided under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. It is 
therefore allegedly beyond the legislative competence of 
Parliament. Further , an intra -court appeal before the Court 
has been provided by Section 5 to litigants despite the clear Const. P. No. 21 of 2022   
   3
requirement in Entry 55 of the Fourth Schedule that 
expanding the jurisdiction of the Court requires ‘express 
authorization’ by or under the Constitution  which is 
statedly lacking in this case.  
3.   Subsequently, on 26.05.2023 Parliament enacted the 
Supreme Court (Review of Judgments and Orders) Act, 2023  
(“Review Act” ) which expanded the grounds of review available 
against judgments/orders of the Court i ssued under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution. As a result, before arguing his case on 
the Procedure Act the learned Attorney General for Pakistan on 
01.06.2023 and 08.06.2023 acknowledged that the provisions of 
the Procedure Act required rationalization and modification to 
cure their overlap with the provisions of the Review Act. 
Accordingly, he sought time to allow Parliament to do the needful. 
The request was granted by the Court on 01.06.2023 and again 
on 08.06.2023 because as explained by the learned Attorney 
General Parliament was busy with the Budget Session and would 
remain so till July 2023.  
4.   Be that as it may, we are not inclined to comment on 
the vires of the Procedure Act which is a matter for the Eight 
Member Bench seized of Constitution Pe tition Nos.6 -8/2023 etc. 
to decide. It would clearly be presumptuous of us to assume the 
outcome on the above issue. However, it should not be ignored 
that the Procedure Act has been suspended by the orders of 
13.04.2023 and 02.05.2023 passed by the Eight Member Bench. 
The Federal Government thereafter in the hearing has neither 
requested for the recall of these orders nor for their modification. 
Consequently, so long as these interim orders are in the field we Const. P. No. 21 of 2022   
   4
are of the considered view that the same must be complied. The 
titled Constitution Petition has already undergone nearly 50 
hearings. Its proceedings have reached the final stage and are 
near conclusion. The said petition should therefore continue to be 
heard and decided by the present Bench. Any chan ge in the 
composition of the Bench is neither necessary as a matter of law 
or of propriety nor is it advisable at this end stage of the case. 
Indeed, concluding the case would serve the public interest as 
much time of the Court and public money have been e xpended in 
hearing the instant petition.  
5.   In the above circumstances, both learned counsel 
proceeded with the case. The submissions by Mr. Makhdoom Ali 
Khan, Sr. ASC are still ongoing. Adjourned to 30.08.2023  at 
11:45 am.  
    
 
 Sd/- 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 Sd/- 
Judge  
 
  
Islamabad  
29.08. 2023  
Naseer/Meher LC  I have attached my 
separate note.  
Judge  
 
 Const.P -21/2022, etc    1 
 
 Syed Mansoor Ali Shah, J. -  I raised the following question 
during the hearing of this case on 18 August 2023 :  
 
[W]hether  this Bench should continue hearing this case or should this 
case be adjourned till the Court first decides the constitutionality of the 
Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023 or in the alternate, 
should a Full Court Bench hear this case pending decision on 
constitutionality of the Act.  
 
Today, the learned counsel for the parties  made their submissions on  
this question. The Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan and my learned 
brother Justice Ijaz-ul-Ahsan have through their order of today  answered 
the question in negative on both alternatives, that is, they have not 
thought it appropriate either  to constitute a Full Court Bench for hearing 
this case or to adjourn the hearing till decision on the constitutionality of 
the Supreme Court (Pract ice and Procedure) Act, 2023 (“Act”) . I, with 
respect, disagree with my learned brothers and  by this note record my 
reasons  therefor :   
2.   Section 3 of the Act provides that the Bench for hearing 
petitions under Article 184(3) of the Constitution is to be constituted by a 
Committee comprising of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and two next most 
senior Judges of the Court, whereas Section 4 thereof mandates that any 
case involving the interpretation of constitutional provision is to be heard 
by a Bench comprising at  least of five Judges. The Act being a procedural 
law prima facie  applies retrospectively to the pending cases under Article 
184(3) o f the Constitution, including the present one. Although the 
operation of the Act has been suspended by an eight -member Bench of 
this Court, the Act would take effect from the date of its enforcement, not 
from the date of decision of the Court , if ultimatel y the Court upholds the 
constitutional validity of the Act. In case the Act is held to be valid, any 
decision given in the present case by this Bench, which is not constituted 
as per the procedure prescribed and of the strength of Judges required 
under  the Act, would  arguably be coram non judice  and thus a nullity in 
the eye of law.  
3.  Needless to underline that u nder Sections 3 and 4 of the Act, 
a due process is provided to deal with matters invoking exercise of 
original ju risdiction of this Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution 
and matters involving the interpretation of any constitutional provision. 
Section 3 read with Section 4 of the Act mandates hearing of a matter 
involving interpretation of any constitutional provision, which includes 
provisions containing fundamental rights, by at least a five -member 
Bench. Further, on the constitution of a three -member administrative Const.P -21/2022, etc    2 
 
Committee envisaged under the Act, a policy would have to be framed to 
deal with all the pending cases including the presen t one , where-under 
the present composition of this Bench might not remain the same.  
4.  Responding to the  observation that the Act being a 
procedural law also applies to pending cases under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, including the present one, the learned counsel for the 
petitioner while relying upon several cases1 contended that even a 
procedural st atute is not to be given retrospective effect if such effect will 
cause inconvenience or injustice. I am afraid, it is not for this Bench to 
decide whether the Act if ultimately held constitutionally valid should not 
be given retrospective effect to avoid any inconvenience or injustice but 
rather it is for the eight-member Bench hearing the case regarding  the 
constitutionality of the Act to decide upon this question. Similarly, the 
contention of the learned counsel for the Federation that in view of the 
well-settled opinion  of this Court as expressed in several cases2 the 
operation of the Act could not have been suspended is not for this Bench 
to deal with. This Bench cannot entertain this contention as a court of 
appeal to the Bench that has suspended the o peration of the Act.  With 
great respect, I also do not subscribe to the discussion made in this case 
by my learned brothers in their order of today, explaining the reasons for 
suspending the operation of the Act in another case, what the learned 
Attorney -General for Pakistan argued in that case and whether or not the 
Federal Government made any request for recalling the stay order in that 
case. While sitting in this Bench hearing the present case, we cannot, in 
my humble view, explain or defend the orders made or proceedings 
conducted by another Bench in some other case.      
5.  The learned counsel for the Federation has argued in favour  
of adjourning the hearing of the present case till decision on the 
constitutionality of the Act or in the alternate constituting a Full Court 
Bench to hear it, mostly for the same reasons as recorded in my last 
order  and reiterated above . And no satisfact ory answer has been put 
forth by the learned counsel for the petitioner to the proposition recorded 
therein that if ultimately the Court upholds the constitutional validity of 
the Act, any decision given in the present case by this Bench, which is 
not cons tituted as per the procedure prescribed in the Act and of the 
                                                             
1 Adnan Afzal  v. Sher Afzal PLD 1969 SC 187; Muhammad Bashi  v. Muhammad Firdaus PLD 1988 SC 232; Khalid 
Qureshi  v. United Bank Limited 2001 SCMR 103; Senior Member BOR  v. Bakhsh Bhutta 2012 SCMR 864.  
2 Federation of Pakistan v. Aitzaz Ahsan PLD 1989 SC 61; Aijaz Jatoi v. Liaqat Jatoi 1993 SCMR 2350; 
Commissioner Inland Revenue v. Yaqoob Ahmed C.P. 1796/2013 decided on 20.11.2013; Pakistan v. A. J. Textile 
Mills C.P. 471/2015 decided on 14.05.2015.  Const.P -21/2022, etc    3 
 
strength of Judges required under the Act, may arguably be coram non 
judice  and thus a nullity in the eye of law. The order of my learned 
brothers, I submit most respectfully, does not address t his concern  
either , even though th ey note in their order that ‘[it] would clearly be 
presumptuous of us to assume the outcome on the above issue.”  The 
decision of constitutional validity of the Act is an equally possible 
decision with that of its constitutional invalidity; it is not a presumption 
or speculation. No one can be sure of either of the decisions before 
pronouncement of the same by the Be nch concerned. Further, it is not 
the matter of compliance or non -compliance of the interim  order  passed by 
the eight -member Bench , which is only of temporary nature, the real 
concern is the effect of the possible final outcome  of the constitutional 
validity of the Act  on the present proceedings  and any decision given 
therein . There is a possibility that the instant proceedings and the 
decision given therein may become  coram non judice   and a nullity in the 
eye of law , if the constitut ionality of Sections 3 and 4 of the Act is upheld 
by the other Bench. So this Damocles ’ sword hanging over these 
proceedings can easily be removed  if either we await the decision of the 
eight-member Bench on the constitutionality of the Act  or  make it 
ineffective by placing  the matter before a  Full Court Bench.       
6.  The interim order of the eight -member Bench suspending  the 
Act was passed on 13 April  2023 more than four months ago and  there is 
no next date of hearing fixed in the case. This unnecessary delay in 
adjudicati ng a matter which directly deals with the core function ing of 
this Court is not understandable. Considering that almost 50 hearings 
have been held it the instant case , it therefore  doubly require s that the 
constitutionality of the Act be decided first at the earliest so that the 
Court can function in accordance with law rather than under the 
uncertainty of a stay order .  
7.  I, therefore , maintain my earlier view recorded in my note of 
22 June 2023 in Const. Petitions No.24 -26 of 2023 (Trial of Civilians in 
Military Courts case) and answer the question  in the terms that in order 
to avoid such an anomaly, the hearing of the present case should either 
be adjourned till the Court first decides the const itutionality of the Act or 
in the alternate a Full Court Bench should be constituted to hear the 
instant case.  
 
Islamabad,  Judge  Const.P -21/2022, etc    4 
 
29th August, 2023.  
Approved for reporting.  
 