YAHYA AFRIDI, J.: – Every judgment pronounced by the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan is a considered, solemn and final 
pronouncement on all points raised and decided in the case.1 
However, under Article 188 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973  (“Constitution”) read with Rule 1 of Order 
XXVI of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980  (“Rules”)  this Court is 
vested with the jurisdiction to review its judgment, in certa in 
circumstances. The judicial consensus of this Court is that a 
judgment passed on an erroneous assumption of material facts, or 
without adverting to a provision of law or Constitution, or without 
noticing an undisputed construction of law and Constitutio n 
amounts to an error apparent on the face of the record, and thus 
justifies positive exercise of the review jurisdiction.2  
 
2.  After careful and cautious consideration of the directions of 
this Court to the officials of the Federal Board of Revenue (“FBR”), 
the Hon’ble Chairman and learned Secretary of the Supreme 
Judicial Council (“Council”) , contained in paragraphs No. 4 to 11 of 
the short order dated 19.06.2020 (“impugned directions”) , I find that 
the same have been made by us without appropriately co nsidering 
the scope of the ouster clause of Article 211 of the Constitution 
and the relevant provisions of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001 
(“Ordinance”) . These two crucial omissions on our part are the 
marked and distinct “errors apparent on the face of the  record” 
and thus, warrant the positive exercise of the review jurisdiction of 
this Court.  
3. To start with, we need to appreciate the exclusivity of the 
constitutional domain of the Council secured under Article 211 of 
                                                             
1 Abdul Ghaffar v. Asghar Ali (PLD 1998 SC 363) [5 -MB]; Government of Punjab v. Aamir 
Zahoor -ul-Haq (PLD 2016 SC 421) [5 -MB]  
2 Muhammad Boota v. Member (Revenue) BOR (2010 SCMR 1049)  CRP.296/2020, etc.  2  
the Constitution, which expressly commands all courts, including 
this Court, not to interfere in the proceedings of the Council. The 
said ouster provision reads:  
 
211. Bar of Jurisdiction.  
The proceedings before the Council, its report to the President 
and the removal of a Judge under cla use (6) of Article 209 shall 
not be called in question in any court.  
No one  can doubt the wide -ranging power vested in this Court 
under Article 184(3) or Article 187(1) of the Constitution, to issue 
appropriate directions, while disposing of a case. Howeve r, where 
the Constitution under Article 211 expressly forbids all courts, 
including this Court, not to interfere in the proceedings of the 
Council, then the authority of this Court under Article 184(3) or, 
for that matter, under any other Article of the Co nstitution, has to 
yield to such definite ouster.   
4. The very essence of the ouster clause provided in Article 211 
is to curtail the jurisdiction of the courts, including this Court, to 
protect and preserve the autonomy and supremacy of the 
“proceedings”  of the Council against judicial interference. The term 
“proceedings” as used in Article 211, has been astutely elaborated 
in the case of Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v. President of Pakistan3, 
wherein it was observed that the word “proceedings” does not 
stand alone or is unqualified in the said provision but stands 
restricted and qualified by three other words, “before the council”.4 
Accordingly, the ouster of this Court’s jurisdiction applies to all 
proceedings that may take place before the Council. If the Council 
is to decide  on whether or not it should exercise its suo moto  
powers, such a decision would be a “proceeding” before the C ouncil 
and thus protected under Article 211 against any judicial 
intrusion. This constitutional protection exalts the pos ition of the 
                                                             
3 PLD 2010 SC 61.  
4 Ibid, para 67.  CRP.296/2020, etc.  3  
Council and establishes its legally lofted supremacy in matters 
relating to initiating and proceeding with inquiries against the 
Judges of the Superior Judiciary. And unless the very proceedings  
of the Council to proceed against a Judge of the  Superior Judiciary 
is positively adjudged  to be  coram non judice , mala fide or without 
jurisdiction , Courts are to jealously maintain the constitutional 
independence of the Council .  
5. In view of this constitutional mandate, any directions of this 
Court  setting steps for the Council, and for that matter, for its 
Hon’ble Chairman and learned Secretary, to follow  or to refrain 
from following  and that too, without  first adjudging its actions or 
inactions  to be  coram non judice , mala fide or without jurisdict ion 
would amount to excessive exercise of jurisdiction by this Court 
under Article 184(3) and Article 187(1) of the Constitution. Such 
directions of the Court amount to usurping the exclusive 
constitutional jurisdiction vested in the Council under Article 209 
and protected under Article 211 of the Constitution.  
6. To sum up, it would be safe to state that this Court did not 
have the jurisdiction to issue the impugned directions to the 
Council to consider initiating, or otherwise, an inquiry against the 
Petitioner Judge based on the “information” received from the tax 
officials of the FBR. If the instructions of the Court to the Council 
to consider the report of the tax officials, as vehemently argued by 
the contesting respondents, are not strictly considere d or taken as 
“directions” to the Council, even then the same has the effect of 
making this Court a “complainant”, and not the “adjudicator” in 
the matter. Similarly, if this Court issues direction s to the 
contrary, that is, refraining the Council from con sidering CRP.296/2020, etc.  4  
"information" obtained, this Court would then too be exceeding its 
mandated constitutional jurisdiction.   
7. Another important aspect that escaped the notice of this 
Court, while issuing the impugned directions to the tax officials 
was that the i mpugned directions , in effect, created a parallel 
regime alien to the scheme envisaged under the Ordinance. The 
Ordinance provides an intricate mechanism for the tax authorities 
to proceed in various matters relating to taxpayers, which range 
from procedur al guidelines, specific timelines and jurisdiction 
available to the concerned authorities, while at the same time, it 
also provides protection to the person being assessed, adhering  to 
the settled principles of ‘due process’ and ‘natural justice’.  
 
8. This Court has, in the judgment under review, passed 
binding directions to the tax officials to proceed in a set manner, 
overlooking the provisions of the Ordinance relating to taking 
cognisance of “definite information”; scrutiny of information and 
assess ment of income tax returns; and territorial jurisdiction.5 
Moreover, in making the impugned directions, we also lost sight of 
the procedure provided in the Ordinance, as to how tax officials 
are: (i) to proceed against a tax filer that has undeclared incom e 
and assets or mis -declared the same and within what time period; 
(ii) to determine the source of funds for purchasing the undeclared 
assets, whether generated in Pakistan or in some foreign country; 
and (iii) above all, to which tax year the undeclared l ocal assets or 
source of funds and the undeclared foreign assets and source of 
funds are to be added to and assessed.6   
                                                             
5 Section 209 of the Ordinance.  
6 Section 111 of the Ordinance.  CRP.296/2020, etc.  5  
9. With the force and guidance of the impugned directions of 
this Court, and that too, against persons not party in the 
constitution pe titions, expecting the probe by the tax authorities to 
abide by the “due process” provided under the Ordinance, would 
be a far cry. In the circumstances of the case,  the matter of probe 
against the spouse and children of the Petitioner Judge should, I 
think, best have been left to the concerned tax authorities to 
proceed under the Ordinance, without any specific directions. By 
giving directions to the tax authorities to proceed with the matter 
on the basis of a procedure and timeline foreign to the Ordinanc e, 
this Court has ultimately subdued the procedure prescribed under 
the Ordinance by expanding its role, inadvertently, as ‘legislator’ 
rather than ‘adjudicator’.  
10. Much was argued from both sides about whether Mrs. 
Sarina Faez Isa, who was not a party to the proceedings, was 
provided with a fair “hearing” befitting the bare threshold to suffice 
the principles of natural justice, before her case was referred to the 
tax authorities. One should not expe ct a consensus of a ten -
member B ench on this factual c ontroversy, as to whether Mrs. 
Sarina Faez Isa was provided with a fair “hearing”, and that too, 
based solely on her informal statement made while addressing the 
Court via video link on 18.06.2020. Therefore, in these review 
proceedings, it would be approp riate to remain focused on the core 
issues involved in the constitution petitions, and not be distracted 
by the factual controversy, as to whether Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa was 
provided with a fair and adequate opportunity to be heard before 
directing the tax o fficials to scrutinise her foreign assets. For, when 
a Court sits to review its own judgment or order, it does not hear a 
new case but only reconsiders its decision on the issues involved in CRP.296/2020, etc.  6  
the case already heard and decided, within the limits of its revi ew 
jurisdiction.  
11. Another error that crept in while making the impugned 
directions is the distraction from the fundamental issue of alleged 
misconduct of the Petitioner Judge qua the non -disclosure of 
foreign assets of his spouse, in his wealth stateme nt, filed with the 
income tax returns under Section 116 of the Ordinance. Though 
this was the main controversy, the impugned directions directed 
the tax officials to proceed against the spouse and children of the 
Petitioner Judge regarding the subject fore ign properties, instead of 
directing the tax officials to proceed against the Petitioner Judge to 
determine his liability, if any, in accordance with the Ordinance. 
Under the Ordinance,7 when a tax filer fails to furnish adequate 
justification for an asset , the same is then deemed as the tax filer’s 
asset procured through unexplained income chargeable to tax, and 
the tax is charged accordingly by adding that income under the 
head “Income from other Sources”. Thus, in case the spouse and 
children of the Peti tioner Judge fail to adequately justify the 
sources of fund for purchasing the foreign assets, the same would 
be deemed even then, under the Ordinance, to be owned by them, 
and not by the Petitioner Judge. Our concern, in the constitution 
petitions, wherei n the impugned directions have been given, was 
with respect to the independence of the judiciary and the 
accountability of the judges in the context of alleged misconduct of 
the Petitioner Judge, which has, in my opinion, been detracted 
from, by making the impugned directions against his family 
members.  
                                                             
7 Section 111 of the Ordinance.  CRP.296/2020, etc.  7  
12.  In view of the above deliberations, I find that the impugned 
directions affecting the rights of Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa, her son and 
daughter, have been passed by this Court in excess of jurisdiction, 
and are, therefore, recalled. Consequently, the “superstructure” of 
subsequent proceedings, actions, orders and reports built on the 
legally faulty “foundation” of the impugned directions would fall 
and have no legal effect on the rights and obligations of Mr s. 
Sarina Faez Isa, her son and daughter.  
13. As for the effect of the above declaration qua the allegation of 
misconduct against the Petitioner Judge, suffice it to state that it 
does not diminish or dilute the constitutional authority of the 
Council to consider, on its own motion, an “information” received 
from “any source”, whatever it may be, including the “information” 
contained in the report received from the tax official, for deciding to 
initiate an inquiry, or otherwise, into the conduct of the Pet itioner 
Judge. In this regard, we should not lose sight of clause 5 of Article 
209 of the Constitution, which clearly provides that “information 
from any source” can form the basis of an inquiry by the Council 
against a Judge of the Superior Judiciary. The  legal significance 
and practical implication of the insertion of the word “any” 
prefixing the word “source” in clause 5 of Article 209 of the 
Constitution has, in fact, expanded the pool from which the 
Council may obtain “information” to initiate an inqui ry into the 
conduct or capacity of a Judge of the Superior Judiciary. To 
interpret the word “any” used in clause 5 of Article 209 of the 
Constitution in a manner that would dilute the authority of the 
Council and restrict the information it can or cannot c onsider 
would amount to defeating the very command of the Constitution. 
Therefore, the Council, “on information” emanating from “any CRP.296/2020, etc.  8  
source” can proceed, on its own motion, with an inquiry into the 
capacity or conduct of any Judge of the Superior Judiciary . The 
decision  on the question,  whether to commence the inquiry or 
otherwise, is a matter that is within the exclusive domain of the 
Council. This Court , or for that matter any other Court, lacks the 
jurisdiction to restrict this vast authority vested in t he Council by 
the Constitution - the supreme law of the land.  
14. Before concluding, I think it is proper to make clear that the 
present order, by no means, seeks to curtail the lawful authority of 
the President, the Council and the tax officials to procee d against 
any Judge of the Superior Judiciary, including the Petitioner 
Judge, in accordance with law as mandated by Article 4 of the 
Constitution. We cannot champion the rule of law if we breed 
complacency in judicial accountability, a feature that seeks to 
uphold and bolster the rule of law. Thus, it is important to ensure 
that there are no artificial impediments to ensuring accountability 
of judges, provided accountability is pursued in accordance with 
law. This exposition of authority, in particular, of  the tax officials, 
however, should in no way detract them from their statutory duty 
to remain steadfast in ensuring the confidentiality of the 
information of a tax filer as mandated under section 216 of the 
Ordinance which, as noted in the judgment under review, was 
blatantly breached in the case of Mrs. Sarina Faez Isa: the tax 
officials on the unlawful directions issued by the Chairman ARU, 
Barrister Shahzad Akbar with the concurrence of the Federal Law 
Minister, Dr. Farogh  Naseem, breached the statutory  
confidentiality of Mrs Sarina Faez Isa’s tax returns. I feel 
constrained to observe that allowing the said delinquents to 
continue in such important positions of authority by the worthy CRP.296/2020, etc.  9  
Prime Minister, and that too after this Court has unanimously 
declare d their actions to be in violation of the Constitution and 
law, particularly the provisions of section 216 of the Ordinance 
entailing penal consequences,8 belies the most elementary 
principles of “good governance”, and expose the worthy Prime 
Minister ’s complicity in the commission of the said violations.  
15. As far as Civil Review Petition No.296 of 2020 is concerned, 
that is, in my view,9 not maintainable, as the locus standi  of the 
Petitioner Judge to invoke the original jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 184(3), as well the review jurisdiction therein, stands 
eclipsed till he holds the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan ; for he owes an obligation under clause 8 of Article 209 of 
the Constitution to observe the Code of Conduct issued  by the 
Council for Judges of the Superior Judiciary, that, inter alia , 
requires him to avoid being involved in litigation, for himself or 
even on behalf of others, which includes public interest litigation  
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . The obj ect is to avert any 
chance of a Judge of the Superior Judiciary being placed in a 
position , where his conduct may be seen as unbecoming of a 
Judge, glimpses of which were seen during the proceedings of the 
present review petitions.  
16. In summation of the above discourse, my considered opinion 
on the essential issues raised  in the present review petitions are 
that: 
i. This Court cannot pass any direction  that would, in essence, 
prompt or pre -empt the Council to proceed in a certain 
manner or refrain it to proceed in any manner as it would, in 
fact, amount to judicial intervention in the “proceedings 
                                                             
8 See Judgment of Umar Ata Bandial J, paras 85 and 136(x); Judgmen t of Maqbool Baqar J, para 
65; Judgment of Syed Mansoor Ali Shah J, paras 38 and 81(ii); Judgment of Yahya Afridi, J., 
paras 47 and 52.  
9 See my view recorded in detail in my minority judgment delivered on 23 October 2020 in 
Constitution Petition No. 17/20 19 of the Petitioner Judge.  CRP.296/2020, etc.  10  
before the Council”, and thereby offend the express manda te 
of Article 211 of the Constitution, unless the very 
“proceedings” are determined to be coram non judice , mala 
fide or without jurisdiction, which has not been established 
in the case in hand;   
ii. The impugned directions of this Court to the Council to 
consider the Report of the tax officials amounts to judicial 
interference in the “proceedings before the Council”, and 
thus violates the autonomy and supremacy of the 
“proceedings” of the Council against judicial interference  
envisaged under Article 211 of th e Constitution;  
 
iii. The Council is, however, on its own motion, competent to 
consider  or refuse to consider  “information” received from 
“any” source, be it the Report of the tax officials, to 
determine whether to inquire or not inquire into the conduct 
of the  Petitioner Judge or otherwise;  
 
iv. The impugned directions to the tax officials to inquire into 
the affairs of the spouse and children of the Petitioner Judge, 
setting out the manner and the timeframe in which they are 
to proceed, violate and are alien to, the provisions of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001, and have subdued th e 
procedure prescribed there under;  
 
v. The President and the Council have the authority, and are 
free to proceed against any Judge of the Superior Judiciary, 
including the Petitioner Judge for alleged misconduct, in 
accordance with Article 209 of the Constitu tion; 
 
vi. The tax officials are competent to proceed against the 
Petitioner Judge or any other Judge of the Superior 
Judiciary, serving or retired, his spouse or/and children, 
without fear or favour, in relation to his or her tax affairs 
only in accordance wi th the provisions of the Income Tax 
Ordinance,  2001 and not otherwise  on the basis of unlawful 
directions ; 
 
vii. Section 216 of the Income Tax Ordinance, 2001, commands 
confidentiality of the information of a tax filer, and breach 
thereof exposes the delinquent  to penal consequences under 
sections 198 and 199 of the Ordinance. Such consequences 
are attracted in the present case to those giving the unlawful 
directions, namely , Chairman ARU, Barrister Mirza Shahzad 
Akbar with the concurrence of the Federal Law Min ister, Dr. 
Farogh  Naseem ; the  tax officials executing the unlawful 
directions in breach of section 216 of the Ordinance;  and 
finally, the worthy Prime Minister, who despite clear and CRP.296/2020, etc.  11  
unanimous finding of misdoings of the named delinquents 
by this Court, re tained them in position s of authority, 
thereby  blatantly expos ed himself to complicity in the 
commission of the said violation .  
 
viii. The Petitioner Judge or any other serving Judge of the 
Superior Judiciary lacks the locus standi  to invoke the 
original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184(3), as 
well as the review jurisdiction therein, as their right to 
invoke the same stands eclipsed, till they hold the office of a 
Judge of the Superior Judiciary, essentially to avert a 
position where their conduct may be seen as unbecoming of 
a Judge, as ordained in Code of Conduct issued by the 
Council for Judges of the Superior Judiciary.   
 
17. These are the detailed reasons for my short order dated 
26.04.2021 , which read : 
 
For the reasons to be recorded later, all review petitions 
except C.R.P. No. 296 of 2020, are allowed and the 
directions contained in paragraphs No. 4 to 11 of the order 
dated 19.06.2020 and detail judgment dated 23.10.2020 
passed in Constitution Petition No. 17 of 2019 and other 
connected petitions are recalled. Consequently, all the 
subsequent proceedings, actions, orders and reports made 
in pursuance of the said directions  are declared to be of 
no legal effect and/or consequences.  
 
Judge  
  