IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
 
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:
 
        Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry,HCJ  
 Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
 Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
        Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
        Mr. Justice Ejaz Afzal Khan  
 
 
 
Suo Moto Case No. 16 of 2011 A/W CMAs .
 
(Implementation proceedings of Judgment  
of this Court reported as PLD 2011 SC 997)  
  AND 
Crl. O. Petition No. 96 of 2012
 
(Senator Haji Adeel Vs. Raja M. Abbas, etc)  
AND 
Crl. O. Petition No. 29 of 2013
 
(Wattan Party , etc Vs. Fed. Of Pakistan, etc)  
AND 
 
(Action Taken on Press Clipping  
 dt. 05.09.2009 the Daily “ The News”)  
AND 
Civil Petition No. 506 -K of 2009
 
(Shaukat Hussain Vs. Muhammad Younas)  
 
On Court N otice:
 
For Federation:   Mr. Syed Mohsin Imam DAG.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh:  Mr. Abdul Fatah Malik, AG. Sindh.  
    Mr. Muhammad Shahadat Awan, PG,  
Mr. Muhammad Sarwar Awan, Addl. AG  
Mr. Adnan Karim, AAG, Sindh  
Mr. Arif Ahmed Khan In -charge Chief 
Secretary/Additional Secretary P&D.  
Mr. Mohammad Naseer Jamali Additional   
Chief Secretary (Services)  
 
For Sindh Police:   Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC  
Mr. Ghulam Shabbir Shaikh, Acting IGP  
    Mr. Zakir Hussain, Addl. IGP  
    Mr. Rasool Bux IGP (Special Branch).  
    Capt (R) Tahir Naveed, DIG East  
    Mr. Zafar  Abbas Bukhari, DIG West  
    Mr. Shahid Hayyat, DIG, South  
    Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG Legal  
    Mr. Farooq  Ahmed  Awan, SSP, SIU , 
Mr. Niaz Ahmed Khosa, SSP, AVCC  Suo Moto Case No. 14 of 2009SMC 16/2011  2 
Mr. Maqsood  Ahmad , SP, 
Mr. Najam Tareen S.P,  
Mr. Irfan Bahadur SP  
(Anti-Encroachment Force ) 
 
Sindh Police Officers  
on Contract basis :  Capt. (R) Salman Syed Mohammad DIG.  
    Mr. Rasool Bux Saand DIG.  
Comdr (R) Shoukat Ali Shah DIG.    
Lt. Col. (R) Nadeemullah Qazi DIG.  
Lt. Col. (R) M.A. Wahid Khan SP.  
Mr. Manzoor Ahmed Mughal DIG.  
Mrs. Tabassu m Abbasi Project Director.  
Mr. Mohib Ali SP  
Mr. Mohammad Hassan Dal, SP.  
Mirza Abdul Majeed SP.  
Syed Sahib Ali Shah DSP.  
Mr. Anwar Alam Subhani PDSP  
Mr. Rehmatullah DSP.  
Mr. Fateh Mohammad DSP.  
Mr. Saad Thaheem.  
 
For Board of Revenue:  Mr. Yawer Farooqui, A SC 
Mr. Mohammad Ahmed Pirzada, ASC with  
Mr. Shahzar Shamoon Secretary  
Mr. Nazar Mohammad Leghari , Consultant  
Syed Zulfiqar Ali Shah Member.  
Mr. Saqib Soomro Member L.U.  
Mr. Nawaz Sahu, DC Thatta.  
Mr. Kanwar Ali Leghari DC West.  
Qazi Jan Mohammad D.C.Malir.  
Mir Laiq Ali, Office Superintendent LU  
     
For DG Rangers:   Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, ASC with  
    Major Ashfaque Ahmed, DA JAG,  
 
Applicants    Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi  
(Applicant in CMA.No.148 -K/2013)  
Mr. Fareed Ahmed Arain  
(Applicant in CMA.No.148 -K/2013) 
Moulana Orangzeb Farooqui  
(Applicant in CMA. No .108-K/2013).  
    Mr. Mohammad Ismail Shaheedi.  
(Applicant in CMA. No.1 79-K/2013).  
Mr. Maqsood Ahmad, SP  
(Applicant in CMA. No.487 -K/2013).  
Mr.Ali Haider, Inspector  
(Applicant in CMA. No.390 -K/2013).  
 
Date of hearing:   22-03-2013 
 
ORDER  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ .-  On 
21.03.2013  in first half of the hearing of this case, Mr. Shahid SMC 16/2011  3 
Hayat, DIG stated that despite all efforts made by the Police and 
Rangers to enter into Lyari, it is very difficult becaus e whenever, 
such operation is commence d, either there is firing upon Police 
and Rangers or the bombs are exploded. On this , Mr. Shahid 
Anwar Bajwa, learned ASC appearing for DG, Rangers was 
directed to place on record reaction of DG, Rangers in black & 
white. In compliance of this direction, he presented a statement 
on behalf of D G. Rangers , which is reproduced herein below: - 
STATEMENT  
It is most respectfully submitted before this Honourable 
Court that we have no information about any no go area. If any 
such area comes to our knowledge or  is otherwise pointed to us, 
we shall use all necessary force and lawful means to clear such 
no go areas  
        Sd/- 
Major General  
Director General  
Pakistan Rangers (Sindh)  
Station:  Karachi    (Rizwan Akhtar)  
Dated 21 March  2013  
As the above statement was not as per the substance of the 
order and on the other hand IGP and DIG as well SP of the area 
have stated that it is not possible for uniform ed personnel to 
enter into the area of Lyari, therefore, learned counsel for DG, 
Rangers was ordered to submit a specific statement whether 
Lyari is No Go Area or not? Accordingly, he submitted second 
statement on behalf of DG, Rangers, which reads as under: - 
STATEMENT  
It is respectfully submitted:  
1. That during the last one year or s o, 65 operations 
including targeted cordon and search operations have been 
conducted in Lyari alone and 258 persons were arrested and 
handed over to Police. Almost all areas of Lyari have been 
covered in these operations.  SMC 16/2011  4 
 2. There is no, no go area in Ly ari. 
3. Headquarters of one of our Wings is located in Peoples 
Stadium and a company is always stationed inside Lyari at 
Benazir University.  
4. However, we will carry out specific patrolling activities to 
check and monitor the latest situation  
        Sd/- 
Major General  
Director General  
Pakistan Rangers (Sindh)  
Station:  Karachi     (Rizwan Akhtar)  
Dated 21 March 2013  
As both the statements put up on behalf of DG Rangers  were 
not satisfactory,  therefore, following directions were issued: - 
“We have handed ov er copy of the same to the 
Acting IGP enabling him to examine its contents and 
hold a meeting with DG, Rangers in the office of 
Incharge Chief Secretary and submit joint statement 
confirming or otherwise contents of this report so 
that we may pass appropri ate orders by tomorrow.”  
Accordingly , three separate statements on behalf of Acting Chief 
Secretary, IGP and DG , Rangers Sindh have been filed, which 
read as under: - 
    STATEMENT  
1. It is most respectfully submitted that in compliance of this 
Honourable  Court order dated 21 M arch 2013, a meeting of 
Director General Pakistan Rangers (sindh) and In spector 
General of Police was held and their reports are attached 
herewith.  
2. Law enforcement agencies have been instructed to arrest 
the criminals involved in heinous crimes as soon as possible in 
Lyari.  
3. Above is submitted for kind perusal of this Honourable 
Court, please.  
 
       Sd/- 
      Acting Chief Secretary Sindh  
      Arif Ahmed Khan  
Station: Karachi  SMC 16/2011  5 
 
STATEMENT  
It is most respectfully submitted in re sponse to meeting held 
with Inspector General of Police Sindh in the office of Chief 
Secretary Sindh, following is submitted, please: - 
1. That, Lyari is not a “No Go Area”, however there is 
presence of criminal elements like in any other area of Karachi.  
2. Headquarters of one Rangers Wing is located in Peoples 
Stadium and a company is permanently stationed inside Lyari at 
Benazir University. Since last year, Rangers has launched 65 
operations in Lyari and have arrested 268 criminals.  
3. We as part of a w ell thought out strategy are continuously 
engaged in launching information based targeted operations in 
various parts of the city including Lyari. These Operations are 
aimed at nabbing any and all criminals and bringing them to 
justice.  
 
Major General  
Director General  
Pakistan Rangers (Sindh)  
(Rizwan Akhtar)  
Station:  Karachi  
 
STATEMENT  
It is most respectfully submitted that in response to 
meeting held with Director General Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) in 
the office of Chief Secretary Sindh, following is submit ted, 
please: - 
 
1. That Lyari is not a “No Go Area”, however there is 
presence of criminal elements like in any other area of Karachi.  
2. Four police stations are located in Lyari namely Kalakot, 
Chaiwara, Baghdadi and Kalri. Since last year, Pol ice has 
launched a number of operations in Lyari and has arrested 
number of criminals.  
3. Police has launched targeted operation in Lyari, only last 
night and arrested 18 criminals.  
 
Inspector General  
Police (Sindh)  
Ghulam Shabir Shaikh  
Station:  Karachi  SMC 16/2011  6 
Perusal of t hese statements , does not answer whether “No Go 
Area” exists in Lyari or not as these functionaries had again 
taken divergent  stands . 
2.   Thus, w e may point out that “No Go Area” does  not 
mean physical obstruction on the entry point of a particular area , 
thereby not allowing uniform ed personnel or civilian to enter and 
walkthrough conveniently  but in substance it means the areas in 
which writ of the state is challenged . No Go Area is defined in 
the judgment in the case of Watan Party v. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 997) as  follows: - 
“Further observe that to avoid political  polarization 
and to break the cycle of ethnic strife and turf war, 
boundaries of administrative units like police 
stations , revenue estates, etc., ought to be altered 
so that the m embers of different communities may 
live together in peace and harmony, instead of 
allowing various groups to claim that particular 
areas belonging to them  and declaring certain areas 
as NO GO Areas under their fearful influence. “ 
3.   Mr. Niaz Ahmed Khosa, SSP AVCC, has voluntarily 
appeared and stated that there are “No Go Areas ” in various 
parts of Karachi  including Lyari , where no writ of the State exists 
and criminals  rule th ose area s and despite  of their best efforts , 
no success has so far been made. Mr. Najam Tareen S.P. Lyari 
admitted  during the course of hearing o n 21.03.2013  that for 
purpose of entering into the area at least  200 person nel of force 
are required . He further stated that since he is a local Pashto on 
and speaks Balochi  as well , therefor e taking advantage of his 
personal  relations,  he at time s enters the area. Statements of SMC 16/2011  7 
both these officers are sufficient to negate the stand taken by 
DG Rangers and Acting I.G  Police. Thus, in v iew of above 
circumstances , we again direct ed the Acting Ch ief Secretary , DG 
Rangers and IGP to put up a joint statement in terms of the 
order dated  21.03.2013 so that we may , after going through  it, 
pass order  as to whether the observation s/directions  given in the 
judgment  in Watan Party’s case (ibid)  have been complied  with 
in letter and spirit  because in view of dete riorating law and order 
situation in Karachi  we had observed  that it had not been 
complied with in letter and spirit.   
4.   Subsequent to above direction , following joint 
statement has been filed: - 
 
“IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN, KARACHI  
 
Suo Moto Case No.16/2011  
 
JOINT STATEMENT OF DIRECTOR GENERAL PAKISTAN 
RANGERS, SINDH INSPECTOR GENERAL POLICE 
SINDH AND ACTING CHIEF SECRETARY SINDH  
 
In compliance of this Honourable Court’s order dated 
21.3.201 3 and 22.3.2013 a meeting was convened today 
by acting Chief Secretary, Government of Sindh in his 
office which was attended by the Director General, 
Pakistan Rangers and the Inspector Police Sindh. In the 
previous statements dated 21.03.2013 and 22.03.201 3 
respectively submitted by the Director General Rangers 
Sindh and Inspector General Police Sindh regarding No -go 
Areas the contention was that there is no area in Karachi 
where the Pakistan Rangers Sindh or the Sindh Police 
cannot enter or conduct operati on to curb crimes; thus, 
no no -go area exist as such.  
 
Now, seeking guidance from the discussion and definition 
of “No -go Areas” determined by the Honourable Court 
according to which the areas in which writ of the State is 
challenged, consequently become w eak and law enforcing SMC 16/2011  8 
agencies are resisted, we conclude that such localities 
could be termed as no -go areas.  
 
It is jointly resolved and stated that such areas wherever 
they exist shall be dealt with strictly in accordance with 
law. The Rangers and Police  shall make their best efforts 
to control crime in such areas and establish writ of the 
State. Commanders of both forces shall maintain regular 
contact, share intelligence and cooperate for action 
against criminal elements in order to provide security to 
citizens in these areas.  
 
  Sd/-     Sd/- 
          (Ghulam Shabbir Shaikh)    (Major General Rizwan Akhtar)                                  
QPM, PSP,                  Director General Rangers, Sindh  
Acting Inspector General of Police Sindh  
 
 
     Sd/- 
(Arif Ahmed Khan)  
Acting Chief Secretary, Sindh  
 
5.   The In -charge Chief Secretary was asked to explain 
that in view of the deteriorating law and order situation in 
Karachi , where life and property of the citizen is not protected , it 
is not the responsibility  of the state /provincial governme nt and 
the executive under the C onstitution to guarantee the 
fundamental rights of the citizen s as provided in the Constitution 
and ensure that their life, propert y and dignity are 
secured/protected. He stated that there co uld not be two 
opinions  in this behalf . But to us no practical demonstration has 
been shown by the State/Provincial Government and Executive, 
although in the judgment reported  as Watan Party v. Federation 
of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC  997 ), we have already obs erved that 
any further failure to protect the life and property of the citizens 
is likely to cause unprecedented disaster, therefore, all efforts 
are to be made to avoid the same in the interest of the country 
which is supreme as per the mandate of the Con stitution and the 
law. We consider it appropriate to mention here that on behalf of SMC 16/2011  9 
IGP with reference to the implementation of the aforesaid 
judgment  a statement in  CMA No.169 -K/2013, has been placed 
on record , which contains details of arrested accused a ffiliated 
with different political parties  and groups . It is considered 
appropriate to reproduce herein below said statement: - 
SUMMARY OF ARREST ACCUSED AFFILIATED WITH POLITICAL PARTIES AND CASES  
Party Accus
ed 
Arrest
ed Arm
s 
Ord. Attem
pt Encount
er Murd
er Narcoti
cs Explosi
ve  Dacoit
y Riotin
g  Extorti
on Total 
ANP 13 6 2 4 9 1 - - - - 22 
Gang War  17 10 - 2 4 - 2 - - - 18 
L.J 2 - - - 5 - - - - - 5 
MQM-A 81 51 3 5 83 3 1 2 4 - 152 
MQM-H 4 1 - - 1 - - - - - 2 
PAC 6 4 - 1 8 - 1 - - - 14 
PPP 4 3 1 1 1 - - - - - 6 
PTI 9 8 1 - - - - 3 - - 12 
SMP 4 2 - - 5 - - - - - 7 
SSP 14 3 2 - 16 - - - - - 21 
ST 38 15 1 3 21 1 - 3 8 3 55 
TTP 27 22 - 1 9 - - - - - 32 
Jund Allah  5 5 - - - - - - - - 5 
Total 224 130 10 17 162 5 4 8 12 3 351 
 
 
6.   At this juncture it wou ld not be out of context to note 
that in the Watan Party’s case  (supra ) we have observed in 
following paras that the criminals have succeeded in making 
their way in political parties, therefore, the political parties 
should denounce their affiliation with them:-  
“Further observe that as per material brought before 
the Court, there are criminals who have succeeded 
in making their ways in political parties 
notwithstanding whether they are components or 
non-components of  government, and are getting 
political  and financial support allegedly from such 
parties, therefore, the political parties should 
denounce their affiliation with them in the interest of 
the country and democratic setup and they should 
not  allow them to use their names as militant 
outfits of t he political parties. Failure to do so may 
entail consequences of a penal nature against the SMC 16/2011  10 
party or person responsible, whether in office or 
not;” 
 
7.   Similarly with reference to violence in Karachi we 
have also observed in the said judgment as follows :- 
“Observe that violence in Karachi during the current 
year and in the past is not ethnic alone but it is also 
a turf war between different groups having 
economic, socio -politico interest to strengthen their 
position/aggrandizement, based on the phenomeno n 
of tit fo r tat with political, moral and financial 
support or endorsement of the political parties, who 
are claiming their representation on behalf of public 
of Karachi including components and non -
components of Provincial Government/Executive;  
 
AND 
 
Declare that recent violence in Karachi represents 
unimaginable brutalities,  bloodshed, kidnapping and 
throwing away dead bodies and torsos in bags; as 
illustration, indicating toll of 306 lives in one month; 
detection of torture cells  video of which has be en 
produced; receiving bhatta  to strengthen the ranks 
of one group against the other; grabbing land; drug 
mafia etc., destroying moveable and immovable 
properties of the citizens, establishes that the 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens enshrined in 
Articles 9, 14,  15, 18 and 24 of the Constitution 
have not been protected/enforced  by the Provincial 
Government/Executive authority and this failure has 
made the lives and properties of the citizens 
insecure, inasmuch as Federal 
Government/Executive has also no t protected 
Province of Sindh against internal disturbance, thus 
the government of Province of Sindh on this account SMC 16/2011  11 
too, failed to carry out functions in accordance with 
the provisions of the Constitution {Article 148 (3)};”  
 
8.   In the meanwhile, durin g the hearing of the case 
from time to time particularly in our order dated 07. 02.2013 
following observations were made: - 
 
“5. We have also observed in our judgment 
that “to come out of the instant grave 
situation…the police force being principal law 
enforcing agency has to be de -politicized and 
strengthened”. In respect of this observation, 
we are somewhat surprised to learn that out of 
one lakh employees in the p olice force of the 
province, not  a single one of such employees 
has been identified as having  been 
appointed/promoted/posted on the basis of 
political influence/considerations. We also note 
that during the hearing of another petition (Crl. 
O.P.89/2011) which was listed for hearing 
yesterday and is again listed for hearing today, 
a number of appoin tments in various 
departments of the Sindh government 
including police, were prima facie  shows to be 
based on considerations other than merit. We, 
therefore, note with regret that a serious 
attempt appears not to have been made to 
identify such functionari es in the police 
department who owe their posts to political 
interference. The reply given in CMA 270 of 
2013 is thus prima facie  wholly unsatisfactory.  
 
7. We have noted that as per material 
brought before the Court “there are criminals 
who have succeeded  in making their way into 
political parties”. In CMA 270 of 2013, we have 
been provided a list of 5 FIRs in South range SMC 16/2011  12 
and 11 FIRs in West range but the 
details/particulars of the persons involved, the 
nature of offences and most importantly the 
affiliati on, if any, of the accused with a political 
party have not been mentioned. Mr. Shah 
Khawar requests for sometime to provide the 
requisite details. Let him do so within this 
week.”  
 
9.   We may observe here that in the joint statement 
which has been reprodu ced hereinabove, it appears that a 
resolve has been shown to deal with No -Go Areas strictly in 
accordance with law. Firstly , in this behalf  it is to be noted that 
Law Enforcing Agencies both Police and Rangers vide order dated 
06.10.2011 had been directed to protect the life and property of 
the c itizens but unfortunately the law and order situation was 
further deteriorat ing day by day in the  city. We do blame to both 
these forces  for such situation because  it was their 
constitutional, legal and moral duty t o take care of the high 
handedness and  exploitation of the citizens of this  city by the 
criminals during the last more than about 15 months, but 
despit e all directions and observations, the Court has granted 
time to the law enforcing agencies and now they have provided a 
strange definition  of No -Go Area and seemingly with reluctance 
they had accepted to the definition , as incorporated in the Watan 
Party’s case (ibid) . Any how , such academic discussion whether 
interpreted by us in the judgment and  agreed by t he executive , 
would not solve the problem of the ordinary citizen s. They want 
security of life and property from the State, Law Enfor cing 
Agencies and the Executive  and their demand in this direction is SMC 16/2011  13 
increasing day -by-day as the rate of crime has increa sed 
whereas the relevant forums have no control over it and no 
solution  has been provided by the State functionaries . Secondly, 
we believe that the Provincial Government /State  must have 
fulfilled their  constitutional duty  but it is the other way round as 
no improvement in the law and order and in  protect ing life of 
citizens is visible either on ground or on paper s as it has been 
demonstrated during the hearing of the case. Therefore,  
statement submitted in the Court today, which has been 
reproduced hereinab ove, would be of no help in view of above 
observation s as well as observation made earlier in the judgment  
of Watan Party (supra ) and is  not sufficient to redress the 
grievance of the general public.  It is also to be noted that the 
general  elections/ polls are due in the coming month i.e. May,  
2013,  therefore, it is duty of the  State/ Chief Secretary , IGP and 
DG, Rangers  to take all steps  to ensure that life  and propert y of 
the citizens are secured  and protected . 
10.   We have inquired from the Chief Secretary  as to 
whether the joint statement, filed in Court, is a sufficient 
measure to ensure that law and order is fully controlled and the 
citizen s of Karachi would  have the sense of security . He state d 
that three weeks  to one month ’s time may be g ranted  for 
addressing the issue . Without commenting upon the request  so 
made , we initially grant two weeks ’ time from today onward  to 
do the needful . After two weeks, Chief Secretary, IGP and DG, 
Rangers  shall submit a joint statement through Registrar  
showing the progr ess in protecting citizens and maintaining law 
and order in Karachi .  SMC 16/2011  14 
11.  It has been informed that police is inv estigating the 
case of murder of Arshad Pup poo and two others, who  were  
reportedly murdered in a brutal manner and their dead bodies 
were alle gedly cut into pieces  and then burnt to ash es The 
progress so far made by the police has been shared with the 
Court confidentia lly. The report submitted  by Mr. Shahihd Hayat, 
DIG is ordered to be kept in sealed envelop . It has been 
requested for more time to complete the investigation, Request 
is allowed to complete  investigation of the case without being 
influenced  from any quarter , strictly in accordance with law .   
12.   An application be aring CMA No.181 -K/2013 has been 
filed by family members of decease d Arshad Pappu. Copy of the 
same has been handed over to Mr. Shahadat Awan, Prosecutor 
General, Sindh with direction to pass on the  same to IGP and the 
concerned DIG and SP for proceeding in accordance with law.  
13.  On 21.3.2013 in view of our observatio n that no IGP 
has been posted in the Province of Sindh  and the vacancy is 
lying vacant since 6.3.2013 when the then IGP was surrendered 
to the Federal Government as per the statement of Government 
of Sindh a fter the incident of Abbas Town. Now i t has been 
informed that vide Notification  dated 21.03.2013 , Government of 
Pakistan, Cabinet Secretariat, Establishment Division, Mr. Shahid 
Nadeem Baloch has been posted as Provincial Police Officer 
(PPO), Government  of Sindh . 
14.    In response to our order dated 2 1.3.2013, whereby 
directions were given to produce summaries of the re -employed 
Police Officers, Mr. Muhammad Naseer Jamali, Secretary 
Services , Sindh has placed on record a report containing SMC 16/2011  15 
summaries  of the persons , who have been re -employed/inducted 
in police department after retirement including Lt. Colon el 
Nadeemullah Qazi, who is a retired Army Officer and had never 
served in Police and also the case of Ms. Tabassam Abbasi, IT 
Consultant. We may observe that re -employment in disciplinary 
force like Po lice or for that matter in any other department has 
to be made subject to section 14 of the Civil Servant Act, 1973, 
read with instructions contained in Estacode, Vol.1, Edn, 2007 
under  the heading “Re -Employment”.  
15.   This Court  in Suo Motu Case No.24 of 2010  (PLD 
2011 SC 277),  has held that re-employment of such persons in 
services on their retire ment must be made in public interest 
because  re-employment against a sanctioned post  is likely to 
affect the junior officers , who are waiting for promotion to  the 
next higher rank as their right of promotion is blocked. And they 
have to wait till such re-employed officer  complete s his contract. 
In the meanwhile , they have to face difficulties in maintaining 
their seniority etc. It is a settled principle of law that the 
promotion of an employee is not to be blocked to accommodate 
a retired officer, however, if the right of promotion is not blocked 
by re -employment , then such powers can be exercised , that too 
in an exceptional case. Surprisingly , the Government of  Sindh  
had not supported re -employment  of the police officers and it is 
stated that whatever order is passed  by this Court , same shall 
be implemented. It is to be noted that  it is the prerogative of the 
Government to l ook into all such cases , applying rele vant 
provisions of law noted hereinabove and the observations made 
by this Court from time to time . For ready reference reliance can SMC 16/2011  16 
be placed on Suo Motu Case No.24 of 2010  (ibid), a judgment , 
which has been delivered by an 8-Member  Bench of this Court. 
Relevant para therefrom is reproduced herein below: - 
 
“5. Learned Attorney  General has also placed on record 
summary of some of the Police Officers w ho are re -employed 
on contract basis.  A perusal whereof indicates that prima facie 
while they were re -employ ed, the provisions of law i.e. section 
14 of the Civil Servants Act, 1973 as well as instructions  
contained in Esta Code in Volume -1, Edition 2007 under the 
heading “Re -Employment” and the judgments of the superior 
courts on the subject were not considered /adhered to. It is to 
be noted that for establishing rule of law and Constitutionalism, 
it is necessary that the relevant provisions should be followed 
strictly in letter and spirit otherwise it would not be possible to 
provide an effective machinery in la w particularly in Police 
Department to ensure law and order, so the peace in the 
country, at the same time to avoid violation of the relevant 
provisions of la w noted hereinbefore, which is tantamount to 
blocking the promotion of the Officers who have also served in 
the Forces and are waiting for their promotion but they are not 
getting chance because of the re -employment/contract 
awarded to the retired Officers. This is not only in the Police 
Department but for the purpose of achieving good governance; 
the same principle should be followed and strictly applied in 
other Departments as well. Be that as it may, we are 
adjourning this case and in the meanwhile learned Attorney -
General shall take up the matter with the 
Government/Competent Authority so it may tak e necessary 
steps to rectify if any omission has been committed, before the 
next date of hearing. Similarly, the learned Attorney -General 
shall convey this order to the Secretary, Establishment Division 
and the Chief Secretaries of the Provinces to ensure that if any 
Civil Servant or other person who has been re -employed, his 
case be also examined in terms of the provisions of law and 
both Federal and Provincial Governments should take necessary 
steps to ensure that re -employment or employ ment on con tract 
basis are not made in violation of the relevant law.”  
 SMC 16/2011  17 
16.   Mr. Yawar Farooqi, learned ASC appearing on behalf 
of Chief Secretary , Sindh  has stated that a summary for  
cancellation of the contract  of police officers/officials  was moved 
but final  order s could not be passed because of the opinion of 
the learned Advocate General that their appointments were not 
contrary to law. On this , Mr. Abdul Fatah Malik, learned Advocate 
General has  contradicted  to his statement and he produced  
photocopy of the summary  mov ed by the competent authority 
for approval by the Chief Minister of Sindh . On having gone 
through the summaries of respective police officers , who were 
re-employed after retirement it is observed that there is not a 
single word in any of the summar ies, showing that their services 
were hired in the public interest. On this , learned Advocate 
General  stated that two days’ time be given to him so that he 
may get the summary approv ed from  the Caretaker Chief 
Minister for terminating the contract s of the re -emplo yment in 
police department so that  the juniors , who are entitled to 
promotion to next grade on merits  are promoted and they may 
get their due rights according to law.  
17.   Undoubtedly, it is  the Government , which  has to 
perform its function strictly in a ccordance with law but, prima 
facie, it is noticed that re-employment  of the se police officers is 
not in conformity with the law and the aforesaid judgment of this 
Court. Therefore, l earned Advocate General  has been asked  to 
seek instructions in this behal f from the concerned quarters 
during the course of the day.  
18.   As regards,  case of Ms. Tabassam Abbasi , Project 
Director, IT  is concerned, though she has been appointed on SMC 16/2011  18 
contract  against a vacant post of Superintendent Police (S P, 
BPS-18) and allowed to draw salary equal to  the post of SP by 
abolishing three posts of constables , her appointment too is not 
in accordance with law because against this post, a DSP in 
regular service is required to be promoted  as SP . For such a 
position the Police Departmen t or Government  of Sindh  may 
create a post of Project Director, IT Department and instead of 
accommodating her against the  post of a  police officer, she may 
be declared holder of an independent post against the budgetary 
provision of the Police Department.  The Chief Secreta ry may , if 
feasible , create a separate post of Project Director, IT in the 
Police Department  and this post will not be converted into any 
other post of regular police service nor the incumbent shall be 
posted against any one of the sanctio ned post of police  
department . 
19.   Learned Advocate General, during proceedings of the 
case, produced copies of two n otifications as per the 
commitment  made by him in first half of the hearing of case. The 
In-charge Chief Secretary  has informed that Chie f Minister has 
agreed to the  cancellation of the contracts and he  has issued 
Notification No.SOIII(S&GAD)POL -6-VII/2008 dated 22nd March, 
2013, contents whereof are reproduced hereinbelow: - 
NOTIFICATION  
In pursuance of Orders dated 08.03.2013 passed by the  
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan in respect of 
C.M.A. 1145/2013 in Suo Moto Case No.16/2011 (Suo 
Moto Action on the news clippings published on 
04.03.2013 in daily “The News, Dawn and The Nation” 
Islamabad regarding incident of Bomb Blast in Abbas 
Town, Karachi on 03.03.2013) and with the approval of SMC 16/2011  19 
the Competent Authority i.e. Chief Minister Sindh, the 
contract appointments of the following police officers are 
hereby terminated with immediate effect: - 
 
i) Capt. (R) Salman Syed Mohammad  
ii) Mr. Rasool Bux Sa and 
iii) Cdr (R) Shoukat Ali Shah   
iv) Lt. Colonel (R) Nadeem Ullah Qazi  
v) Lt. Col. (R) M.A. Wahid Khan  
vi) Mr. Manzoor Ahmed Mughal  
vii) Mr. Mohib Ali.  
viii) Mr. Mohammad Hassan Dal  
ix) Mirza Abdul Majeed  
x) Syed Sahib Ali Shah  
xi) Mr. Anwar Alam Subhani  
xii) Mr. Rehmatullah  
xiii) Mr. Fateh Mohammad  
   
20.   Similarly one of the officer s re-employed  on contract 
namely  Mr. Waseem Ahmed, Additional Chief Secretary (BS -21), 
Home Department, who was also a former Police Officer and on 
retirement has been appointed by the Government of Sindh, has 
also tendered his resignation, which has been accepted by the 
competent authority with immediate effect. Such Notification has 
also been placed on record.  
21.  in compliance with our directions issued vide order 
dated 21.3.2013 Syed Zu lfiqar Ali Shah, Member BOR  has given  
presentation of satellite imagery of Karachi Division  Lands.  
Extracts/script whereof have  also been produced for our perusal 
which hereby is made part of the record of instant proceedings. 
He has selected detai edl satellite imagery of Deh Nimano  Jokhio, 
District Malir, Karachi. After watching the presentation , we are of 
the opinion that it i s quite possible to identify the  lands , which 
have been grab bed/encroached  unauthorizedly .  
22.  Mr. Mohammad Ahmed Pi rzada learned ASC /special 
counsel of the Bo ard of Revenue is directed to collect information 
on the basis of satellite imagery for whole of the Kar achi to SMC 16/2011  20 
identify the encroachment of the lands. He is required to collect 
credible information with the assistance of Mr. Zulfiqar  Ali Shah , 
Member Boar d of Revenue to the following effect : 
(i)  Out of estimated area of 6,81,000.00 acres of land in 
93 Dehs of all the five districts of Karachi , how much  
of its portion is occupied by authorized 
owners /allottees/leasehold ers and the law under 
which they are enjoying such status ? 
(ii)  What is the status of remaining area of land ? 
(iii) Whether  the government functionaries have control 
over the entire area of land owned by the Provincial 
and or Federal Governme nt? 
(iv) Whether any action to retrieve the proper ty has been 
taken  against unauthorized persons ? 
(v) How many cases have been filed against the land 
grabbers/encroachers before the Tribunal  or Special 
Court  constituted under the Sindh Public Property 
(Removal of Encroachmen t) Act, 2010 and the 
present st atus of the cases ? 
(vi)  Whether the competent authority has taken steps to 
approach the Tribunal under the aforesaid Act of 
2010 for retrieval of the property which has been 
forcibly encroached upon by the land  grabbers? 
23.  It has  been informed that Anti Encroachment Force 
has also been created , which is headed by SP  Irfan Bahadur. We 
have enquired from  him to explain  to us the manner in which he 
is discharging his functions for removal of the encroachments , 
unauthorized  structures , etc. He under instruc tions from Mr. 
Nazar  Muhammad  Laghari stated that Government of Sindh 
Revenue Department under section 9 of the Sindh Public 
Property (Removal of Encroachment) Act, 2010 conferred powers 
upon the authorized officers and under section 3(3) of the Act  all SMC 16/2011  21 
the Assistant Commissioners and Mukthiarkars or Collectors on 
behalf of Government of Sindh are empowered to remove such 
encroachment s together with the structure , if any raised by 
anyone  on the public property within a period not less than two 
days as may b e specified by order in writing and if such person 
refuses to remove encroachment on the  structure raised 
thereon , after the expiry of the notice  period , the authorized 
officer shall require the incharge of a police station for police 
assistance within the  local limits of which the property is 
situated . On such requisition  the required assistan ce shall be 
provided un der section 5(2) of the Act, 2010 and the matter 
shall be sent to the Tribunal or the Special Court for action 
against the land -grabber accordi ng to law. He further stated that 
under the provisions of Act, 2010 the Provincial Government has 
so far retrieved 10,690  acres of land and 9 kilometer railway 
track and at present 62 cases are pending before Special Court 
constituted under the Act  of 2010 . The SP Encroachment Cell  is 
directed  to submit  his report within 7 days  as to whether the 
encroachment s by the land -grabbers have been cleared  within 
his jurisdiction .  
24.   Mr. Shahadat Awan , learned Prosecutor General 
Sindh stated that from the date o f promulgation of the Act, 
2010, 145 FIRs were registered  and put up before the Special 
Court , out of which 62 are pending decision whereas the 
remaining have been disposed of as ‘A’ Class or ‘C’ Class. We 
could not understand as to how such like cases can  be disposed 
of in A or C class. The SP Encroachment Cell shall submit details SMC 16/2011  22 
of each case, which was disposed of either as  ‘A’ or as ‘C’ class 
during investigation. He shall also submit report about the case s, 
which were quashed.  The learned Prosecutor G eneral may  also 
submit the details of such cases with his comments separately as 
to whether any further action in this behalf has been taken or 
not and if the cases have failed in Court  for want of sufficient 
evidence , he would fix responsibility on the in vestigation team  or 
other concerned. He would further point out whether the 
properties in possession of encr oachers/land -grabbers have been 
retrieved or are still in their unlawful possession along with its 
complete details.  
25.  In the context of  land-grabbing and encroachment of 
land one Mohammad Ismail Shahidi has moved CMA No.179 -K of 
2013 and stated that there is an old dispute of encroachment of 
the property in KDA Scheme No.36  and the property owned b y 
the lawful allottees etc. has  been taken over f orcibly by the land 
mafia. Mr. Mohammad Ahmed P irzada , ASC  has informed that 
the case, reference of which he has made in this application , is 
sub-judice before the Sindh High Court and learned Chief Justice 
after holding full -fledged hearing has reserved t he judgment. As 
the matter is sub -judice  before the High Court,  therefore , we 
would not pass any order in this behalf except making  an 
observation that it would be in the interest of justice if the High 
Court decides the case expeditiously so that the righ ts of the 
parties arising out of the litigation may be determined and 
settled. Mr. M.A. P irzada , ASC  shall produce copy of the petition 
which has been filed along  with annexures as well as judgment 
of the High Court if announced  by that time , so that we ma y SMC 16/2011  23 
have benefit of the same for the purpose of deciding the oth er 
matters relating to the land -grabbing and encroachment. Notice 
of the application be given to the Board of Revenue, Land 
Utilization Department as we ll as to the parties named therein .  
26.  The Senior Member Board of Revenue stated that at 
the time of assassination of Mohterma Benazir Bhutto,  the land 
record of 872 Dehs had  burnt and under the directions of the 
Board of Revenue, an Inquiry Committee was appointed to 
reconstruct the record. It  is to be noted  that reconstruction of 
the revenue record shall only be considered , if it is established 
on record that the record  actually has been destroyed , burnt etc. 
Therefore, we have directed the Senior Member Board of 
Revenue to place on record evi dence to establish that the 
revenue record in different districts was  burnt and matter was 
reported to the respective Police stations  by giving details of the  
relevant  record. In respect of mechanism for reconstruction of 
the record the relevant documents on the basis of whi ch record 
can be reconstructed,  they have to consider the  Land Record 
Office, Hyderabad , where reference of allegedly burnt record 
should be available and record from the officer of Survey 
Superintendent as well as Micro Filming Unit or from the office of 
Sub Registrars etc , the Board of Revenue should not have 
reconstructed the record  in absence of aforesaid material , 
because there is likelihood that the Government property may be 
claimed by th ose persons , who are not the owners of the such 
land, as it is the duty of Board of Revenue/ Government 
functionaries to save its properties.  Be that as it may, Senior 
Member Board of Revenue may submit claims which have been SMC 16/2011  24 
received by the Deputy Commissioner (s) and or the Inquiry 
Officer  along wi th comparative statement showing difference, if 
any, in  the claim s of the owners of lands from the original claim s 
and whether the property owned by the Government has been 
protected and no claim is based on fictitio us documents and 
whether such claim s have been accepted or not, if so , to what 
extemt .    
27.   In CMA No.183 -K of 2013, a pplicant has stated that 
an area of 1446 Acres and 34 Ghunta of land situated in Deh 
Shah Bukhari, Taluka Qasim Abad, District Hyderabad meant for 
reserved forest vide notifi cation dated 23rd January, 2012 has  
been converted from reserved forest and was further allotted to 
the 100 fictitious persons, 14 acres each for lease of 99  years.  
He has prayed that record of the case may be examined and 
appropriate orders to save the na tional interest be passed.  
28.   Mr. Shah Zar Shamhoon, Senior Member of Board of 
Revenue present in Court was directed to procure the record 
from the office of Member , Land Utilization. Accordingly, record 
was produced. A perusal whereof indicates that t he total area of 
reserve forest of Shah Bukhari  is 1681 Acres out of which the 
forest department purportedly under “the Agro Forest Lease 
Policy 2010 ” has retain ed 895 acres and allotted on lease . 
whereas  1446 Acres a summary was put up before the Chief 
Minister , Sindh  on 16.12.2011 , signed by Ghulam Mustafa Phul, 
then Secretary to the Government of Sindh, Land Utilization 
Department . Before it the  defunct District Officer Revenue 
Hyderabad vide letter No. HQM/K/ -18/- of 2010 dated 2nd July, 
2010 has report ed that Forest Land under Pacca track  out of SMC 16/2011  25 
protective Bund of River Sindh  measuring 1446.24 Acres in 
Taluka Qasimabad, District Hyderabad is lying uncultivated a nd 
vacant at  the site but the same is in possession of concerned 
Forest Department . However, Land Uti lization Department 
proposed to  de-notify the land in favour of Land Utilization 
Department, so that the same may be disposed of under the 
Statement of Conditions notified vide Notification No.09 -294-
03/SO -1/336 dated 25.02.2006 in the interest of Government 
ex-chequer. The Chief Minister accordingly approved the 
summary and the Member Land Utilization vide letter dated 
23.1.2012 de -notified the forest lands in Pacca area , which are 
not actually under Forest Department. Subsequent thereto this 
land was transferred on lease for 30 years in favour of different 
persons, detail of which  is available  on record.  However, it is 
informed by the Senior Member  Board of Revenue tha t before 
materializing  the transfer s the order de -notifying the reserve 
forest ha s been cancelled on 16.3.2012. But, he was not aware 
whether money had  been received from the allottees or not?  
Prima facie we have noted that de -notifying reserved 
forest was contrary to the provision of section 27 of Sindh Forest  
Act, 1927.   
29.   It is also an admitted fact that except the letter 
dated 23.01.2012 there was no notification by the Secretary to 
the Government of Sindh, Land Utilization Department for the 
change of status of the land in question . It is to be seen  that 
Government functionari es being the custodians of its properties 
are bound to follow  a legal and transparent procedure for 
disposal of the  lands  owned by  the Forest Department or SMC 16/2011  26 
Revenue Department , but perusal of the file suggests that no 
such procedure was followed and the lands were allotted in 
favour of 100 persons  in an arbitrary manner .  
30.   Applicant stated that construction work on the land 
has also commenced unauthorisedly but he could not 
substantiate his contention.  
31.   As a valuable property owned by the Governme nt of 
Sindh  is involved, therefore, we direct that let the District and 
Sessions Judge, Hyderabad appoint a judicial officer not below 
the rank of Senior Civil Judge , who shall be required to visit the 
site in presence of the President of District Bar Asso ciation , 
Hyderabad  and prepare a report indicating the status of land on 
spot and state whether land  is being utilized by any person for 
any purpose. The Senior Civil Judge shall notify his proposed 
visit to the D.C Hyderabad who shall accompany him with 
relevant revenue record to identify the land.   
32.   In the public interest we also direct the Member Land 
Utilization to visit the site independently and submit his report. 
However, if any construction work has commenced over there, 
he would submit detail s of the persons, company etc. who had 
occupied the same for utilization and report shall be submitted 
within 7 days to the Registrar for our perusal and passing 
appropriate orders in Chambers, if in the meanwhile case is not 
fixed for regular hearing.   
33.    The Senior Member Board of Revenue is directed to 
submit the relevant file with the Registrar against a valid 
certificate/receipt. In the meanwhile notice of this application be 
also issued to the Advocate General, Senior Member Board of SMC 16/2011  27 
Revenue, and M ember Land Utilization for filing reply on the next 
date of hearing.  
34.   IN CMA 164 -K/2013 reference of Human Rights case 
No.40539 -S/2012 has also been made. The file has been 
procured from the office, which indicates that in this case one 
Amir Mustafa  filed application in which he has alleged that some 
persons with the support of some political figures have 
established an  office where SP Anti Enforcement Police and all 
the Revenue Officers/Officials remain present with revenue 
record and to implement th e illegal orders regarding revenue 
work, put pressure on the innocent people to give them money 
otherwise their lands will be cancelled or they will be ejected 
from the  lands. Report was called from the Chief Secretary, 
Sindh and Senior Member, Board of Re venue but despite 
issuance of reminder dated 8.3.2013 no report has been 
submitted. This HRC be treated as Civil Miscellaneous Application 
and be clubbed with the instant case. The Chief Secretary and 
Senior Member Board of Revenue  and the SP Encroachment Cell 
are directed to submit reply within  7 days  for our perusal in 
Chambers . Notice to the Advocate General may also be issued.  
35.   In CMA 184 -K/2013 , it has been stated that project 
is under construction on 41 Acres o f the land on preparing 4 
khatas. C opy of the application has been handed over to the 
Senior Member, Board of Revenue with direction to file reply 
within seven days.  
36.   It is to be noted that CMA 73 -K/2013 on behalf of 
Board of Revenue was filed as compliance report of para 
131(8)(11) o f the judgment in the case of Watan Party v. SMC 16/2011  28 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2011 SC 997) and orders dated 
25.10.2012, 31.10.2012 and 28.11.2012  passed in the instant 
case. There are three parts of this CMA  including appendix -III 
titled “Detail of Fresh Allotm ent Regarding 99 -Year Leases under 
Land Grant Policy Notified On 25.2.2006 w.e.f.25.2.2006 to 
28.11.2012 ”, which contains  names of 542 allottees to whom 
property has been transferred on lease from time to time 
commencing from the year 2006 onward.  
37.   It is to be seen with reference to above property this 
Court vide judgment dated 09.09.1999  in Criminal Petitions 
No.36 &37 -K/1999  directed for preparation of list of the case, 
where lands were granted in Sindh in violation of rules etc. 
Concluding para th erefrom is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“8. …… We consider it appropriate to direc the 
Chief Secretary and Secretary Land Utilization 
Department, Govt. of Sindh to prepare a list of 
cases where lands were granted in Sindh in 
violation  of rules, conditions and ban and provide 
this list with all necessary details to the Registrar 
of this Court positively within three months from 
today so that this Court may consider taking 
further action against the defaulting and corrupt 
parties, and also send copy of such detai led 
information to the Chief Ehtesab Commissioner 
for such action against the concerned 
grantees/allottees and officials and authorities 
concerned as may be required under the Ehtesab 
Act, 1997, or any other law.”  
38.   As no action was taken by the concer ned officials, 
therefore , an article was published in daily “News” under 
caption, “Officer s do not care two hoots about SC Judgment”. SMC 16/2011  29 
This Court took suo moto notice (Suo Moto Case No.14/2009) of 
the issue highlighted in the article and passed orders on di fferent 
dates. In the meanwhile, vide order dated  6.10 .2009, Mr. Yousaf 
Leghari, the then Advocate General was asked  to look into the  
matter on case to case basis. He submitted a report titled 
“STATEMENT SHOWING THE DETAILS OF STATE LAND LEASED 
OUT/ALLOTTE D TO VARIOUS PERSON S IN KARACHI”, which 
contains somewhat identical  details/description of the 
persons /allottees of the land as is  referred to in Part -III of CMA 
73-K/2013 .  
39.   It is to be noted that this Court vide order dated 
6.11.2009 passed in SMC 1 4/2009 made following  
observations: - 
“5. We have noted painfully that in some of the 
cases the property has been allotted even 
without determining whether it would being  the 
public interest or just for the purpose of 
commercial activity  to facilitate speci fic 
person/organizations. We may clarify here that 
the provincial Government  as well as the Federal 
Government  being custodian of the interest of 
the public, are not supposed to act in any 
manner which is  against the  public  interest. 
While  discharging  such  functions the prime 
consideration should be nothing but the public 
interest. However, we will wait for the report 
from the AG Sindh who is authorized e ven to 
summon the parties/allot ees after issuing notices 
to them to appear and justify their cases. Afte r 
hearing their view point he shall submit a report 
for our perusal in Chambers . He is also 
authorized to appoint any one else, if need be, SMC 16/2011  30 
who shall visit the site for the purpose of 
submitting physical report about the properties of 
the State. The Boa rd of Revenue shall cooperate 
with him and all the necessary 
files/material/documents shall be examined by 
him.  
6. Another statement showing the cases 
regularized under the Ordina nce III of 2001 has 
also been f iled but on havi ng seen some of the 
cases withou t pin pointing them, we are of the 
opinion  that the regularization  has not been 
made keeping in view the  nexus of the Ordinance 
and the  price  has not been charged and the 
purpose of t he property which was allotted has 
also not been utilized. Learned AG Sin dh is also 
authorized to look int o this case well in detail and 
submit report as has been observed hereinabove. 
He is also directed to place on  record relevant 
laws relating to the allotment/le ase etc. 
prevailing in the province of Sindh.  
40.   It seems t hat without showing respect to the order 
dated 9.9.1999 passed in Criminal Petitions No.36 -K & 37 -
K/1999, the government property has been allotted or 
transferred on lease basis etc. prime facie without following the 
principle of transparency and in this m anner a huge valuable 
property, price of which statedly runs into billions has been 
transferred on throw away prices in the names of the persons of 
their own choice.  
41.   As in the instant case same question has arisen, 
therefore, SMC 14 of 2009 has been  ordered to be clubbed with 
the instant case.  SMC 16/2011  31 
42.   It is to be seen that there had been question mark s 
on the allotments of the lands at the rates lower than market 
value, therefore, on 3rd January, 2001,  in pursuance of Sindh 
Urban State Land (Cancella tion of Allotments, Conversion and 
Exchanges ) Ordinance, 2000, the allotment s, conversion s or 
exchanges of urban state l ands obtained or granted for 
residential, commercial or industrial purposes at the rates lower 
than the market value in violation of  law or ban  from 01.01. 1985 
were cancelled.  However, a committee under section 4(2)  of the 
Ordinance was constituted for carrying out the purpose s of the 
Ordinance and it was mentioned therein that after making such 
inquiry as is deemed  fit, if the government is satisfied that the 
allotment s, conversion s or exchanges of the urban state land are 
obtained or granted for residential, commercial or industrial 
purpose s at the rates lower tha n the market value in violation of 
law or ban, i t shall determine the amount  of loss caused  to 
Government and call upon the person concerned to pay such 
amount within the specified period. The Committee so 
constituted, reportedly, has not concluded its task so far.  
43.   Needless to observe that 542 allottees , whose 
description is  available in appendix -III in the reply of Board of 
Revenue (CMA 73 -K/2013)  succeeded in getting the allot ments 
in their favour under the  policy on the basis of statement of 
condition s mentioned therein  obtained land  at lower  rates 
instead of at the market  rates as i s mentioned in the Policy of 
2006.  Mr. Yawar Farooqi, learned ASC stated that files of 
aforesaid 542 allotments are available for perusal of the  Court.  SMC 16/2011  32 
44.   In the light of the above, following questions are 
required to be determine d:- 
(i) As to w hether in terms of lease agreement under 
the statement of policy issued by Government of 
Sindh under section 10 of the Act, the allottees or 
the lessees whose names have been filed in the 
appendix -III (CMA 73 -K/2013)  and all those 
allottees/lessess to whom  such properties have 
been transferred  upto 15.3.2013 , have utilized 
the same as per the terms and conditions within 
stipulated period ?  
 
(ii) If not, as to whether in terms of sub -section (5) 
of section 10 of the Colonization Act , any action 
has been taken  by reversing the entry in their 
names. The allotment  or lease in respect of land 
mentioned hereinabove from 2006 onward upto 
15th March, 2013 in Karachi  Division  has been 
made in a transparent manner on receiving the 
market price following the phenomena of wi lling 
seller a nd willing buyer, or otherwise?  
 
(iii) If any irregularity  has been committed, the 
responsibility shall be fixed on the officer by the 
Commission?   
 
(iv) Whether granting lease or making allotments of 
government lands  in Karachi  in transparent 
mann er can prove  to be helpful in future for the 
development of the Karachi ?  
 
(v) Any other issue, which the Commission considers 
needs to be addressed?   
To ascertain , inter alia , the above  question s, we direct  the Chief 
Secretary to constitute a Commission h eaded by Mr. Nazar 
Muhammad Leghari, Consultant of Revenue Department  and 
depute two officers from the Revenue Department of  his choice  
to provide him assistance . The Commission, if need be, may 
increase manpower at its own option and the Chief Secretary 
shall cooperate fully with the C ommission. He would also settle  
fee of the Commission with its Chairman, which shall be paid in 
advance . In addition to it , he shall also  plac e a reasonable 
amount at the disposa l of the Commission to meet day -to-day SMC 16/2011  33 
expendit ure. He would also issue directions to all the 
Mukhtar kars and Deputy Commissioner s/Revenue Officers of 
Karachi to provide all necessary assistance to him. The Chief 
Secretary shall also provide logistic support to the Commission 
to complete the task. The Commission is required to complete its 
task within a period of two weeks after receipt hereof . 
45.   Thus, in view of the above discussion and 
observations, it is ordered as follows: - 
 
(a) In the Watan Party’s case (ibid), it has already been 
directed that  “there must be no  ‘No Go Area’ at all 
but despite the probe made by us during hearing, 
heads of both the functionaries were not agreeable 
on the existence of ‘No Go Areas’  in Karachi  but it 
has been established on record by means of credible 
information t hat ‘No Go Areas ’ do exist in Lyari, 
therefore, in pursuance of our earlier judgment, the 
IGP himself and if necessary the DG, Rangers shal 
also personally lead the operation into such areas to 
make Karachi free of ‘No Go Areas ’ and peaceful city 
to pro tect and also provide them a congenial 
atmosphere free from hold of the criminals so that 
they may live peacefully and also participate in 
forthcoming general elections, polling of which has 
been schedule to be on 11th May, 2013. They have to 
complete the tas k within a period of two weeks and 
report compliance shall be submitted to the Registrar 
for our perusal in Chambers, if in the meanwhile 
instant case is not listed for further hearing.  
 
 
(b) Mr. Shahid Hayat, DIG/Police authorities are hereby 
directed to  conduct honestly and fairly investigation 
in the murder case of Arshad Pappu and others 
strictly in accordance with law, without sparing any 
person  involved in the commission of crime. DG, 
Rangers, if required, shall also provide adequate 
assistance to th e police in view of the mandate, 
which has been given to the Rangers under section 5 
of the Anti Terrorism Act, 1997, so that the real 
culprits are brought to book and writ of government 
as well as rule of law is fully established.  
 
 
(c) Notice of CMA 181 -K of 2013 be issued to IGP, DG, 
Rangers as well as to the Editor a nd Publisher of the 
Newspaper , Daily Josh  to place on record the original  SMC 16/2011  34 
extract of Daily “JOSH” Karachi dated 21st March, 
2013, copy of which has been appended with the 
application.   
 
 
(d) The Government of Sindh may create an 
independent post of Project Director, IT in Police 
Department as it has already been observed in the 
para supra.  
 
 
(e) The SP Encroachment Cell is directed to submit his 
report within 7 days as to whether the 
encroa chments by the land -grabbers have been 
cleared with in the Karachi area and land has been 
retrieved.  
 
 
(f) The Prosecutor General, Sindh is directed to submit 
the details of the cases, which were filed before the 
Tribunal or the Special Court under the Sind h Public 
Property  (Removal of Encroachment) Act, 2010  and 
state the reasons for their failure of the cases by 
fixing responsibility upon the officers involved in 
these cases and action, if taken against any one of 
them. He would further state as to whethe r the 
properties encroached/grabbed have been retrieved 
or not?  
 
(g) Mr. Muhammad Ahmed Pirzada, learned ASC shall 
procure and produce in Court copy of the petition 
pending before the High Court in respect of cases of 
KDA Scheme No.36 and the judgment, if has been 
announced by the learned High Court enabling this 
Court to have the benefit from the same.  
 
(h) Notice of CMAs No. 164 -K/2013, 156-K/2013 , 179 -
K/2013  and 93/2013 be issued to Board of Revenue, 
Senior Member Land Utilization for next date of 
hearing. 
 
(i) Senio r Member Board of Revenue is directed to put 
up details of the claims submitted by the alleged 
owners, allottees, lessees of the agricultural  
properties, filed by them before the Revenue 
authorities, Mukhtarkar etc. during re -construction of 
the revenue record while examining /handling the 
cases of 872 Deh, in respect whereof it has been 
alleged  that record has been burnt.  
 
(j) Notice of CMA No.183 -K/2013 be issued to the 
Senior Member Board of Revenue, Member Land 
Utilization as well as the Se cretary Forest.  
 SMC 16/2011  35 
(k) The District & Sessions Judge Hyderabad is directed 
to appoint a judicial officer not below the rank of 
Senior Civil Judge along with President District Bar 
Association Hyderabd to visit Deh Shah Bukhari, 
Taluka Qasimabad and prepare a report indicating as 
to whether on the land, which is meant for reserved 
forest, who is in the possession and whether any 
construction work is going on , on the said land.  
 
(l) The Member, Land Utilization will also independently 
visit the above -said lan d and submit his report 
whether any construction work has commenced over 
there and detail report shall be submitted by him 
within two weeks.  
 
(m) Notices of CMA 164 -K, HRC No. 40539 -S/2012 and 
CMA 184 -K/2013 be issued to the Senior Member 
Board of Revenue  and other persons who are party 
in this case as per its proceedings.  
 
(n) Notice of SMC No.14/2009 be issued to the Board of  
Revenue.  
 
(o) In CMA No.148 -K/2013 applicant has prayed for 
providing protection and action against one 
Muhammad Asad Thanvi. Notice be issued  to 
Advocate General and IGP, Sindh to submit report 
before the next date of hearing.  
 
(p) CMA No.108 -K/2013 has been filed by Maulana 
Aurangzeb Farooqi. Notice be also issued to the IGP, 
Sindh for filing reply.  
 
(q) Comments of CMA 390 -K/2013 be obtained from 
IGP, Sindh  
 
Put up for hearing at Karachi on 4th April, 2013.  
 
     CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE       JUDGE  
 
JUDGE       JUDGE  
Karachi, the  
22nd March, 2013.  
Nisar/*     Approved For Reporting  