IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
    
   Present  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Tariq Parvez  
   Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim  
 
C.M.As.No.874, 1710, 1711 OF 2011, H.R.C.No.678 -P OF 2011 AND 
CRL.ORG.P.No.  50/2011 IN S.M.C.No.18/2010  
 
On Court notice   :  Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, AGP.  
 
For NICL    : Mr. Saeed Aslam Raja, ED(CS)  
     Syed Abid Ali Shah, GM.  
 
For Ayyaz Niazi (accused):  Mr. Qamar Afzal, ASC.  
 
For M/O Commerce  : Mr. Zafar Mehmood, Secretary.  
 
For F IA   : Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, Dir (L)  
 
For the applicants   : Mr. Ali Zafar, ASC.  
(in C.M.As.No.1710 -1711/11)   Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
 
Respondent    : Mr. Zafar Ahmad Qureshi, Former  
(in C.M.As.No.1710 -1711/11)   Addl.D.G, FIA (In -person ) 
 
For NAB    : Mr. Fauzi Zafar, ADPGA (Absent)  
 
Crl.O.P.No.50/2011  
 
For alleged Contemnors  : Dr Babar Awan, Sr.ASC.  
     Mr. Qamar Zaman Ch. Secy. Interior  
     Mr. Abdul Rauf Ch. Secy. Estt.Division.  
     Mr. Khushnood A. Lashari, PSPM.  
 
Date of hearing:    1.7.2011.  
 
ORDER  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ . - In response 
to the notice dated 16.6.2011, Qamar Zaman Ch, Secretary, Ministry of 
Interior, Abdul Rauf Ch. Secretary, Establishment Division, and Khushnood 
Lashari, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, appeared t hrough their 
counsel and filed their replies; contents whereof have been perused by us  2 
along with the learned counsel to substantiate their pleas emanating from the 
replies . In addition to the replies, the learned counsel has formulated the 
following propo sitions on which he intends to make his submissions: -  
1. Neither there was intention nor any willfull or otherwise 
defiance was shown to the order dated 24.1.2011, passed 
by this Court.  
 
2. All actions done by the answering respondents or acts in 
administrativ e capacity during the course of official 
business, no contempt of any order was intended.  
 
3. All actions are covered by the Rules of Business, 1973, 
particularly by Rules 5, 11A and 15(4).  
 
4. The entire stance of all the three officers is based upon 
truth an d obedience to the competent authority of the 
Federation.  
 
5. All the three respondents held the dignity of this Court 
and law above all other considerations and no action is 
ever taken by them which is detrimental to the 
administration of justice.  
 
2.  The learned counsel h as contended that these officers have 
acted in good faith in discharge of their duties otherwise they ha ve full 
respect for the Court and or have not violated its orders and directions, in 
any manner. He stated that today he is busy befor e another learned Bench of 
this Court in connection with some important issue, therefore, he needs time 
to argue the case.  
3.  We may observe that the stand taken by the learned counsel for 
the respondents was very fair and candid while  making statement t hat  3 
Government has no interest in the investigation of these cases and whatever 
has been done, it was unintentional and none of the respondents had any 
intention to undermine the authority of the Court and or disrupt the 
investigation of the cases.  
 
4.  We have drawn his attention towards para 3 from the replies of 
the Khushnood Akhtar Lashari, Principal Secretary to the Prime Ministrer , 
and Abdul Rauf Ch, Secretary, Establishment Division, which reads “that a 
plain reading of FIA’s letter/report suggested  that additional charge 
assigned to Mr. Qureshi in FIA was no longer required otherwise there was 
no other purpose of this letter at all ”, whereas para 3 of reply of Qamar 
Zaman Ch, Secretary Ministry of Interior, Islamabad was similar to the 
aforesaid rep lies, which reads “it is clear from the above contents that 
Ministry of Interior’s letter was only by wayof information and there was 
absolutely no suggestion explicit or implied that Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi 
be disassociated from the investigation of the N ICl case .”   
 
5.  It is to be noted that former DG, FIA, in whose case judgment 
was reserved on 15.4.2011, had addressed a letter to the Secretary, Ministry 
of Interior, Government of Pakistan, contents whereof reads as under: -  
“OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GEN ERAL  
FEDERAL INVESTIGATION AGENCY  
ISLAMABAD  
 
No.PS/DG/FIA/2011/208   April 15, 2011  
 
The Secretary, Ministry of Interior,  
Government of Pakistan,  
Islamabad . 
 
Subject:  NOTIFICATION.  
 
  Kindly refer to your office Notification 
No.3/6/2011 -Estt (FIA), dated 9.2.2011, in pursuance of the 
Notification issued by the Government of Pakistan, Cabinet  4 
Secretariat, Establishment Division No.F.12/3/81 -E-
3(Police) dated 24.1.2011 with respect to posting of Capt. 
(R) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, (PSP/BS -21) as member of the 
FIA against the post of Additional Director General/FIA to 
supervise the investigation of NICL case at Lahore.  
 
2. It will not be out of place to mention that the interim 
challans in NICL cases have been submitted in the Court of 
competent jurisdiction on 11 .4.2011 and a report thereof 
has already been submitted in the Honourable Supreme 
Court of Pakistan on 14.4.2011 by the said officer.  
 
3. The matter is brought to your notice for further 
necessary action.  
 
                                       Sd/ - 
    Malik Muhammad Iqbal, PSP  
              Director General/FIA”  
 
6.  It seems that in the context of the above letter, reply of the 
alleged contemnors has been filed and, prima facie , they have drawn 
inference f rom the above letter as is indicated in the rep lies of the 
respondents reproduced hereinabove that Mr. Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, 
Additional Director General, FIA, was no longer required whereas the 
cursory glance on the contents of the letter suggests that Malik Muhammad 
Iqbal, DG, FIA, has written the abov e letter to bring into the notice the 
progress of the investigation in the cases for necessary information  and has 
never suggested that Capt. (R) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi was no longer required 
as has been inferred by them .  
 
7.  As all the three officers have requested through their learned 
counsel for further time, but in the meanwhile, as far as the progress of 
investigation in the cases relating to the NICL scam is concerned, it was 
remarkably advanced and accelerated  by Capt. (R) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi 
during the period he supervised the investigation, which resulted in 
collection of huge amount of Rs.1.74 billions , has come to stand still. 
Therefore, the officer who had been discharging duties honestly, uprightly  5 
and had shown professionalism in bringing back the looted money should 
not have been condemned by issuing notification dated 18.4.2011 
disassociating him from the investigation in the cases by withdrawing the 
additional charge of the post of Additional Director General, FIA. An officer 
conducting hones t investigation s hould have been allowed to continue with 
the investigation. As the recovery has to be made and final challan is yet to 
be submitted, therefore, it was another important aspect of the case which 
should have been noticed  before the issuance of aforesaid notification.   
 
 
8.  In view of the importance of the matter, we asked the Attorney 
General for Pakistan, who is present in Court, that now the case is being 
adjourned at the request of Dr. Babar Awan, who is busy before another 
learned Bench  and in the larger interest of justice, no one  amongst the 
alleged contemnors  has objected to the conducting of investigation by 
Capt.(R) Zafar Ahmed Qureshi, in terms of the earlier notification dated 
24.1.2011 issued by the Establishment Division coupled  with the subsequent 
letter of D.G, FIA to the Government for again associating Capt. ® Zafar 
Ahmed Qureshi with the investigation as he has not accomplished the job 
which has been assigned to him and in view of the importance of the case 
which required investigation to be carried out  but has not been completed so 
far and only interim challan has been submitted, he may not have been 
disassociated from the investigation. The learned Attorney General admits 
that he is an honest officer and had carried out the  investigation properly and 
successfully. He, however, has expressed his reservation  without cogent 
reasons.  
  6 
9.  In the facts and circumstances when such like honest and 
upright officer , who ha s always upheld the national interest and had taken all 
risks in performance of his duties should not have been condemned in such a 
manner  by issuance of the notification dated 18.4.2011 by the Establishment 
Division.  We, therefore, suspend the operation of Notification F.No.12/3/81 -
E-3 (Police) dated 18.4.2011 issued by the Government of Pakistan, Cabinet 
Secretariat, Establishment Division till further  order s. The incumbent D.G, 
FIA, is directed to extend  all necessary assistance to Capt. (R) Zafar Ahmed 
Qureshi for carrying out investigation of the cases registere d at Lahore in 
respect of N.I.C.L scam and any other  matter connected and relat ed thereto  
in terms of earlier notification dated 24.1.2011 issued by the Establishment 
Division . No interference of any nature whatsoever shall be caused either by 
D.G, FIA or by any other authority and he would take over the charge of the 
investigation of the cases of N.I.C.L scam at Lahore immediately and would 
be free to take all such steps and adopt all measures in discharge of his 
duties necessary for conducting transparent  investigation. He shall, however, 
be submitting fortnightly reports to Mr. Justice Amir Hani Muslim in 
Chambers for perusal.  
 
  The c ase is adjourned to a date in office.  
 
CJ 
 
 
J 
 
 
J 
Islamabad the  
1st July 2011.  
APPROVED FOR REPORTING.  Sohail/**  