 
 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Mr. Justice Athar Minallah  
 
 
Civil Petition No. 3575 of 2020  
(Against the judgment dated 23.09.2020 of the 
Peshawar High Court,  Peshawar passed in Writ 
Petition No. 514 -P/2020)  
 
Regional Manager, NADRA RHO, Hayatabad,  
Peshawar and another.       … Petitioners  
     Versus  
Mst. Hajira and another.       … Respondent s 
 
 
For the Petitioners :  Mr. Afnan Karim Kundi, ASC.  
 
Both Respondents:   In-person.  
 
On Court’s Notice :  
For the Federation:   Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
     Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 
Date of Hearing:    22.11.2023.  
 
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ. This petition has been filed by two petitioners, 
respectively Reg ional Manager, NADRA, Regional Head Office, Hayatabad, 
Peshawar and Director General, NADRA, Project Directorate NADRA Head 
Quarters, Islamabad, but both of them are not authorized to file this 
petition. It appears that a statutory corporate body did not r ead its own 
law, which is, the National Database and Registration Authority Ordinance, 
2000 (‘ the Ordinance ’). Mentioning an acronym in the title of the petition 
also does not conform to how a party is to be described in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 ( ‘CPC’). The National Database and Registration Authority 
(‘Authority ’) should learn how corporate entities are to be defined and to 
read the Ordinance to learn who can initiate and defend litigation. Section 
3(2) of the Ordinance stipulates that the Authority is a corporate body and 
has to sue in its own name through the authorized person.  
 Civil Petition No. 3575 of 2020  
 
 
 2
2. The learned counsel representing the petitioners state s that in the 
writ petition which was filed by the respondents (two private individuals ) in 
the Peshawar H igh Court had arrayed the petitioners as mentioned herein , 
and copied the title therefrom. With respect to the learned counsel , if the 
respondents had not arrayed the Authority , this objection should have been 
taken before the High Court, and not to perpet uate the mistake  before this 
Court . Learned counsel also states that the office of this Court raises 
objections when parties are not described exactly as they were before the 
High Court, but did not refer to any objection in this regard nor to an order 
of this Court. It appears that the ability to accept one’s mistake is a quality 
in recession. Litigation has to be conducted in accordance with the law . 
However, the petitioners did not comply  with the Ordinance nor with the 
CPC regarding the provisions stipu lating the mode and manner of 
describing parties.  
 
3. Leaving aside the aforesaid the learned counsel submits that the 
Pakistan Origin Card (‘ POC’) is granted under section 11 of the Ordinance 
and in accordance with the National Database and Registration Authority 
(Pakistan Origin Card) Rules, 2002 (‘ the Rules ’). The writ petition, which 
was allowed, had directed the Authority to issue POC to the respondent No. 
2, which learned counsel states has now been issued, therefore, the 
grievance of the respondent s stands redressed. It is unfortunate that the 
Authority rather than doing its job in the first instance had compelled the 
respondents to file a writ petition before the Peshawar High Court, which 
was allowed . However, the decision of the Peshawar High Cour t was 
challenged before this Court , when certain questions were raised, and only 
then better sense prevail ed and the Authority issued the POC to the 
respondent No. 2. The Authority is a statutory organization  and should 
have abided by its own law, and not to have generated unnecessary 
litigation.  
 
4. The only concern of the learned counsel is that the impugned 
judgment did not refer to section 11 of the Ordinance and the Rules. He 
states that if the respondent  No. 1 and respondent No. 2 were to divorce, 
then as per the impugned judgment, the respondent No. 2 would still be 
entitled to the POC, which would be contrary to rule 4(5) of the Rules. We Civil Petition No. 3575 of 2020  
 
 
 3
are confident that if proper assistance had been provided to the High Court 
the impugned judgment would have attended to th is aspect too. Needless to 
state that if the situation, as conjectured by the learned counsel, were to 
arise the same will be attended to as provided by the Ordinance and the 
Rules. With such clarif ication this petition is disposed of.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
Judge 
Islamabad:  
22.11.2023  
(M. Tauseef)   
Approved for Reporting  