IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Qazi Faez Isa  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
 
 
Human Rights Case No. 18877 of 2018  
[In the matter regarding deduction of 
high Tax/other charges by Mobile 
Companies in Pakistan]  
 
 
Attendance:  
  
  Mr. Anwar Mansoor, Attorney General for Pakistan.  
  Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, Addl. Attorney General  for Pakistan.  
  Mr. Tariq Mehmood Jahangiri, Advocate General, I slamabad.  
  Mr. Abdul Latif Yousafzai, Advocate General, KP.  
Barrister Qasim Chohan, Addl. Advocate General, Punjab.  
Barrister Shabbir Shah, Addl. Advocate General, Sindh.  
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl. Advocate General, Balochistan.  
Mr. Ali Sibtain Fazli, Sr. ASC (For Telenor)  
Mr. Munawar Iqbal Duggal, ASC (For PTA)  
Mr. Ali Raza, ASC (For Pak Mobile; Ufone + Jazz + Warid)  
Mr. Ali Zafar, ASC (for Punjab Revenue Authority)  
Mr. Ayaz Shaukat, ASC (for Zong)  
Mr. Mohammad Kassim Mirjat, AOR (S.R.B)  
Dr. Jehanzeb Khan, Chairman FBR.  
Ghulam Abbas Kazmi, Member Legal, FBR.  
Nasir Mehmood, Law Off icer, Finance Department, Lahore.  
Javed Khan, Dy. Secretary, Finance Department, KP.  
Muhammad Khurram Siddiqui, Director Law, PTA.  
Adil Umer Khalid, Director (CA), PTA.  
  
 
Date of Hearing :  27.03.2019 . 
 
 
O R D E R   
1. This matter pertains to the levy/impositio n of advance income tax 
by the Federation, Federal Excise Duty by the Federa tion in the 
Islamabad Capital Territory, sales tax on services by the Provinces and 
service/maintenance charges by cellular mobile operators.  
 
2. The learned counsel representing cellular mobile operators state 
that they have stopped levying/imposing and collecting service /  
maintenance charges and do not intend to do so  in the future.   
 HRC No. 18877 of 2018  
 
 
 2
3. The learned Attorney General for Pakistan (“AGP”) question s 
whether this matter could have b een taken notice of under Article 184  (3) 
of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (“ the 
Constitution ”) as, according to him , it does not concern the enforcement 
of any Fundamental Right enshrined in the Constitution. The learned 
Advocate Ge nerals of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Islamabad  and the 
learned Additional Advocate Generals  of Punjab, Sindh and Balochistan 
(“AGs” and “ AAGs ”) support the learned AGP in this regard.   
 
4. The learned AG P, the AGs  and AAGs also question the order of this 
Court  dated 11th June, 2018 wh ich restrained the collecti on of the said 
taxes . They submit that this was done without considering the applicable 
laws and without striking down the relevant provision of any law which 
authorized such levy/imposition and collectio n. Since the said interim 
order is causing massive revenue loss to the Federation and the 
provinces the learned law officers request that this matter may be 
adjudicated upon at an early date.  
 
5. A cursory examination of the matter has raised a number of 
questions.  The preliminary question which requires consideration  is: 
(1) Whether this matter could have been taken 
notice of under Article 184 (3)?  
 And, i f the answer to the aforesaid is in the affirmative , then 
the following questions would require consider ation : 
(2) Whether advance income tax can be levied on all 
the customers of cellular mobile operators 
irrespective of whether or not they are taxpayers 
pursuant to section 236 read with section 147 
and section 2  (66) of the Income Tax Ordinance , 
2001 ?  
(3)  Whether sales tax on cellular services provided 
by the cellular mobile operators can be levied / 
imposed on the ir customers by the provinces 
under the ir respective laws, that is, the Sindh 
Sales Tax on Services Act, 2011, the Punjab 
Sales Tax on Ser vices Act 2012, the Khyber HRC No. 18877 of 2018  
 
 
 3
Pakhtunkhwa Finance Act, 2013 and the 
Balochistan Sales Tax on S ervices Act, 2015 ? 
(4)  Whether excise duty can be levied / imposed by 
the Federation on the service s provide d by 
cellular mobile operators  to their customers 
under the Federal Excise Act, 2005?  
 
6. The Federation and the Provinces to submit their respective 
concise statements with regard to the aforesaid questions , which should 
be accompanied with extracts of the applicable laws. The information 
about the amount of the said taxes collected by the cellular mobile 
operators and paid to the respective reve nue authorities of the Federation 
and the provinces for the period from 13th June, 2017 through till 13th 
June, 2018  shall also be provided in the concise statements . The concise 
statement  submitted on behalf of the Federation should be signed by the 
Secretaries of Revenue, Law and the learned AGP , the concise statement 
on behalf of the Islamabad Capital Territory by the Secretaries of 
Revenue, Law and the learned AG of Isl amabad  and th e concise 
statement on behalf of the province s signed by the Secretaries  of 
Finance , Law and the learned AGs; and in case of disagreement amongst 
any of the said secretaries and law officers separate concise statements  
may be filed . If the cellular mobile operators want to file concise 
statements they may also do so  under the joint signature s of the 
concerned officer and their counsel .  
 
7. Since the referred to interim order was passed by a three -member 
Bench it would be appropriate if this ma tter is heard by a Bench 
comprising of at least three members. Therefore , this matter should be 
referred to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan for requisite orders  for 
the constitution of the Bench  and for fixing it for hearing at an early date 
as it pe rtains to the collection of public revenues.   
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
 
Bench -IV 
Islamabad:   
27.03.2019  
 (M. Tauseef)   