IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
 
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, HCJ  
    MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
    MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 40 of 2012 & CMA No.2494/12  
 
 
Muhammad Azhar Sidd ique  Vs.    Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 41 of 2012 & CMA No.2495/12  
 
Imran Khan      Vs.   Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 42 of 2012  
 
Kh. Muhammad Asif    Vs.    Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 4 3 of 2012  
 
Syed Zafar Ali Shah   Vs.    Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 44 of 2012  
 
S. Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi  Vs.    Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 45 of 2012  
 
Ch. Khalid Farooq, ASC  Vs.     Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 46 of 2012 & CMA 2496 OF 2012  
 
Shahid Naseem Gondal, Adv. Vs.    Federation of Pakistan etc.  
 
 
Const. Petition No. 47 of 2012  
 
Ch. M. Asghar Saroha  etc.     Vs.   Mohtarma Dr. Fehmida Mirza, 
       Speaker National Assembly etc.  
 
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  2 
Const. Petition No. 50 of 2012  
 
Lahore High Court Bar     Vs.    Speaker National Assembly  
Association, thru. Sh. Ahsan    and others  
ud-din, President of High Court  
 
 
For the petitioners:   Mr. A. K. Dogar, Sr. ASC  
     Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC  
     Mr. Meh mood A. Sheikh, AOR  
     (in Const.P. No.40/2012)  
   
     Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC  
     Mr. M. Waqar Rana, ASC  
     S. Safdar Hussain, AOR  
     (in Const. P. No.41/12)  
 
     Kh. Muhammad Asif, MNA (In person)  
     (in Const. P. No. 42/12)  
      
      
     S. Zafar Ali Shah, Sr. ASC (in person)  
     (in Const. P. No.43/12)  
 
     S.Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi (in person)  
     (in Const. P. No.44/12)  
  
     Mr. Abdul Rehman Siddiqui, ASC  
     (in Const. P. 45/12)  
      
     Mr. A.K. Dogar, Sr. ASC  
     (in Const. P. 46/2012)  
 
     Khan Attaullah Tareen, ASC  
     Ch. M. Asghar Saroha, ASC  
     (in Const. P.47/12)  
 
     Mr. Taufiq Asif, ASC  
     (in Const. P. 50/2012)  
 
On Court Notice:    Mr. Irfan Qadir,  
     Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
For Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani:  Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC  
     Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
 
For the Federation:   Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, ASC  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
For the Speaker, N.A:   Mr. Muhammad Latif Qureshi,  
     Joint Secretary (L), N.Assembly  
 
For the ECP:    Mr. Muhammad  Nawaz, Director (L)  
   
Date of hearing:    14, 15, 18 & 19 June, 2012  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  3 
 
 
JUDGMENT  
  
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ.  — On 15 
October, 2007, the President of Pakistan promulgated the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007, hereinafter referred to as the “NRO”. A 
number of petitions were filed before this Court under Article 184(3) of 
the Constitution challenging the vires of the NRO and various 
provisions thereof. This Court, by judgment dated 16 December, 2009, 
reported as Dr. Mobashir Hassan v. Federation  of Pakistan (PLD 2010 
SC 265) held that sections 2, 6 and 7 of the NRO were ultra vires and 
violative of various Articles of the Constitution and declared the NRO 
void ab initio and non est. It was further held that “all steps taken, 
actions suffered, and  all orders passed by whatever authority, any 
orders passed by the Courts of law including the orders of discharge 
and acquittals recorded in favour of accused persons, are also declared 
never to have existed in the eyes of law and resultantly of no legal 
effect.” Paragraphs 177 and 178 of the judgment are reproduced 
hereinbelow: -  
“177.   Since in view of the provisions of Article 100(3) 
of the Constitution, the Attorney General for Pakistan could 
not have suffered any act not assigned to him by the 
Federa l Government or not authorized by the said 
Government and since no order or authority had been 
shown to us under which the then learned Attorney 
General  namely Malik Muhammad Qayyum had been 
authorized to address communication to various 
authorities/court s in foreign countries including 
Switzerland, therefore, such communications addressed by 
him withdrawing the requests for mutual legal assistance 
or abandoning the status of a civil party in such CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  4 
proceedings abroad or which had culminated in the 
terminati on of proceedings before the competent fora in 
Switzerland or other countries or in abandonment of the 
claim of the Government of Pakistan to huge amounts of 
allegedly laundered moneys, are declared to be 
unauthorized, unconstitutional and illegal acts of the said 
Malik Muhammad Qayyum.  
178.  Since the NRO, 2007 stands declared void ab 
initio, therefore, any actions taken or suffered under the 
said law are also non est in law and since the 
communication  addressed by Malik Muhammad Qayyum 
to various foreign  fora/authorities/courts withdrawing the 
requests earlier made by the Government of Pakistan for 
mutual legal assistance;  surrendering the status of civil 
party; abandoning the claims to the allegedly laundered 
moneys lying in foreign countries including Switzerland, 
have also been declared by us to be unauthorized and 
illegal communications and consequently of no legal effect, 
therefore, it is declared that the initial requests for mutual 
legal assistance, securing the status of civil party and the 
claims  lodged to the allegedly laundered moneys lying in 
foreign countries including Switzerland are declared never 
to have been withdrawn. Therefore the Federal 
Government and other concerned authorities are ordered 
to take immediate steps to seek revival of th e said 
requests, claims and status.  
2.   It is submitted on behalf of the petitioners that the 
competent authority of the Federal Government failed to implement 
the judgment despite express directions of this Court issued from time 
to time and have continu ed to ignore the same till date. A suo motu 
notice  was taken by this Court of a news item, which reported 
appointment of one of beneficiaries of NRO, namely, Ahmad Riaz 
Sheikh, as head of the Economic Crimes Wing of the Federal 
Investigation Agency (FIA). In the course of the proceedings, the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  5 
Government was once again directed to take steps to revive all the 
cases, including those, which were being pursued outside the country 
before the promulgation of the NRO, but were abandoned in pursuance 
of the NRO. Th e Court reiterated its direction issued in the case of Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan  to write a letter as per instruction contained in 
paragraphs No.177 and 178 of the said judgment. On 30 March, 2010, 
the then Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary A ffairs 
was summoned before the Court and was asked to explain the delay in 
the implementation of the judgment. He appeared on 31 March, 2010 
and submitted reports on behalf of Law Ministry as well as National 
Accountability Bureau (NAB) through Mr. Anwar M ansoor Khan, the 
then Attorney General for Pakistan. The learned Attorney General 
sought time to go through the same and “apprise the Court with 
regard to the compliance of the judgment in letter & spirit”. On 1 April, 
2010, the Court was informed that the  Chairman NAB had written a 
letter to the Swiss Authorities seeking revival of the said request. In 
the order of the said date, the Court expressed the opinion that 
request for reviving Pakistan’s status of a civil/damaged party in the 
proceedings in Switz erland fell within the purview of the Government; 
therefore, the Government ought to do the needful in accordance with 
the procedure adopted earlier. After issuing these directions in the first 
hours of the Court working time, the case was again taken up i n the 
afternoon. The learned Attorney General appeared and informed the 
Court that “he did his best to have access to the record of the case 
lying with Ministry of Law, Justice & Parliamentary Affairs, but Mr. 
Babar Awan, Minister of Law, was not allowing him to lay hands on the 
same for one or the other reason.” The Court then summoned the 
Secretary, Ministry of Law on the same day who appeared and stated CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  6 
that he had received three sealed envelops from the Foreign Office, 
addressed to the Secretary, the At torney General of Switzerland and 
another functionary. He also stated that in the letter addressed to him, 
his opinion was sought on the issue of sending envelopes to 
Switzerland. According to him, he had retained two envelopes at home 
in safe custody and had yet to form his opinion on the matter. The 
Court then directed the learned Attorney General and the counsel for 
the NAB to submit report to the Registrar of the Court confirming that 
“request for opening of Swiss cases has been forwarded accordingly 
and no lacuna left therein.” However, no such report was ever 
submitted to the Court. Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan  thereafter  resigned 
from the office of the Attorney General for Pakistan.  
3.    The matter was thereafter taken up on different dates of 
hearing fro m time to time. On 25th May, 2010, the then Law Minister 
appeared and informed the Court that a summary regarding 
implementation of the judgment including, inter alia, the request for 
revival of the status of civil/damaged party had been prepared and 
submi tted to the Prime Minister. He was directed to file a concise 
statement on behalf of the Federal Government, specifying expressly 
the steps taken for the implementation of the judgment. Accordingly, a 
concise statement was filed wherein reference was made to the 
observation made by the Prime Minister on the aforesaid summary 
that Ministry of Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs had not given 
any specific views in the matter as per Rules of Business, 1973. This 
observation of the Prime Minister was reprodu ced in the order of this 
Court dated 10th June, 2010.   CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  7 
4.   A time barred review petition was filed by the Federation 
of Pakistan against the judgment in Dr. Mobashir Hassan’s case  and 
the implementation proceedings were suspended. The review petition 
was subsequently dismissed vide judgment reported as Federation of 
Pakistan v. Dr. Mobashir Hassan  (PLD 2012 SC 106). Thereafter, the 
issue of implementation of the judgment was taken up again by a 5 -
member bench. On 3 January, 2012, the learned Attorney Gene ral was 
asked whether a summary had been submitted to the Prime Minister 
pursuant to the earlier order of this Court dated 5 July, 2010. The 
learned Attorney General expressed his ignorance of any 
developments in the matter.  
5.   This Court, in its order dated 10 January, 2012 identified 
six different options available to the Court to secure implementation of 
the judgment. Of these, the Court pursued Option No.2, which is 
reproduced hereunder: -  
“Option No.2  
Proceedings may be initiated against the Chief Executive of 
the Federation, i.e. the Prime Minister, the Federal Minister 
for Law, Justice and Human Rights Division and the Federal 
Secretary Law, Justice and Human Rights Division for 
committing contempt of this Court by persistently, 
obstinately and co ntumaciously resisting, failing or 
refusing to implement or execute in full the directions 
issued by this Court in its judgment delivered in the case 
of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (Supra). It may not be lost sight of 
that, apart from the other consequences, by vi rtue of the 
provisions of clauses (g) and (h) of Article 63(1) read with 
Article 113 of the Constitution a possible conviction on 
such a charge may entail a disqualification from being 
elected or chosen as, and from being, a member of Majlis -CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  8 
e-Shoora (Parl iament) or a Provincial Assembly for at least 
a period of five years.”  
 
6.   A 7-member bench  of this Court issued notice to Syed 
Yousaf Raza Gillani, Prime Minister of Pakistan, hereinafter referred to 
as “the respondent”, and, after observing due formal ities, framed the 
following charge against him: -  
“That you, Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan, have willfully flouted, disregarded and disobeyed 
the direction given by this Court in para 178 in case of Dr. 
Mobashir Hassan v. Federa tion of Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 
265)” to revive the request by the Government of Pakistan 
for mutual legal assistance and status of civil party and the 
claims lodged to the allegedly laundered moneys lying in 
foreign countries, including Switzerland, which w ere 
unauthorizedly withdrawn by communication by Malik 
Muhammad Qayyum, former Attorney General for Pakistan 
to the concerned authorities, which direction you were 
legally bound to obey and thereby committed contempt of 
Court within the meanings of Article  204 (2) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read 
with section 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance 
(Ordinance V of 2003), punishable under Section 5 of the 
Ordinance and within the cognizance of this Court. We 
hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the above 
said charge.”  
7.   The charge was denied and the matter proceeded on to full 
hearing. Ultimately, vide short order dated 26 April, 2012, the 
respondent was convicted under Article 204 (2) of the Constitution read 
with sec tion 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 and 
sentenced under section 5 of the Ordinance to undergo imprisonment 
till rising of the Court. The detailed reasons for the said order were CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  9 
released on 8 May, 2012. At para 70 of the detailed judgment, the 7-
member bench of this Court clearly observed as follows:  
“In the case in hand the accused is the highest Executive 
functionary of the State of Pakistan and he has willfully, 
deliberately and persistently defied a clear direction of the 
highest Court of th e country. We are, therefore, fully 
satisfied that such clear and persistent defiance at such a 
high level constitutes contempt which is substantially 
detrimental to the administration of justice and tends not 
only to bring this Court but also brings the j udiciary 
of this country into ridicule . After all, if orders or 
directions of the highest court of the country are defied by 
the highest Executive of the country then others in the 
country may also feel tempted to follow the example 
leading to a collapse o r paralysis of administration of 
justice besides creating an atmosphere wherein judicial 
authority and verdicts are laughed at and ridiculed.”  
It must also be noted that the respondent accepted his conviction and 
did not file an appeal against the said jud gment.  
8.   The Speaker of the National Assembly after receipt of the 
order dated 26 April, 2012 gave ruling on 24 May, 2012 whereby she 
decided that no question for disqualification of the respondent had 
arisen  even  after the judgment of conviction rende red by the Supreme 
Court. Relevant paragraphs from the ruling of the Speaker are 
reproduced as under: -  
“5. Now coming to the point as to whether any question  
arises for disqualification of a member from being a 
Member of Parliament under clause (2) of Ar ticle 63 of the 
Constitution on the basis of material and information 
placed before me and the powers and jurisdiction of the 
Speaker under the said Article. I may like to reproduce the 
provision of clause (2) of Article 63 as under: - 
“If any question aris es whether a member of the 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) has become disqualified 
from being a member, the Speaker or, as the case 
may be, the Chairman shall, unless has decides that 
no such question has arisen, refer the question to 
the Election Commission within thirty days and if he CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  10 
fails to do so within the aforesaid period it shall be 
deemed to have been referred to the Election 
Commission.”  
6. It would be advantageous here to quote the case law 
on the subject. It has been held in Kanwar Intizar 
Muhamma d Khan VS. Federation of Pakistan and others 
reported in 1995 MLD Lahore 1903 that the Speaker while 
examining a reference under Article 63(2) of the 
Constitution is not supposed to act merely as post office. If 
a reference is submitted to him, he is not b ound to 
forward/transmit the same, to the Chief Election 
Commissioner for decision forthwith. The Speaker has to 
apply his own mind judiciously after fully taking into 
consideration the relevant provisions on the subject and 
then decide as to whether “any question” in the nature of 
disqualification has “arisen” which may justify the making 
of reference to the Chief Election Commissioner.” The 
same view was also expressed by the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan in PLD 2005 SC 52.”  
In conclusion,  the Speaker held as  under: -  
“In the light of what has been stated above, I am of the 
view that the charges against Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani are 
not relatable to the grounds mentioned in paragraph (g) or 
(h) of clause (1) of Article 63, therefore, no question of 
disqualific ation of Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani from being a 
member arises under clause (2) of Article 63 of the 
Constitution. The letter of the Assistant Registrar (IMP) for 
Registrar of the Supreme Court stands answered 
accordingly. Furthermore, the petition of Moulvi  Iqbal 
Haider, Advocate being without any merit, is not 
maintainable and accordingly rejected.”  
 
9.   These petitions have been filed directly before this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution challenging the above ruling of 
the Speaker with the assertions  that, inter alia, after the judgment of 
the 7 -member bench of this Court, the respondent stands disqualified CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  11 
as a member of the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament) and has also ceased 
to be the Prime Minister on and from the day and time of his 
convict ion. The prayer clauses of Constitution Petitions No. 40 & 41 of 
2012 are reproduced below: -  
Const. P.40/2012  
 It is therefore, respectfully prayed that in the light of 
the submissions made in the paras above 2nd Respondent 
be required to show under what  authority of law he claims 
to hold the office of the Prime Minister of Pakistan.  
 It is further prayed that pending disposal of the main 
petition this learned court be pleased to restrain the 2nd 
Respondent from acting as Prime Minister and to stop 
usurpa tion of his office and misuse of the facilities 
connected with the said office.  
Const. P. 41/2012   
IT IS WHEREFORE MOST RESPECTFULLY PRAYED 
that this Honourable Court may graciously be pleased to 
declare the decision of Respondent No.1 dated 24.05.12 as 
unconstitutional, void and in violation of fundamental 
rights of access to justice and independence of judiciary.  
It is further prayed that this Honourable Court be 
pleased to direct Respondent No.4 to decide the question 
of disqualification of Respondent N o.2 as having been 
deemed to have been referred to it under Article 63(2) and 
(3).” 
 
10.   We have heard the learned counsel for the parties in all 
the petitions, including the learned Attorney General for Pakistan at 
length and have gone through the case -law cited at the bar in support 
of their respective arguments and contentions.   
11.   At the outset, it may be appropriate to deal with the 
preliminary objection raised by the respondents and the learned 
Attorney General against the maintainability of the se petitions. Mr. CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  12 
Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC, learned counsel for the respondent has 
challenged the maintainability of the petitions on the ground that they 
do not meet the requirements of Article 184(3) of the Constitution of 
Pakistan, viz., the involvement of  a question of public importance with 
reference to enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred 
by Chapter 1, Part II of the Constitution. According to the learned 
counsel, the petitioners have not identified which of their fundamental 
rights sta nds violated. Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, learned ASC for 
the Federation has reiterated the same objection. He has referred to 
the case of Syed Kabir Ahmad Bukhari v. Federation of Pakistan  (1988 
SCMR 1988) wherein the petition was dismissed as being incom petent 
on the ground that no violation of any Fundamental Right was alleged 
for whose enforcement the jurisdiction of this Court could be invoked 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. On the issue of 
maintainability of the instant petitions, the learne d Attorney General 
has contended that all the petitioners, especially Khawaja Muhammad 
Asif, MNA, Pakistan Muslim League (N), have not approached this 
Court with clean hands, inasmuch as they are using the Supreme 
Court to settle political scores and with the object of seeking public 
sympathy and votes for the upcoming election.  
12.   In response, Mr. Hamid Khan has submitted that the 
petitioners, including Imran Khan who is the head of a political party, 
have approached this Court for the vindication of t heir Fundamental 
Rights as enshrined in Articles 10A, 14, 17 and 25 of the Constitution 
and for ensuring obedience to the Constitution and the law, which is 
the inviolable obligation of every citizen, low or high. He has placed 
reliance on the case of Muha mmad Nawaz Sharif v. President of CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  13 
Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473). He has further argued that the action of 
the Speaker runs contrary to the principle of independence of the 
judiciary and also infringes the Fundamental Right of access to justice 
in the light of  the law laid down by this Court in Asad Ali v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PD 1998 SC 161). Mr. Hamid Khan has argued that the 
maintainability of the petitions cannot be questioned in view of a 
plethora of case law, more particularly in light of a very recent  
pronouncement of this Court In re: Corruption in Hajj Arrangements  
(PLD 2011 SC 963) wherein the parameters of  the jurisdiction of this 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution have been laid down 
very clearly. He further argued that the conviction of the Prime 
Minister, ipso facto, made it a question of public importance and also 
constituted infringement of their aforesaid Fundamental Rights, which 
entitled the petitioners to invoke the original jurisdiction of this Court 
for the enforcement of thei r aforesaid Fundamental Rights.  
13.   In almost every petition filed before this Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution, objection regarding maintainability 
is raised and is dealt with by the Court on the facts and circumstances 
of each case. The scope of this jurisdiction by now is, therefore, well 
settled. Each petitioner, in order to be able to successfully invoke this 
jurisdiction, is required to satisfy the Court about the two -fold 
requirement stipulated in Article 184(3), viz., the petition r aises a 
question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights. In support of their plea for maintainability of the 
petitions, the petitioners have referred, inter alia, to the cases of Miss 
Benazir Bhutto  and Muhammad  Nawaz Sharif . In both these 
judgments, this Court has placed a broad based interpretation on the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  14 
scope of Article 184(3) of the Constitution. In the former case, 
Muhammad Haleem, C.J., while dealing with the applicability of the 
rule of locus standi  in the matte r of initiation of public interest 
litigation referred to a famous discourse on the subject, which is 
reproduced hereunder: -   
“… … After all the law is not a closed shop and, even in 
adversary procedure, it is permissible for the next friend to 
move the Court on behalf of a minor or a person under a 
disability. Why not then a person, if he were to act bona 
fide, activise the Court for several reasons. This is what 
public interest litigation seeks to achieve as it goes further 
to relax the rule on locus standi so as to include a person 
who bona fide makes an application for the violation of any 
constitutional right of a determined class of persons whose 
grievances go unnoticed and unredressed. The initiation of 
the proceedings in this manner will be in aid of the 
meaningful protection of the rule of law given to the 
citizens by Article 4 of the Constitution, that is, "(1) To 
enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance 
with law is the inalienable right of every citizen, wherever 
he may be, and  of every other person for the time being 
within Pakistan. …” [the World Peace Through Law 
Conference at Lagos in 1961]  
 
On the nature and the scope of the jurisdiction of this Court under 
Article 184(3), the learned Chief Justice commented as under: -  
  
“The plain language of Article 184(3) shows that it is open-
ended . The Article does not say as to who shall have the 
right to move the Supreme Court nor does it say by what 
proceedings the Supreme Court may be so moved or 
whether it is confined to the enf orcement of the 
Fundamental Rights of an individual which are infracted or 
extends to the enforcement of the rights of a group or a 
class of persons whose rights are violated. In this context 
the question arises whether apart from the 
non-incorporation of sub Articles 1(a) and 1(c) of Article 
199 the rigid notion of an "aggrieved person" is implicit in 
Article 184(3) as because of the traditional litigation which, 
of course, is of an adversary character where there is a lis 
between the two contending partie s, one claiming relief 
against the other and the other resisting the claim. This 
rule of standing is an essential outgrowth of Anglo -Saxon 
jurisprudence in which the only person wronged can 
initiate proceedings of a judicial nature for redress against 
the wrongdoer. However, in contrast to it, this procedure is 
not followed in the civil law system in vogue in some 
countries. The rationale of this procedure is to limit it to CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  15 
the parties concerned and to make the rule of law selective 
to give protection the a ffluent or to serve in aid for 
maintaining the status quo of the vested interests. This is 
destructive of the rule of law which is so, worded in Article 
4 of the Constitution as to give protection to all citizens. 
The inquiry into law and life cannot, in m y view, be 
confined to the narrow limits of the rule of law in the 
context of constitutionalism which makes a greater 
demand on judicial functions. Therefore, while construing 
Article 184(3), the interpretative approach should not be 
ceremonious observance  of the rules or usages of 
interpretation, but regard should be had to the object and 
the purpose for which this Article is enacted, that is, this 
interpretative approach must receive inspiration from the 
triad of provisions which saturate and invigorate t he entire 
Constitution, namely, the Objectives Resolution (Article 
2-A ), the Fundamental Rights and the directive principles 
of State policy so as to achieve democracy, tolerance, 
equality and social justice according to Islam.  
  In this milieu, I am of t he view that the 
adversary procedure, where a person wronged is the main 
actor if it is rigidly followed, as contended by the learned  
Attorney General, for enforcing the Fundamental Rights, 
would become self -defeating as it will not then be available 
to provide "access to justice to all" as this right is not only 
an internationally recognized human right but has also 
assumed constitutional importance as it provides a broad 
based  remedy against the violation of human rights and 
also serves to promote socio -economic justice which is 
pivotal in advancing the national hopes and aspirations of 
the people permeating the Constitution and the basic 
values incorporated therein, one of which is social 
solidarity, i.e. , national integration and social cohesion by 
creating an egalitarian society through a new legal order.  
  This ideal can only be achieved under the rule 
of law by adopting the democratic way of life as ensured 
by Fundamental Rights and Principles of Policy. The 
intention of the framers of the Constituti on, as it seems to 
me, is to implement the principles of social and economic 
justice enshrined in the Principles of Policy within the 
framework of Fundamental Rights. Chapters I & II of Part 
II of the Constitution which incorporate Fundamental 
Rights and d irective principles of State policy, respectively 
occupy a place of pride in the scheme of the Constitution, 
and if I may say so, these are the conscience of the 
Constitution, as they constitute the main thrust of the 
commitment to socio -economic justice. The directive 
principles of State policy are to be regarded as 
fundamentals to the governance of the State but they are 
not enforceable by any Court. Nonetheless, they are the 
basis of all legislative and executive actions by the State 
for implementing the  principles laid down therein. As the 
principles of democracy are not based on dogmas and also 
do not accept the theory of absolutes in any sphere of 
socio-economic justice, therefore, the authors of the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  16 
Constitution, by enumerating the Fundamental Rights and 
the Principles of Policy, apparently did so in the belief that 
the proper and rational synthesis of the provisions of the 
two parts would lead to the establishment of an egalitarian 
society under the rule of law. However, while 
implementing the directi ve principles of policy, the State 
should not make any law which takes away or abridges the 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Chapter I in view of the 
embargo placed by Article 8(1) and (2). Necessarily, 
therefore, the directive principles of State policy h ave to 
conform to and to operate as subsidiary to the 
Fundamental Rights guaranteed in Chapter I, otherwise 
the protective provisions of the Chapter will be a mere 
rope of sand. Law, in the achievement of this ideal, has to 
play a major role, i.e., it has to serve as a vehicle of social 
and economic justice which this Court is free to interpret.  
 
In Mian Muhammad Nawaz Sharif v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 
1993 SC 473), maintainability of petition under Article 184(3) was 
discussed and decided as under: -   
 
“6. While construing Article 17 which guarantees 
fundamental right, our approach should not be narrow and 
pedantic but elastic enough to march with the changing 
times and guided by the object for which it was embodied 
in the Constitution as a fundamental  right. Its full import 
and meaning must be gathered from other provisions such 
as preamble of the Constitution, principles of policy and 
the Objectives Resolution, which shed luster on the whole 
Constitution. Reference in this connection may be made to 
the observations made by Muhammad Haleem, C.J. (as he 
then was) in Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan PLD 
1988 SC 416 at 489: -  
“… … while construing Article 184(3), the 
interpretative approach should not be ceremonious 
observance of the rules or usag es of interpretation, 
but regard should be had to the object and the 
purpose for which this Article is enacted, that is, this 
interpretative approach must receive inspiration from 
the triad of provisions which saturate and invigorate 
the entire Constitutio n, namely, the Objectives 
Resolution (Article 2A), the Fundamental Rights and 
the directive principles of State policy so as to 
achieve democracy, tolerance; equality and social 
justice according to Islam.”  
 
In the case of Munir Hussain Bhatti v. Federatio n of Pakistan  (PLD 
2011 SC 407) it has been held as under: -  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  17 
“6. The petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction vested 
in this Court under Art. 184(3) of the Constitution. Mr. K.K. 
Agha, learned Additional Attorney General for Pakistan has 
argued that the j urisdiction of this Court under the said 
Article can only be invoked where “a question of public 
importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
fundamental rights” is involved. ......   
9. More importantly, however, under the law, this 
factual claim is quite irrelevant for answering the present 
question, which is: does the case before us involve “a 
question of public importance with reference to the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights”? Article 
184(3) ibid empowers this Court to exercis e jurisdiction 
thereunder whenever the Court considers a matter to: (i) 
be of public importance and (ii) that it pertains to the 
enforcement of fundamental rights. The determination on 
both these counts is to be made by this Court itself, 
keeping the facts  of the case in mind. That this case 
involves a question which relates to the “enforcement of 
fundamental rights” has not been seriously questioned. ... 
...  
10. Furthermore, in making this determination, the Court 
is not to be swayed by expressions of pub lic sentiment nor 
is it to conduct an opinion poll to determine if the public 
has any interest in an issue being agitated before the 
Court under Article 184(3) of the Constitution. Instead, a 
whole range of factors need to be kept in mind, which 
have, over  the years, been expounded in numerous 
precedents of this Court. It is important to keep these 
precedents in view because, as noted in an earlier 
judgment, “[i]t is through the use of precedent that the 
contours of the law are constantly defined. The 
Const itution of Pakistan, through Article 189, recognizes 
the significance of judicial precedent in the acknowledged 
tradition of a Common Law jurisdiction.” (Re: Suo Motu 
Case No.10 of 2009 reported as 2010 SCMR 885, 921). A 
review of the precedents that enunc iate the scope of 
Article 184(3) makes it clear that contrary to the import of 
Mr. Agha's submission, “overt expression of public 
interest” or “street demonstrations and vigorous media 
debate” have not been considered necessary factors for 
the exercise of jurisdiction over a case under the said 
Article.  
16. ... ... there have been cases where this Court has 
declined to exercise jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution. Mr. K.K. Agha referred to the case titled 
Jamat -e-Islami through Amir and ot hers v, Federation of 
Pakistan and others (PLD 2008 SC 30) wherein exercise of 
jurisdiction had been declined. Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan 
provided us a list of six other reported cases (referred to 
below) where the Supreme Court decided that the 
circumstances d id not warrant exercise of jurisdiction CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  18 
under Article 184(3) ibid as the petitions in those cases did 
not meet the dual criteria of (a) public importance and (b) 
enforcement of fundamental rights. These cases are 
Manzoor Elahi v. Federation of Pakistan (PL D 1975 SC 66 
at page 79, 128, 144 and 159), Shahida Zaheer Abbasi v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1996 SC 632 at page 659 and 
662 sideline G and H), Syed Zulfiqar Mehdi v. PIAC (1998 
SCMR 793 at page 799, 800, 801 sideline A, B, C and D), 
Watan Party v. Pre sident of Pakistan (PLD 2003 SC 74 at 
page 81, sideline D and E), Mian Muhammad Shahbaz 
Sharif v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2004 SC 583 at page 
596 para 18 -19, page 597, 598 para 22) and APNS v. 
Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2004 SC 600 at 619W, 
621AA). No ne of these seven cited cases, however, related 
to the independence of the Judiciary or to the process of 
judicial appointments, the same are distinguishable on this 
ground alone.  
17. Based on the foregoing discussion and review of 
precedents, we are not l eft in any doubt that these cases 
are eminently suitable for the exercise of jurisdiction under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution.”  
 
 
14.   In the context of the present case, a recent decision of this 
Court rendered In the matter of: Corruption in Hajj Arrangements in  
2010 (PLD 2011 SC 963) is also very relevant. It may be 
advantageous to refer to the relevant discussion, which reads as 
under: -  
“20. The judiciary including the High Courts and the 
Supreme Court is bound to protect and preserve the 
Const itution as well as to enforce fundamental rights 
conferred by the Constitution either individually or 
collectively, in exercise of the jurisdiction conferred upon it 
either under Article 199 or 184(3) of the Constitution. We 
are fully cognizant of our juri sdiction, it is one of the 
functions of the judicial functionaries to decide the matters 
strictly in accordance with the Constitution and law. We 
are conscious of our jurisdiction, and exercise the same 
with judicial restraint. But such restraint cannot be  
exercised at the cost of rights of the citizens to deny 
justice to them. The scheme of the Constitution makes it 
obligatory on the part of superior Courts to interpret 
Constitution, law and enforce fundamental rights. There is 
no cavil with the propositio n that ultimate arbiter is the 
Court which is the custodian of the Constitution, as it has 
been noted herein before and without repeating the same, 
this Court had initiated proceedings in the instant case as 
is evident from the detailed facts and circumsta nces noted 
hereinabove to ensure that corruption and corrupt CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  19 
practices by which the Hujjaj were looted and robbed has 
brought bad name to the country.”   
 
15.   In the case at hand the Prime Minister stood convicted by 
the apex Court of the land for willfu lly, deliberately and persistently 
defying a direction issued in Dr. Mobashir Hassan case , and such 
persistent defiance at the highest level was considered substantially 
detrimental to the administration of justice, and as tending not only to 
bring this Co urt, but also the entire judiciary of this country into 
ridicule. The ruling of the Speaker declaring that no question of 
disqualification of the respondent had arisen despite a concluded 
judgment of the apex Court defied the principles of independence of 
the judiciary and trichotomy of powers, and also constituted a violation 
of the due process clause under Article 10A of the Constitution . All this 
has made it a case suitable for invoking the original jurisdiction of this 
Court. Accordingly, we hold that t he instant petitions raise a question 
of public importance with reference to the enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights enshrined in Articles 9, 10A, 14, 17 & 25 of the 
Constitution and meet the requirement of Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, therefore, the same are held to be maintainable. The 
objection raised by the learned counsel for the respondents, being 
devoid of any merit, is overruled.  
16.    Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC for the respondent , also argued 
that the petitioners have directly invoked the jur isdiction of this Court 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, and in case they succeed in 
getting the relief, the respondent would be deprived of the right of 
appeal under Article 185(3) of the Constitution, which is included in 
the right to fair trial  and due process enshrined in Article 10A read 
with Article 4 of the Constitution. Reference in this behalf has been CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  20 
made to the case of Abdul Haq v. Muhammad Yasin  (PLD 1956 Lahore 
209), Pakistan v. General Public  (PLD 1989 SC 6) and Jamat -e-Islami 
v. Fed eration of Pakistan  (PLD 2008 SC 30).  
 
17.   We have considered the argument of the learned counsel 
and have gone through the judgments cited at the bar. In Abdul Haq’s 
case (supra ), right to file revision was provided under the Punjab 
Urban Rent Restrict ion Act, 1952, but in view of the expiry of the said 
Act, the petitioner therein was deprived of the same. The High Court 
held that the judgment of the trial Court, against which no appeal 
could be filed, was not sustainable unless it had passed through al l the 
contemplated stages. The case of Pakistan v. General Public  pertained 
to Islamization of different laws wherein right of appeal was barred 
against the decision of Court Martial . However, this Court held that the 
remedy of review provided to an aggrie ved person could not be 
equated with the remedy of appeal. In Jamat -e-Islami’s case  the 
petitions were filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution challenging 
the eligibility of the person in uniform to contest the election of the 
President of Pakistan.  The Court, by majority of 5 to 4, held that such 
a question could not be raised before the Supreme Court as the matter 
squarely fell within the jurisdiction and domain of Election Commission 
of Pakistan. Reliance has also been placed by the respondents on  All 
Pakistan News Paper Society v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 1 
at page 54), Ghulam Mustafa v. General Manager  [2012 PLC (CS) 
617]. The distinguishing features of all these cases, particularly the 
case, which had arisen out of civil proceedings i nitiated before the trial 
Court, except in the case of Pakistan v. General Public  (supra ), 
wherein process of Islamization of the laws was undertaken by the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  21 
Shariat Appellate bench of this Court, were that nothing was said 
about providing right of appeal i n those cases which arise out of 
constitutional jurisdiction under Article 199 or Article 184(3) before 
this Court. However, in some of the cases, if a Constitution Petition is 
filed under Article 199, right of intra -court appeal is available under 
section  3 of the Law Reforms Ordinance, 1972, subject to the 
conditions noted therein. It is a well recognized principle that t he right 
to claim review of any decision of a Court of law, like the right of 
appeal is a substantive right and not a mere matter of pro cedure. A 
review is not available unless it has been so conferred by law.  See 
Hussain Bakhsh  v. Settlement Commissioner  (PLD 1970 SC 1). As 
regards the judgment pronounced by the Supreme Court in exercise of 
its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3), though an aggrieved 
person has the right to seek review thereof under Article 188 of the 
Constitution, but the framers of the Constitution in their wisdom have 
not provided a right of appeal against it. It is well settled that the 
legislature is presumed t o know the state of law as it exists, as such, 
no premium can be allowed to be made on account of any provision of 
the Constitution or the law. The judgments cited by the learned 
counsel for the respondent hardly advance the proposition canvassed 
by him. T he plea is unfounded and is rejected.  
18.   Mr. Hamid Khan and other learned counsel, who filed 
petitions after the Speaker had given the aforesaid ruling , have also 
argued that after the pronouncement of the judgment of the 7 -
member bench dated 26 April,  2012, the Speaker was bound to refer 
the matter to the Election Commission for issuance of notification of 
disqualification of the respondent . The Speaker was not legally CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  22 
empowered to sit in judgment over a matter, which had been finally 
adjudicated upon by the apex Court of the land, obstruct the course of 
administration of justice, and thereby violate the principle of 
independence of judiciary , as also various Fundamental Rights of the 
citizens. On the other hand, Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr.ASC, Mr. Irfan Qadi r, 
learned Attorney General for Pakistan and Mr. Muhammad Munir 
Piracha, ASC were of the opinion that notwithstanding the judicial 
determination by a Court of law, the Speaker had the power and 
jurisdiction to decide the question of disqualification of the  respondent 
within 30 days by applying her independent mind as she was not a 
mere post office, particularly after the change brought about in clause 
(2) of Article 63 of the Constitution by the Eighteenth Constitutional 
Amendment and in case she failed to do so, then after the expiry of 
the aforesaid period, it shall be deemed to have been referred to the 
Election Commission. According to Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, there is no such 
thing as automatic application of Article 63(1)(g) . He argued that 
reference made by the learned counsel for the petitioners to Article 
104(2) of the Constitution of 1962 and the judgment of the Supreme 
Court in A.K. Fazlul Quadir Chowdhry v. Shah Nawaz  (PLD 1966  SC 
105) had  no bearing on the case at hand on account of significant 
differen ce between the language employed in the said Article and the 
one used in Article 63(2), particularly after the recent change brought 
about in the latter mentioned provision .    
 
19.   Learned Attorney General argued that  the 7-member 
bench which convicted and sentenced the respondent for contempt of 
Court travelled much beyond its jurisdiction by bringing into its “zoom ” 
the likely consequences of Article 63(1)(g) of the Constitution CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  23 
notwithstanding the clear cut legal position . That even otherwise the 
Supreme Court had no role to play in matters to be decided either by 
the Speaker of the National Assembly or eventually by the Election 
Commission. According to the learned Attorney General, the 
disqualification of the respondent was not an issue before the 7 -
member bench, inasmuch as the only issue before it was whether the 
Prime Minister , by not writing a letter to the Swiss Authorities in 
compliance of the judgment of the Supreme Court,  had committed any 
contempt or not. He added that even if it is assumed f or the sake of 
argument that some order was flouted, conviction in terms of Article 
63(1)(g) ought to be a direct consequence and not an indirect 
consequence, inasmuch as in law, direct consequences , and not 
remote consequences , are to be considered. The a bove argument of 
the learned Attorney General is misplaced. The question of the 
respondent’s disqualification was not before the 7 -member bench of 
this Court. The only issue before that bench was whether the 
respondent’s action or inaction amounted to cont empt of court of a 
kind that ought to bring about a conviction and sentence.  It is for this 
reason that the 7 -member bench of this Court did not disqualify the 
respondent at the time of his conviction. Instead the learned judges on 
that bench left the ques tion of the respondent’s disqualification to be 
addressed directly through the process provided for under Article 
63(2) of the Constitution.  
20.   Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, learned ASC , elaborating 
his argument submitted that after a conviction is record ed, the 
Speaker still has to examine two things : firstly , she has to decide the 
question whether the court was of competent jurisdict ion, which is not CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  24 
in doubt  here;  and secondly, she has to determine what offence has 
been committed because conviction for each and every offence does 
not disqualify a person from becoming or being a Member of the 
Parliament. He argued that i n the instant case, the Speaker was 
required to examine whether the respondent was convicted for 
contempt of court for  propagating any op inion, or acting in any 
manner, prejudicial to the integrity, or independence of the judiciary, 
or for defaming or bringing into ridicule the judiciary in terms of Article 
63(1)(g). He argued that the respondent was convicted for 
disregarding an order of t he Court, and not for the offences mentioned 
in Article 63(1)(g). He further argued that disobedience of an order of 
the Court cannot be taken as ridiculing or defaming the judiciary. To  
further elucidate his argument  that a person will not be disqualified  for 
all kinds of convictions , e.g., if somebody is convicted under paragraph 
(a) of clause (2) of Article 204 of the Constitution  for abusing, 
interfering with or obstructing the process of the Court in any way or 
for disobeying any order of the Court, or  somebody  is convicted under 
paragraph (c) ibid, for doing anything which tends to prejudice the 
determination of a matter pending before the Court, he will not be 
disqualified as these are not covered by Paragraphs (g) & (h) of clause 
(1) of Article 63.  
 
21.   We have considered the arguments raised by the learned 
counsel. It may be noted that in the instant case, the respondent has 
been convicted by this Court under Article 204(2) of the Constitution 
read with section 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance , 2003 for 
willfully flouting, disregarding and disobeying the Court’s direction 
contained in paragraph No.178 of the judgment in Dr. Mobashir CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  25 
Hassan’s case  and sentenced to imprisonment “till rising of the Court”, 
which was duly undergone by him. The resp ondent did not file an 
appeal against the said judgment. Therefore, the judgment attained 
finality entailing all the consequences, including disqualification of the 
respondent from being a Member of the Parliament on and from the 
day and time of his convic tion and sentence. A perusal of the 
concluding portion of the short order dated 26 April, 2012 shows that 
the eventual disqualification of the respondent in terms of Article 
63(1)(g) of the Constitution on account of his conviction was treated 
by the Court  as a mitigating circumstance in determining the quantum 
of sentence to be passed against him. In the instant case, a concluded 
judgment of conviction of the respondent pronounced by the highest 
Court of the land was holding the field. Therefore, the Speak er was not 
required to take upon herself the exercise of deciding whether a 
question of disqualification of the respondent had arisen. As soon as 
the judgment of conviction  and sentence was passed by the 7 -member 
bench on 26 April, 2012 at 9:30 a.m. agains t the respondent there 
was no doubt whatsoever that a question of his disqualification had 
arisen under Article 63(1)(g) .  In those circumstances the Speaker 
ought to have referred the question of the respondent’s disqualification 
to the Election Commissio n within the prescribed time of 30 days . 
 
22.   As regards the nature or kind of conviction that entails 
disqualification of a Member of the Parliament, that is not an issue in 
the present case as it is not an appeal against the judgment of the 7 -
member be nch. Furthermore, it is rightly pointed out by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners that the issue has been dilated upon by the 
7-member bench in quite some detail , inasmuch as  the bench CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  26 
convicted the respondent in that case for willfully flouting, disr egarding 
and disobeying direction of the Court contained in Para 178 of the 
judgment delivered in Dr. Mobashir Hassan’s case . The 7 -member 
bench has clearly held in Para 70 of their judgment of 26 April, 2012 
that ”such clear and persistent defiance at suc h a high level constitutes 
contempt which is substantially detrimental to the administration of 
justice and tends not only to bring this Court but also brings the 
judiciary of this country into ridicule .”  Therefore , in view of such 
a judicial determinatio n, the Speaker was not empowered to decide 
that no question of disqualification of the respondent had arisen and 
was only to refer the matter to the Election Commission in terms of 
Article 63(2) of the Constitution  for enforcement of the judgment .  
 
23.   In a system of constitutional governance, guaranteeing 
Fundamental Rights, the Judiciary is assigned the role of interpreting 
and applying the law, adjudicating upon disputes arising among 
governments or between State and citizens or citizens inter se and 
enforcing the Fundamental Rights. The Constitution of Pakistan 
contains specific and categorical provisions for the independence of 
Judiciary. The Preamble and Article 2A lay down that “the 
independence of Judiciary shall be fully secured”; and with a view  to 
achieving this objective, Article 175 provides that “the Judiciary shall 
be separated progressively from the executive”. The principle of 
trichotomy of powers upon which the scheme of the Constitution is 
based, envisages three organs of the State, name ly, Legislation, 
Executive and Judiciary, each of whom has to perform its functions 
within its domain. In line with the said principle, this Court has always 
performed its functions strictly remaining within the area of its CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  27 
jurisdiction and shown utmost respect to the other organs of the State 
by not intruding upon the domain reserved for the m. In Al-Jehad Trust 
v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 324) this Court held as under: 
-  
“It was made known to the people that they were fighting 
for the freedom a nd in consequence of freedom what 
would they gain would be democracy and their own 
Government and perception of such democracy was 
Government of the people, for the people and by the 
people. To set up such democratic Governments, 
Constitutions were made in  India and Pakistan in order to 
produce system of governance with trichotomy of powers 
among the three pillars, namely, the Legislature, Executive 
and Judiciary. The word “consultation” has been used for 
the first time in the Constitution of India and the 
Constitution of Pakistan in connection with appointments of 
Judges in the Superior Judiciary. The history of India and 
Pakistan, as mentioned in detail in the preceding part of 
this judgment, very clearly shows that always effort was 
made to seek that the Judiciary functioned independently 
and should not be controlled by the Executive. There is no 
cavil with the proposition that the Legislature has to 
legislate; the Executive has to execute laws and the 
Judiciary has to interpret the Constitution and laws. The 
success of the system of governance can be guaranteed 
and achieved only when these pillars of the State exercise 
their powers and authority within their limits without 
transgressing, into the field of the others by acting in the 
spirit of harmony, coop eration and coordination. So far the 
powers of the Judiciary are concerned, we are exactly 
going to do that and we are going to interpret the relevant 
provisions of the Constitution within the limits prescribed 
so that the provisions are harmonized and the  Constitution 
becomes workable.”  
 
This Court, in the Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case  declared the 
Proclamation of Emergency and PCO No.1 of 2007 to be 
unconstitutional, illegal and void ab initio  and all the Ordinances, which 
were in force on 3rd November, 2007 as well as the Ordinances, 
promulgated between 3rd November upto 15th December, 2007, were 
shorn off the validity purportedly conferred upon them. However, this 
Court referred all such Ordinances, including the National 
Reconciliation Ordina nce, 2007 to the Parliament for the purpose of CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  28 
validation or otherwise. This act of the Court demonstrates the respect 
it has for the legislature because the Court instead of determining the 
fate of those Ordinances itself left it to be decided by the Parl iament or 
the concerned Provincial Assembly. Similarly, In re: Corruption in Hajj 
Arrangements in 2010  (PLD 2011 SC 963) it was held that if the action 
or decision in question is perverse or is such that no reasonable body 
of persons, properly informed cou ld come to, or is arrived at by 
misdirecting itself and adopting a wrong approach or is influenced by 
irrelevant or extraneous matters, the Court would be justified in 
interfering with the same. In the said case, the notification of placing  
one Mr. Sohail Ahmad, the then Secretary Establishment as OSD was 
declared to be not sustainable in the eye s of law. However, it was 
observed that it was the prerogative of the competent authority to 
post him either as Secretary Establishment or give him any other 
assign ment commensurate with his status, performance, ability, work, 
etc. Likewise, in the case of Tariq Aziz -ud-Din (2010 SCMR 1301), the 
Court, after having concluded that the discretion in making the 
promotion s of Government officers from grade 21 to 22 had n ot been 
judiciously exercised , instead of directing the Government to promote 
the petitioners therein , sent back the matter to the competent 
authority with certain observations. In re: Suo Moto Case No.5 of 2010 
(LNG case ) (PLD 2010 SC 731), where proceedi ngs were initiated 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution  on the report of Mr. Rauf 
Klasara, a known  journalist  regarding a scam of 25 billion rupees , the 
case was sent back to the concerned authorities of the Government for 
further action. Similarly, In re: Privatization of Pakistan Steel Mills 
reported as Wattan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2006 SC 
697), Iqbal Haider v. Capital Development Authority (PLD 2006 SC CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  29 
394), In the matter of: Human Rights Cases No.4668 of 2006 etc. (F.9 
Park)  (PLD 201 0 SC 759)  and In re:  SMC No. 13/2009 regarding Multi 
Professional Housing Societies  (PLD 2011 SC 619) , the Court instead 
of issuing direction s to the Federal Government, referred the matter to 
the Executive Authorities to take appropriate steps in accordan ce with 
law in light of the observations made by it. Thus, as far as this Court is 
concerned, it may be said without fear of contradiction  that it has 
always adhered to the principle of trichotomy  of powers.  The Judiciary 
has never claimed supremacy over t he other organs of the State and 
has confined itself to the discharge of functions  assigned to it under 
the Constitution , including enforcement of Fundamental Rights 
guaranteed under the Constitution. The Courts derive their powers and 
jurisdiction from th e Constitution and the law and the decisions 
rendered by them can be revised, reviewed, or scrutinized by no forum 
other the one provided under the Constitution or the law within the 
judicial hierarchy. However, surprisingly, a s has been argued  by the 
petitioners,  the Speaker of National Assembly vide ruling dated 24 
May, 2012 effectively made an attempt to overrule the judgment of 
the 7 -member bench passed by them in exercise of jurisdiction 
conferred upon them under Article 175(2) of the Constitution.  
 
24.   Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC argued that: -  
(a) As appeal was not filed against the judgment of this Court 
dated 26 April, 2012, therefore, this judgment cannot be 
set aside except in the manner provided in the Constitution 
and the law.  
(ii) The Speaker in h er ruling dated 24 May, 2012 made an 
attempt to exercise judicial powers which are not vested in 
her under the Constitution and the law, therefore, she CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  30 
cannot be allowed to sit in appeal over the judicial verdict 
of a Court of law.  
 
On the other hand, Mr.  Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC argued that the Speaker 
having been designated specifically by the Constitution itself to 
perform a constitutional function has the exclusive authority to decide 
the matter. Therefore, she is within her constitutional authority and 
her ruling is within the scope of the Constitution and the law as well as 
within the ambit of the judgment of the 7 -member bench.  
 
25.   It is to be noted that section 19(1)(iii) of the Contempt of 
Court Ordinance, 2003 provides that in case of an original  order 
passed by a Single Judge or a Bench of two Judges of Supreme Court 
an intra -court appeal shall lie to a Bench of three Judges and in case of 
original order passed by a Bench of three or more Judges , an intra -
court appeal shall lie to a Bench of five  or more Judges. As in the 
instant case original order was passed by a Bench comprising seven 
Hon’ble Judges, therefore, appeal was competent before a Bench 
comprising 8 or more Hon’ble Judges of this Court. Reference may be 
made to the case of Abdul Hamee d Dogar, Former Judge v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 315). In the said case, the original order 
was passed by a 4 -Member Bench of this Court whereby the case was 
fixed for the framing of charge. The intra -court appeal filed against the 
said order w as heard by a larger Bench comprising 7 Hon’ble Judges. 
Similarly, in the case of Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, Prime Minister of 
Pakistan v. Assistant Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan  (2012 
SCMR 422), wherein  the original order was passed by a 7 -Member 
Bench of this Court and the intra -court appeal filed under section 19 of 
the Ordinance was heard by a larger Bench comprising 8 Hon’ble CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  31 
Judges. In the case of Justice Hasnat Ahmed Khan v. Federation of 
Pakistan/State  (PLD 2011 SC 680)  the intra -court appeal was heard 
by a Bench comprising 6 Hon’ble Judges against the original order 
passed by a 4 -Member Bench of this Court.  
 
26.   Admittedly against conviction/sentence awarded to Syed 
Yousaf Raza Gillani no appeal was filed, therefore, the Speaker had no 
judicial power to ignore the judgment dated 26 April, 2012 on the 
ground that no specific charge regarding propagation of any opinion or 
acting in any manner against the independence of judiciary or 
defaming, ridiculing the judiciary as contemplated by Article  63(1)(g) 
of the Constitution ha d been framed. It may be observe d that the 
Speaker , by interfering in a concluded judgment on contempt of Court , 
has gone beyond the jurisdiction available to her under the relevant 
provision of Constitution.  
 
27.    It is to be observed that before determining the role of the 
Speaker in pursuance of the judgment delivered by a 7 -Member Bench 
of this Court , who being adjudicators are responsible for the 
administration of justice at the highest forum of the hierarchy of 
judicial system , decided the contempt case brought before them in the 
exercise of jurisdiction conferred upon them. The judgment has 
attained finality since no appeal was filed challenging its merit under 
the law.  
28.    As has been noted hereinabove, the Spea ker as per the 
contents of her ruling dated 24 May, 2012 was fully cognizant that the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan vide short order dated 26 April, 2012 , CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  32 
followed by the detailed judgment released on 8 May, 2012  has 
punished the Prime Minister under section 5  of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance (Ordinance V) of 2003 with imprisonment till rising of the 
Court. Sentence was executed forthwith. The Speaker also stated that 
both the orders have been conveyed to her and has admitted that she 
has also gone through th e same. However, before deciding as to 
whether any question has arisen for disqualification of the respondent, 
she reproduced the relevant provisions of Constitution, i.e. Article 
63(2) and also quoted following judgments: -  
(i) Kanwar Intezar Muhammad Kha n v. Federation of Pakistan 
(1995 MLD 1903)  
(ii) Ayatullah Dr. Imran Liaqat Hussain v. Election Commission 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 52)  
 
As per the contents of the ruling of the Speaker, the ratio decidendi  of 
the judgment in the first mentioned case is th at the Speaker while 
examining a Reference under Article 63(2) of the Constitution is not 
supposed to act merely as post office. If a Reference is submitted to 
him, he is not bound to forward the same to the Chief Election 
Commission for decision forthwith . The Speaker has to apply his own 
mind judiciously after taking into consideration the relevant provisions 
on the subject and then decide as to whether ‘any question’ in the 
nature of disqualification has ‘arisen’ which may justify making 
reference to the  Chief Election Commissioner. As far as the 
observation made in this judgment by the three learned Judges of the 
Lahore High Court is concerned, it is not applicable to the facts of the 
instant case, as in the reported judgment there was no final judgment 
delivered by a Court of law declaring a Parliamentarian guilty of 
contempt of Court. In the cited case, the grievance of petitioner CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  33 
Kanwar Intizar Muhammad Khan, advocate and citizen of Pakistan in 
his application dated 15 September, 1995 before the Speake r of 
National Assembly was based on certain allegations against 
Mohtarama Benazir Bhutto, the then Prime Minister of Pakistan as 
according to him she was disqualified from remaining a Member of 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) on the basis of the allegation re produced 
in the judgment. The facts of the second case were that “a Petition 
under Article 199 of the Constitution was filed in the High Court of 
Sindh, Karachi with the prayer (not properly worded) that the Election 
Commission of Pakistan be directed to r eject nomination papers of 
those candidates who are not faithful to the declaration by the founder 
of Pakistan and bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan and will 
uphold the sovereignty and integrity of Pakistan. Specially the 
candidates of MQM and tho se candidates who are holding tickets from 
MQM shall be strictly condemned to participate in the election of 10th 
October, 2002 and their election campaign should be banned until the 
judgment of this petition be fulfilled”. The Constitution petition was 
dismissed and this Court observed that while  the allegations leveled 
against the Muttaheda  Qaumi Movement were indeed very serious but 
the genuineness and authenticity of such allegations could not be 
determined by this Court merely on the basis of press -clippings and 
speeches made on various occasions . Therefore, while dealing with 
Article 63(2) of the Constitution it was observed as under: - 
“6. In the same wake of events we have adverted to the 
provisions embodied under Article 63 which hardly renders 
any a ssistance to the case of petitioner and "provides 
mode to oust a member of the Parliament if he incurs 
disqualification subsequent to his election as member. The 
Speaker of the National Assembly or the Chairman of the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  34 
Senate as the case may be, may make a reference to the 
Election Commission for decision of the question as to 
whether a member who had suffered disqualification 
ceased to hold his office or not. When a matter is brought 
to the notice of the Speaker with reference to the 
disqualification of a m ember, he would have to apply his 
mind to the fact whether a question such as contemplated 
in Article 63(2) had arisen or not. For instance, if the 
information upon which he was required to make a 
reference was unrelatable to any of the grounds contained 
in sub  clauses (a) to (e) or clause (i) of Article 63 of the 
Constitution, he would be entitled to refuse to make a 
reference. However, his function under Article 63(2) is 
clearly of a very limited character. He will no doubt apply 
his mind to the very lim ited point whether a question had 
or had not arisen. In fact, in a proper case, he might be 
directed by the superior Court to make a reference where 
he had refused to do so, if a petition was brought for that 
relief." Ghulam Muhammad Mustafa Khar v. Chief Election 
Commission of Pakistan and others (PLD 1969 Lah. 602).”  
 
The Speaker, in her ruling, placed reliance on the cases of Javed 
Hashmi and Dr. Imran Liaqat Hussain. The former case proceeds on a 
different premise and is, therefore, not attracted to the  facts and 
circumstances of the present case. The latter case also does not 
advance the proposition sought to be laid down by the Speaker in her 
ruling, inasmuch as it is held therein that when a matter of 
disqualification of a member is brought before the  Speaker, she will 
have to apply her mind but the function required to be performed 
under clause (2) of Article 63 is of a very limited character. 
Furthermore, there is a difference between sub -clauses (a), (g) and 
(h) of clause (1) of Article 63 and the o ther sub -clauses therein , which CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  35 
were the focus of the reasoning in that case . These three sub -clauses 
base disqualification of a member of Parliament on convictions by 
courts. Thus, it means that when a conviction of a  member of 
Parliament by a court of co mpetent jurisdiction is placed before the 
Speaker, she is bound to make a reference to the Election Commission 
and cannot instead sit in judgment  over it  in the garb of an exercise of 
power under Article 63(2) of the Constitution. The Speaker  does not  
enjoy an appellate authority or a review jurisdiction to look into the 
merits of the judgment , nor does she have the power to set such a 
conviction aside .  
29.   Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, learned counsel for the respondent 
argued that even if a case falls under one of  those sub -clauses of 
Article 63(1) which mention a conviction by a court the Speaker 
retains some discretion to determine whether a question of 
disqualification has arisen. He highlighted that under Article 63(1)(h) a 
person would be disqualified from bei ng a Member of the Parliament 
only if he is convicted for an offence, which involves moral turpitude 
and that he is sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a term of not 
less than 2 years unless a period of 5 years has lapsed since his 
release. According to him when the Speaker is informed about a 
conviction, she has to determine whether it is for an offence involving 
moral turpitude . Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan’s argument is no doubt correct that 
even in cases falling under sub -clauses (a), (g) and (h) the Speaker 
would normally have the discretion to determine whether a question of 
disqualification has arisen, but where a court specifically notes that it 
is convicting a person for the kind of offence that would form the basis 
of disqualification under sub -clauses (a), (g) and (h), the Speaker has CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  36 
no choice but to refer the matter to the Election Commission under 
Article 63(2).  
30.   A perusal of the short order dated 24 April, 2012 as well as 
reasons of the judgment, referred to hereinabove, abundantly makes it 
clear th at after the conviction/sentence the Court was fully conscious 
of the fact that he has to suffer disqualification and thus the 
observation s are based on objective consideration keeping in view the 
evidence available on record, on the basis of which the Cou rt rightly 
held that he has been willfully, deliberately and persistently defying 
the order of this Court and such act was found to be substantially 
detrimental to the administration of justice not only to bring this Court 
but also bring judiciary of this Court into ridicule. The learned counsel 
for the respondent referred to the ruling of the Speaker which showed 
that the Speaker focused on the fact that the charge regarding an 
offence of moral turpitude had not been framed in terms of Article 
63(1)(h) . However, it appears that  the Speaker failed to notice that 
the charge contained the provision  of Article 204(2) of the Constitution 
read with section 3 of the Ordinance, 2003. Th is aspect of the matter 
is discussed in detail in the following Para of the judg ment:  -  
68.  After finding the factual allegations against the 
accused to have been established beyond reasonable 
doubt, we now advert to some legal aspects regarding his 
guilt and punishment. We note in this context that key 
words used in the Charge were  “willfully flouted” , 
“disregarded” and “disobeyed” which find a specific 
mention not only in Section 2(a) of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance (V of 2003) defining “civil contempt” but also in 
Section 3 of the said Ordinance defining “Contempt of 
Court” . The said Ordinance V of 2003 derives its authority 
from Article 204(3) of the Constitution, Article 204(2) of 
the Constitution itself empowers this Court to punish a 
person for committing “Contempt of Court” and the above 
mentioned words used in the Charge f ramed against the 
accused also stand sufficiently covered by the provisions of 
Article 204(2) of the Constitution. It is pertinent to CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  37 
mention here that Section 221, Cr.P.C. dealing with 
Charge and its forms clarifies that a Charge is to state the 
offence a nd if the offence with which an accused is charged 
is given a specific name by the relevant law then the 
offence may be described in the Charge “by that name 
only”. According to Section 221, Cr.P.C. “If the law which 
creates the offence does not give it an y specific name, so 
much of the definition of the offence must be stated as to 
give the accused notice of the matter with which he is 
charged” . It is further provided in Section 221, Cr.P.C. that 
“The law and section of the law against which the offence 
is said to have been committed shall be mentioned in the 
charge”. In the case in hand not only the name of the 
offence, i.e. contempt of court had been specified in the 
Charge framed against the accused but even the relevant 
Constitutional and legal provisio ns defining contempt of 
court had been mentioned in the Charge framed. According 
to Section 221(5), Cr.P.C. the fact that the Charge is made 
in the terms noted above “is equivalent to a statement 
that every legal condition required by law to constitute the  
offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case” . 
 
At this stage, reference may be made to the contents of the short 
order dated 26 April, 2012 passed by the 7 -memebr bench, which 
reads as under: -  
“For the reasons to be recorded later the accused S yed 
Yousaf Raza Gillani, Prime Minister of Pakistan/Chief 
Executive of the Federation, is found guilty of and 
convicted for contempt of court under Article 204(2) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read 
with section 3 of the Cont empt of Court Ordinance 
(Ordinance V of 2003) for willful flouting, disregard and 
disobedience of this Court’s direction Cr.O.P. No.06 of 
2012 contained in paragraph No. 178 of the judgment 
delivered in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan v Federation 
of Pakis tan (PLD 2010 SC 265) after our satisfaction that 
the contempt committed by him is substantially 
detrimental to the administration of justice and tends to 
bring this Court and the judiciary of this country into 
ridicule.  
2.  As regards the sentence to be p assed against the 
convict we note that the findings and the conviction for 
contempt of court recorded above are likely to entail some 
serious consequences in terms of Article 63(1)(g) of the 
Constitution which may be treated as mitigating factors 
towards t he sentence to  be passed against him. He is, 
therefore, punished under section 5 of the Contempt of 
Court Ordinance (Ordinance V of 2003) with imprisonment 
till the rising of the Court today.”   
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  38 
Para 2 of the above order clearly refers to the disqualifica tion 
envisaged by Paragraph (g) of Clause (1) of Article 63, and not to the 
disqualification mentioned in Paragraph (h) .  
  
31.   Mr. Muhammad Munir Piracha, learned ASC for the 
Federation argued that the jurisdiction of this Court is barred under 
Article 69(1) of the Constitution because the Speaker is the Member of 
Parliament, therefore, her ruling dated 25 May, 2012 falls within the 
ambit of internal proceedings and the Court has no jurisdiction to 
interfere with the same. He has also taken an alternate plea that in 
case the Court comes to the conclusion that the petition is competent 
and the ruling  of the Speaker is held to be invalid, in that eventuality, 
the ruling  of the Speaker may not be substituted with the Court’s 
verdict, rather the matter should  be remitted to the Speaker to decide 
it afresh and the bar of 30 days will not apply. On this issue, the 
learned Attorney General argued that this Court has no role to play in 
the matter of disqualification of a member of the Parliament, which is 
to be de cided either by the Speaker of the National Assembly or 
eventually by the Election Commission and that the Speaker of the 
National Assembly is not bound by the judgment of the Supreme 
Court.  
 
32.   Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan learned Sr. ASC was called upon to 
prese nt his argument on whether this Court is empowered to examine 
the validity of a ruling by the  Speaker of the Assembly under Article 
63(2) of the Constitution. He stated that the Constitution itself has 
specifically empowered the Speaker to decide the quest ion of 
disqualification of a member of the Parliament, therefore, the decision 
of the Speaker is sui generis  and adjudicatory in nature. According to CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  39 
the learned counsel, Speaker’s ruling is pre -eminently within the ambit 
of the judgment of the 7 -member be nch of this Court, which only 
hinted to a possible disqualification of the respondent pursuant to the 
conviction, and did not contemplate it conclusively. Mr. Hamid Khan 
argued in rebuttal that under Article 63(2) a duty has been cast upon 
the Speaker to d ecide the question of disqualification within 30 days 
and that the role of the Speaker in these matters is very limited. He 
has placed reliance on Ayatullah Dr. Imran Liaqat Hussain v. Election 
Commission of Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 52).  
 
33.   Clause (1) of  Article 69 of the Constitution provides that 
the validity of any proceedings in the Parliament shall not be called in 
question on the ground of any irregularity of procedure whereas clause 
(2) ibid provides that no officer or Member of the Parliament in w hom 
powers are vested by or under the Constitution for regulating 
procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order in the 
Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of 
the exercise by him of those powers. The issu e as to what are, and 
what are not, the internal proceedings of the Parliament, which are 
beyond the pale of jurisdiction of the Courts has been dilated upon by 
the superior Courts in the past on many occasions. In the case of 
Farzand Ali v. Province of We st Pakistan  (PLD 1970 SC 98), Hamoodur 
Rehman, C.J., observed that whatever was not “related to any ‘formal 
transaction of business’ in the House cannot be said to be a part of its 
internal proceedings”. In the case of Muhammad Naeem Akhtar v. 
Speaker, Sin dh Provincial Assembly  (1992  CLC  2043) the High Court 
held that the action of Speaker in accepting resignations in question 
would neither fall within meaning of term “any proceedings in the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  40 
Provincial Assembly” used in Article 69 read with Article 127 of  the 
Constitution, nor such action could be described as an exercise of 
power by the Speaker of regulating the procedure or the conduct of 
business in the Assembly; thus, a constitutional petition against the 
action of Speaker in accepting resignations of Members of Assembly 
was maintainable. In the case of Shams -ud-Din v. Speaker, 
Balochistan Provincial Assembly  (1994 MLD 2500), it was held by the 
High Court that the i nternal proceedings which were carried out by the 
Assembly, during its session, were not amenable to the jurisdiction of 
Court . However, all other administrative actions by the Speaker 
including recruitment of employees would not enjoy immunity from 
judicial review, particularly when such action of Speaker, prima  facie, 
was in violation of exi sting rules or the discretion vested in him to take 
certain decisions in order to smoothly run the functions of Provincial 
Assembly Secretariat had not been exercised judiciously . Therefore, 
the High Court under Article 199 of the Constitution was competen t to 
examine the validity or otherwise of such action. The High Court of 
Balochistan, in the case of Mining Industries of Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd. v. 
Deputy Speaker, Balochistan  Provincial Assembly  (PLD 2006 Quetta 
36) held that the question relating to right of a person to be a Member 
of House or to continue to sit therein was not a question pertaining to 
the internal proceedings of the House, but a question affecting the 
constitution of the House, which was not precluded from inquiry by the 
Courts under Artic le 199 of the Constitution. This Court  has recently 
reaffirmed the relevant principles , in a judgment reported as Munir 
Hussain Bhatti v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 407) . While 
dilating upon the power of judicial review of the Court vis -à-vis Arti cle 
69 of the Constitution , this Court noted that although the committee CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  41 
constituted under Article 175A of the Constitution bore the title of 
“Parliamentary Committee” its nature and functions were such that its 
proceedings were not to be considered the in ternal proceedings of 
Parliament. Its functions were of an administrative nature and related 
to judicial appointments rather than parliamentary business. 
Therefore, its proceedings were held to be reviewable by the superior 
courts and there was no immunity  from judicial scrutiny under  Article 
69 of the Constitution. The same principle applies to the Speaker’s 
ruling under article 63(2) of the Constitution. The Speaker performs 
the administrative task of determining whether a question of 
disqualification has  arisen and if in doing so she goes beyond her 
constitutional remit , misapplies the applicable law or misuses her 
discretion, then her decision will be reviewable. Article 69 will not 
provide her ruling any immunity from judicial review.  
 
34.   Similar app roach is adopted and prevalent in the 
neighbouring country despite the bar of jurisdiction of courts provided 
in Para 7 of the Tenth Schedule of the Indian Constitution.  The 
superior Courts of that jurisdiction have adjudicated upon the validity 
of the rulings of the Speaker and on several  occasion s have set aside 
the ruling s passed by the Speaker. Reference may be made to the 
judgments reported as Ravi S. Naik v. Union of India  (AIR 1994 SC 
1558) , Mayawati v.  Markandeya Chand  [(1998) 7 SCC 517] . Recent 
examples of cases where the Speakers’ rulings on various  issues  have 
been held to be reviewable include  Jagjit Singh v. State of Haryana  
(AIR 2007 SC 590) , Rajendra Singh Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya  
(AIR 2007 SC 1305) and  D.Sudhakar v. D.N.Jeevanraju  [Civil Appeal 
Nos.4517 -4521 of 2011] deci ded on 25 January, 2012.  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  42 
 
35.   A survey of the above case -law makes it abundantly clear 
that the ruling of the Speaker is open to judicial scrutiny by the 
superior Courts because it does not fall within the proceedings  or 
conduct of business of the Parliament within the contemplation of 
Article 69 of the Constitution. Thus, we hold that the ruling of the 
Speaker in the matter of referring the case to the Election Commission 
under Article 63(2) of the Constitution wherein a question of 
disqualification of a Member of the Parliament has arisen , or where the 
Speaker decides that no such question has arisen , is amenable to the 
jurisdiction of the superior Courts. It may be noted that a fter the 
decision of the 7 -member bench da ted 26 April, 2012, a copy of the 
judgment was forwarded by the office of this Court to the Speaker and 
in the meantime a petition was also filed by one Maulvi Iqb al Haider 
before the Speaker for making a reference to the Election Commission 
in terms of Ar ticle 63(2). However, on 24 May, 2012, a day before the 
expiry of the period of 30 days within which the Speaker had to decide 
the question in terms of Article 63(2) , she gave a ruling that no 
question of disqualification of the respondent had arisen pursu ant to 
his conviction by the Supreme Court. Admittedly, the judgment of this 
Court along with the covering letter was not made a part of the 
proceedings of the Parliament for the obvious reason that under Article 
63(2) the Speaker ’s function is not part of  the parliamentary process.  
Applying the test laid down in the judgments noted hereinabove and 
also considering the provision of the Constitution and the Rules of 
Procedure on the subject,  we hold that ruling of the Speaker dated 25 
May, 2012 does not fal l within the “proceedings” of the Majlis -e-
Shoora (Parliament) which cannot be subjected to judicial scrutiny by CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  43 
virtue of Article 69 of the Constitution. In light of the above discussion, 
the objection raised by respondent’s counsel  is not tenable  and is 
overruled.  
 
36.   Suffice it to observe that the Speaker, in performing the 
function assigned to him under Article 63, has to decide whether there 
is any determination by a Court of competent jurisdiction in respect of 
any of the disqualifications mention ed in clause (1) thereof, e.g., 
whether a person is of unsound mind and has been so declared by a 
competent court, etc. In this case, the Speaker is required to consider 
the judgment of the concerned Court. Secondly, in the case of 
disqualification which i s not emanating from a judgment of a Court of 
law, the Speaker has to decide the matter on the basis of the 
information laid before her, e.g., where a person has become 
undischarged insolvent, or he has ceased to be a citizen of Pakistan, or 
has acquired t he citizenship of a foreign State, or he holds an office of 
profit in the service of Pakistan, or is in the service of any statutory 
body, or is dismissed from service, etc.  
37.   The Speaker on having considered the contents of the 
charges against the re spondent wherein it has been categorically 
stated that “ you, Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan, have willfully flouted, disregarded and disobeyed the 
direction given by this Court in Para 178 in the case of Dr. Mobashir 
Hassan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265) to revive the 
request by the Government of Pakistan for mutual legal assistance and 
status of civil party and the claims lodged to the allegedly laundered 
moneys lying in foreign countries, including Switzerland, which  were 
unauthorizedly withdrawn by communication by Malik Muhammad CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  44 
Qayyum, former Attorney General for Pakistan to the concerned 
authorities, which direction you were legally bound to obey and 
thereby committed contempt of court within the meanings of Artic le 
204(2) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 1973 read 
with Section 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance (Ordinance V of 
2003), punishable under Section 5 of the Ordinance and within the 
cognizance of this Court. We hereby direct that you be tried by this 
Court on the above said charge”, has observed that “no specific charge 
regarding the propagation of any opinion or acting in any manner 
against the independence of the judiciary or defaming or ridiculing the 
judiciary as contemplated under  Article 63(1)(g) has been framed”, 
and ultimately concluded that charges against Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani 
are not relatable in paragraph (g) or (h) of clause (1) of the Article 63 
of the Constitution, therefore, no question of disqualification of Syed 
Yousaf Raza Gillani from being a Member arises under clause (2) of 
Article 63 of the Constitution. It seems that the Speaker in violation of 
principle of independence of judiciary and access to justice purportedly 
exercised jurisdiction similar to that of an appellate court as she 
sought to interpret the judgment passed by a Bench comprising 7 
Hon’ble Judges of this Court  and determine its effects vis a vis the 
respondent’s disqualification . In this behalf , reference may be made to 
the case of Asad Ali v. Fede ration of Pakistan  (PD 1998 SC 161). 
Inasmuch as a judgment given by this Court by a larger Bench is 
binding on the Benches of which number of Judges is less than the 
larger Bench and under Article 189 the judgments of Supreme Court 
are binding on all judi cial forums and executive authorities under 190 
of the Constitution. Reference in this behalf may be made to the cases 
of Iffat Jabeen  v. District Education Officer (M.E.E.), Lahore  (2011 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  45 
SCMR 437),  Al-Jehad Trust v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1997 SC 
84), Section Officer, Government of Punjab, Finance Department  v. 
Ghulam Shabbir  (2010 SCMR 1425), Chairman, Central Board of 
Revenue v.  Nawab Khan  (2010 SCMR 1399) and  Nazar  v. Member 
(Judicial -II) BOR  (2010 SCMR 1429). In such view of the matter, the 
respo ndent had no lawful authority to continue to occupy the office of 
the Prime Minister of Pakistan and represent the whole nation. It is to 
be noted that the Court always exercises restraint with a view to 
avoiding any constitutional and legal complications and ensure that the 
functioning of the Government under the Constitution is carried on 
smoothly. It is pertinent to mention that Constitution Petition 
No.41/2012 was filed on 27th May, 2012, i.e., after the expiry of 
limitation provided for filing of appea l and in the meantime the 
Speaker vide her ruling dated 25th May, 2012 declined to make a 
reference to the Election Commission under Article 63(2) of the 
Constitution in terms of the order dated 26th April, 2012 passed by a 
Bench comprising 7 Hon’ble Judge s of this Court. As observed earlier, 
the citizens of this country have a right to be governed by the chosen 
representatives who are not disqualified to become, and from being 
members of the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament). As soon as  a member of 
the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament), much less a representative who is 
further elected as the Prime Minister of the country , incurs a 
disqualification in terms of Article 63 of the Constitution, he ceases to 
be a member. It is the right of every citizen that they should live with 
respect, honour and dignity as envisaged by Article 14 of the 
Constitution, therefore, they are to be governed by their 
representatives who have not been convicted or sentenced for 
contempt of Court in pursuance whereof they would be disqualified  for CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  46 
the period of five years. We have gone through the judgments relied 
upon by the learned counsel. There is no cavil with the principles laid 
down therein, but the instant case has to be seen in view of its own 
facts and circumstances . It has already be en stated that a chosen 
representative of the people, who ha d been elected unanimously by all 
the Parliamentarians belonging to different political parties, has been 
convicted and sentenced for contempt of Court and due to such 
conviction, he is likely to face some serious consequences in terms of 
Article 63(1)(g) of the Constitution, therefore, anyone amongst the 
citizens, who is subject of the Constitution has a right to come forward 
and raise question about the disqualification of the Prime Minister 
because of violation of his fundamental rights under Articles 9, 10A, 
14, 17 and 25 of the Constitution. In none of the judgments cited by 
the learned counsel for the respondent, the allegation of being a 
convict of contempt of Court and still continuing to ru le the country as 
its Chief Executive/Prime Minister was leveled against anyone. Those 
judgments have proceeded on different  facts and circumstances and 
are not even remotely attracted to the facts of the instant case.  
 
38.   Though we have dealt presentl y with Article 63(2) as per 
current status after 18th Constitution Amendment, it would also be not 
out of context to point out that sub Article (2) of Article 63 had 
undergone certain changes at different times. The original provision of 
Article 63(2) prov ided that if any question arises whether a member of 
the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament) has become disqualified from being a 
member, the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman shall refer 
the question to the Chief Election Commissioner and, if the Chie f 
Election Commissioner is of the opinion that the member has become CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  47 
disqualified, he shall cease to be a member and his seat shall become 
vacant. However, there had been complaints that at times the Speaker 
was not making references against the Members fo r indefinite period. 
Therefore, on 21 August, 2002 vide Chief Executive Order (LFO, 
2002), aforesaid Clause (2) was amended and a time limit was 
provided for making such a reference. The amended clause provided 
that the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case  may be, shall, within 
thirty days from raising of such question, refer the matter to the Chief 
Election Commissioner. This amendment was made part of 17th 
Constitutional Amendment. The said clause was further amended by 
the Eighteenth Constitutional Amend ment and it was provided that the 
Speaker or the Chairman shall, unless he decides that no such 
question has arisen, refer the question to the Election Commission 
within thirty days and if he failed to do so within the aforesaid period, 
it shall be deemed to have been referred to the Election Commission. 
The change brought about by the recent amendment only suggests 
that the Speaker is required to decide the matter in an appropriate 
case as discussed hereinabove, and refer the matter to the Election 
Commiss ion. In no way, does this dispensation take  the action of the 
Speaker out of the pale of the jurisdiction of this Court.  
39.   Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan learned ASC has submitted that there are 
three different kinds of contempt of court, but only one kind of 
conte mpt effects the disqualification of a member of Parliament. Out of 
these three types of contempt, only two are relevant to section 18 of 
the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003. Nor was the effect of the trial 
of the respondent resulting in the judgment liable to disqualify him 
because none of the words ‘ridicule’, ‘scandalize’, ‘or defame’ were CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  48 
used in the show cause notice; the charge; the evidence; or in any 
question put to the accused.  The concept of subjective satisfaction of 
a court or judge is alien t o the law and to that extent the observations 
in the judgment of the 7 -member bench  with regard to the application 
of section 18 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 do not effect 
the disqualification of the respondent to be a member of Parliament.  
40.   Learned Attorney General for Pakistan raised the following 
contentions. He argued  that the disqualification of Prime Minister was 
not an issue before the 7 -member bench. The issue was only whether 
the Prime Minister ha d committed any contempt or not, t herefore,  the 
judgment of the 7 -member bench wa s violative of clauses (1) & (2) of 
Article 248 of the Constitution. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
cannot transcend the territorial limits of Pakistan. Hence, the question 
of contempt did not arise at all. Therefore, the judgment of the 7 -
member bench ought to be ignored  as was done in the past in many 
cases. The Hon’ble Judges of the 7 -member bench had absolutely no 
justification or mandate to charge the Prime Minister with contempt 
keeping in view the  factual, legal and constitutional aspects of the case 
in question.  The conviction of the Prime Minister was based on a 
groundless charge. The Supreme Court never ordered the Prime 
Minister in the NRO case to write a letter to the authorities in Geneva. 
The Speaker of the National Assembly in her ruling has also referred to 
the charge itself.  The entire contempt proceedings in the Supreme 
Court eventually resulting in conviction were without jurisdiction. 
There was absolutely no occasion for the 7 -member bench to have 
called the Prime Minister thrice, and that too, in utter disregard of the 
law and the Constitution. Tracing the history of contempt of court law, CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  49 
the Attorney General added, it would become evident that at the 
moment, there is no contempt law  in the country. The Prime Minister 
cannot be held guilty for noncompliance with an unimplementable 
direction of the Supreme Court. The charge in this case is illegal. This 
is a unique case where the role of prosecutor and adjudicator was 
assumed by the co urt itself. For the purpose of disqualification of the 
Prime Minister, especially when it is well known that the courts in the 
past have been destabilizing elected government through judicial over -
reach . No order of the court has been flouted or disregarde d by the 
Prime Minister. Even otherwise, no court in Pakistan can order or 
dictate the Prime Minister in the realm of his executive authority and 
courts in the past have never interfered in the working of the Prime 
Minister. Even if for the sake of argumen t, it may be assumed that 
some order was flouted, conviction in terms of Article 63(1)(g) ought 
to be a direct consequence and not an indirect consequence. Here, the 
conviction is not for defaming or ridiculing. In law, direct consequences 
and not remote c onsequences are to be considered. In the instant 
case, disqualification has to be direct consequence in terms of Article 
63(1)(g). It is a conviction for not writing a certain letter, and not for 
defaming or ridiculing the judiciary. The Prime Minister was  not 
charged for ridiculing the judiciary and the word ‘ridicule’ finds no 
mention in the defunct Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003. There has 
to be a positive act to attract disqualification under Article 63(1)(g). 
Any omission will not constitute the act  of defaming or ridiculing the 
judiciary in terms of the said clause. A lot of emphasis was laid on 
section 18 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003. It is out of 
context. Real essence of section 18 is that as far as possible, contempt 
jurisdiction is t o be sparingly exercised and under the Supreme Court CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  50 
rules, 1980, it is the Attorney General for Pakistan to conduct the 
proceedings. The Hon’ble Chief Justice has been pointing out that the 
conviction ought to have been set aside by filing an appeal. Ther e was 
no need for the Speaker to go into the question as to whether any 
appeal has been filed or not. The judgment of the 7 -member bench 
suffers from serious constitutional and legal violations and that 
judgment is being made an issue in this case by the p etitioners 
because heavy reliance has been placed, therefore, proper course 
would be to refer this matter to a larger bench, so that the same could 
be revisited. There are judgments, in which appeals were not filed. In 
Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan’s case, no appeal was filed, and the 
Judges were restored, it had not been set aside till then. Therefore, 
judgments can be revisited at a later stage. There are judgments 
which lay down that a void order is to be ignored. So, this judgment of 
the 7 -member bench is a lso required to be ignored. There is no finding 
in the judgment of the 7 -member bench that the Prime Minister 
propagated anything for the purpose of defaming or ridiculing the 
judiciary. These words appearing in the Constitution have a direct 
nexus with de faming or ridiculing. Through silence nobody can be 
defamed or ridiculed.    
41.  Suffice to add that above grounds raised by learned 
counsel for respondent and learned Attorney General legally can only 
be considered by the appellate Court hearing appeal un der section 19 
of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003. Learned counsel for the 
respondent and learned Attorney General for Pakistan have raised the 
above mentioned legal points, which they could have raised in appeal. 
This Bench in exercise of jurisdicti on under Article 184(3) is not the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  51 
appellate Court of the 7 -memb er bench . Therefore, the same cannot 
be adjud icated upon in the present proceedings .  
 
42.   It is further to be added that according to Article 63(2) the 
Speaker has to decide if any question  of disqualification of a member 
of the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament) has arisen or not . To interpret this 
provision, it is necessary to examine meaning of the word ‘question’  as 
given in various dictionaries, some of which are as under: -  
Question:  A sent ence worded or expressed so as to seek 
information.  
2. a doubt about or objection to a thing’s truth, credibility, 
advisability, etc. b. the raising  of such doubt etc.  
3. a matter to be discussed or decided or voted on.  
4. a problem requiring an answer or solution.  
5. a matter or concern depending on conditions. [Concise 
Oxford Dictionary of Current English; Eighth Edition]  
 
Question: To ask a question or questions of a person or 
figure a thing; to interrogate.  
2. To question with: to ask question of; to hold discourse 
or conversation with; to dispute with.  
3. To ask or put questions.  
4. To make question of, to raise the question; hence, to 
doubt hold as uncertain.  
5. a. To call in question, dispute, oppose. b. To bring into 
question, make doubtful o r insecure. c. To state as a 
question. 6. To ask or inquire about, to investigate a thing.  
[The Oxford English Dictionary; Volume VIII]  
 
Question:  1. a. An expression of inquiry that invites or 
calls for a reply. b. An interrogative sentence, phrase, or 
gesture.  
2. A subject or point open to controversy; an issue.  
3. A difficult matter; a problem: a question of ethics.  
4. A point or subject under discussion or consideration.  
5. a. A proposition brought up for consideration by an 
assembly. b. The act of br inging a proposal to vote.  
6. Uncertainty; doubt: There is no question about the 
validity of the enterprise. [ The American Heritage 
Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition ]  
 
The word ‘question’ means, inter alia, a doubt about a certain thing o r 
matter , which is required to be  ascertained . However, in the instant 
case, after the conviction of the respondent by the 7 -member bench, 
there was no doubt that a question of his disqualification  had arisen . CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  52 
In the circumstances , the Speaker , in discharg e of her function s, could 
not bypass/ignore such determination , and was left with no alternative 
but to decid e the question of disqualification of the respondent in the 
affirmative  and refer the matter to the Election Commission . If the 
relevant authoritie s would not adhere t o the afore discussed principle,  
then a convict would continue to participate in the affairs of the 
Parliament, perform the functions of Prime Minister  and would be 
running the affairs of State unconstitutionally.   
 
43.   Now we turn t o the argument  of the learned counsel for 
Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani that every conviction , ipso facto, does not 
disqualif y a person from being a Member of the Parliament. This 
argument has been advanced by the learned counsel with two 
impressions in his min d. One , that the respondent has not been 
convicted by a Court of competent jurisdiction for propagating any 
opinion, or acting in any manner prejudicial to the integrity or 
independence of judiciary , or for defaming or bringing into ridicule the 
judiciary,  therefore, he cannot be disqualified. It is to be seen that the 
respondent has been found guilty of contempt of Court by the 7 -
member bench for willfully, deliberately and persistently defying clear 
direction of the highest Court of the country after havi ng tak en into 
consideration his conduct as the highest executive functionary of the 
State and on being fully satisfied that such willful and persistent 
defiance at such a high level constitutes contempt, which is 
substantially detrimental to the administra tion of justice , and tends not 
only to bring this Court but also the judiciary of this country into 
ridicule . [Emphasis provided ]. Exactly, the same word i.e. ‘ridicule ’ has 
been used in Article 63(1)(g) of the Constitution. Thus, it has attracted CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  53 
the prov ision of disqualification. The 7-memebr b ench seized with the 
matter could have passed order of his disqualification at that time, but 
it seems that judicial restraint was exercised knowing that the convict 
had a right of appeal and review. Furthermore, h is case was also to be 
routed through the Speaker for the purpose of following the process of 
law, and above all , he would have been entitled to defend himself if 
direct challenge was thrown to his qualification as a Member of the 
Parliament. And as now a g ood number of petitions have been filed 
seeking enforcement of Fundamental Rights enshrined in Articles 9, 
10A, 14, 17 and  25 of the Constitution as Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani has 
continued his position as Prime Minister instead of resorting to the 
remedy av ailable to him  under the law , it is held that after having 
been convicted  and sentenced for contempt of Court  he has been 
disqualified , ipso facto, from being a Member of the Parliament. 
Second important question in the mind of the learned counsel for the 
respondent in raising this plea appeared to be based on a number of 
grounds and we have been tried to be persuaded to decline the relief 
to the petitioners on the plea that the judgment of the 7 -member 
bench did not contain some of the elements of the term  “contempt” as 
defined in the Contempt of Court Ordinance , 2003 . A similar argument 
was made by the learned Attorney General. Suffice to reiterate that 
the learned counsel , or the learned Attorney General – the latter being 
on Court notice in terms of Orde r XXVIIA, CPC to assist the Court on 
constitutional issues , and ha ving also acted as a Prosecutor in the 
contempt of Court proceedings  – could have conveniently agitated the 
above points by filing an appeal before the appropriate bench against 
the judgment  of the 7 -member bench instead of throwing a challeng e 
to the same in a collateral proceedings .   CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  54 
 
44.  M/s Aitzaz Ahsan and Muhammad Munir Piracha insisted 
that in case this Court comes to the conclusion that the ruling of the 
Speaker dated 24 May, 2012 i s not sustainable, then the matter may 
be sent back to the Speaker for fresh decision  as per law laid down in 
Umar Draz Khan v. Muhammad Yousaf  (1968 SCMR 880), Azmat Ali v. 
Chief Settlement and Rehabilitation Commissioner  (PLD 1964 SC 260) 
and Begum B.H.S yed v. Afzal Jahan Begum (PLD 1970 SC 29).  We 
have considered the submission of the learned counsel. As has been 
noted hereinabove, the Speaker had a period of 30 days at her 
disposal to decide whether she was agreeable to send a reference or 
not. Though she ought to have decided the question much earlier 
because the affairs of the country were being run by a Member of the 
Parliament who had become disqualified after his conviction and 
sentence passed by the 7 -member bench against which neither any 
appeal was filed nor was it got suspended  from the forum provided 
under the law . However, t he Speaker decided the matter on 24 May, 
2012, i.e., just one day before the expiry of the period  of 30 days  
provided for the purpose . In the circumstances, the plea for rem and is 
not entertainable, inasmuch as the period of 30 days already having 
expired, the same cannot  be enlarged . In case the decision was not 
taken in this behalf at the earliest possible, the country would have 
continued to remain in a serious constitutio nal crisis. In this view of 
the matter, the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the 
respondents are distinguishable on facts  and are not attracted to the 
present case. In Umar Draz Khan’s case , the election petition was 
dismissed by the Authority on the ground that it had no jurisdiction to 
declare the election void as the respondent did not suffer from the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  55 
disqualification on account of age at the time of his election as 
member of the electoral college. The said order was challenged before 
the High Court through a writ petition , which was accepted and the 
decision of the Authority was declared to be untenable in law , and it 
was directed that his name be removed from membership of electoral 
unit. However, the case was remanded to the Authority to deci de the 
Election Petition in accordance with law. The order of the High Court 
was challenged before this Court, wherein it was observed that in a 
proceeding of this nature, the High Court should not have gone into 
disputed questions of fact and recorded a f inding thereon. On the basis 
of said observations, the order of the High Court so far as it related to 
the questioning of the order of the Authority and remanding the case 
to him, was up held; however, part of the order by which the directions 
were issued t o the Controlling Authority to remove the name from 
membership of the electoral college, was set aside. In the case of 
Azmat Ali‘s case , it was held that in a proceeding of extraordinary 
nature where a superior Court calls for the records of judicial or quasi-
judicial authorities or tribunals , which are not subject to its appellate 
jurisdiction, the superior Court no doubt has the full power to do 
justice , but does not , as a rule, even in a case where it does interfere, 
substitute its own decision for the d ecision of the inferior authority or 
tribunal . Where it is felt that questions have been left undecided by 
such Tribunal or authority or a question has to be decided after the 
taking of fresh evidence, it is more appropriate to return the case to 
authority  or Tribunal concerned for decision in accordance with law, 
after quashing the order complained against. In Begum B.H.Syed’s 
case, it was held that the High Court in writ petition against order of 
the Settlement Authorities is not competent, after quashing  the order CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  56 
of the lower Tribunal, to go into the merits of the case and decide 
which of the parties was entitled to the transfer of the property in 
dispute. If the High Court does so, it exceeds its jurisdiction .  
 
45.   The above judgments hardly advance the proposition 
sought to be canvassed by the learned counsel for the respondents, 
inasmuch as in none of these case, the question of disqualification  of a 
sitting Member of the Parliament, who was also the Chief Executive of 
the country on account of his conviction recorded by the highest Court , 
which had attained finality as no appeal was filed against it , and called 
for no determination of any questions of fact, was involved . Even in Al-
Jehad Trust case , some Judges were laid off while others  were 
workin g, therefore, the functioning of the judiciary had not come to a 
standstill whereas in the instant case 180 million people were being 
governed by a disqualified Member of the Parliament. Same was the 
position of the Cabinet , headed by  the Prime Minister , inasmuch as all 
the act ions done by the Ministers are considered to be the actions of 
the Federal Government . Therefore , it was not in the interest of the 
country and the institution to remand the case.  
 
46.   As stated above, while interpreting the Articl e 63, an effort 
has been made to keep the case within the four corners of the said 
provision of the Constitution . As such , reference of the matter to the 
Election Commission for issuance of notification under the short order 
dated 19 June, 2012 in the inst ant case was entirely within the ambit 
of Article 63(2) in view of the fact that the ruling of the Speaker had 
been found not sustainable .  
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  57 
47.   The crux of the above discussion is that the respondent 
after having been convicted  by the 7 -member bench for  contempt of 
courtbecame disqualified to be a Member of the Parliament in terms of 
63(1)(g) of the Constitution as he did not avail the remedies provided 
by law to get  such a finding set aside. Therefore, when the matter 
came before the Speaker, she ought not to have delay ed the decision 
and to have referred it to the Election Commission immediately in view 
of the exigency of the circumstances, notwithstanding the fact that 30 
days’ period was available to her, and also keeping in mind that she 
was not the appellate authority of the Supreme Court whose judgment 
of conviction ha d attained finality. In the circumstances , the question 
in terms of Article 63(2) at best be to send the reference to the 
Election Commission or not , and by applying her mind she had t o 
decide positively even before the expiry of 30 days ’ period in the 
interest of institution and the country to refer the matter to the 
Election Commission for issuance of notification of disqualification of 
the respondent from being a Member of the Parlia ment. Much 
emphasis was laid by the learned counsel for the respondent on the 
word ‘unless’ used in Article 63(2). No doubt, t he existing scheme of 
the Constitution gives the Speaker right to decide  the question  of 
disqualification of a person from being a  Member of the Parliament in 
respect of issues , which are required to be probed with reference to 
the disqualifications envisaged by Article 63(1) where no conviction 
has been recorded by a Court of competent jurisdiction , which is to be 
done within the pe riod of 30 days provided in Article 63(2) .  
 
48.   Here, a word may also be said about the role and function 
of the Election Commission after a question has been referred, or is CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  58 
deemed to have been referred to it, by the Speaker under  Article 
63(2). Articl e 63(3) provides that the Election Commission shall decide 
the question within ninety days from its receipt or deemed to have 
been received and if it is of the opinion that the member has become 
disqualified, he shall cease to be a member and his seat shal l become 
vacant. Like the Speaker , the Election Commission also cannot sit in 
appeal over a concluded judgment  of a superior court , and has to 
decide the question in the affirmative that the convicted person has 
become disqualified, therefore, his seat sha ll become vacant. As has 
been noted above, there is a clear distinction in respect of other 
disqualification s mentioned in Article 63(1) , in respect whereof 
information is laid before the Speaker involving determination of 
controversial facts. Therefore, the Election Commission may , after a 
reference from the Speaker,  undertake a second scrutiny in such 
matters . But where there is a conviction recorded by a competent 
Court against a person, who is a  Member of the Parliament, which has 
attained finality, the role and function of the Election Commission is 
confined to issu ing notification of disqualification of the concerned 
Member on the basis of verdict of  the Court .   
 
49.  In the instant case, the Speaker, in not making a reference 
to the Election Commissi on under the circumstances of the case, 
exceeded her jurisdiction, and consumed 30 days ’ time . In view of 
facts and circumstances of the present case, t he said period of 30 days 
prescribed by the Constitution  cannot be enlarged. Thus, being left 
with no al ternative, matter was sent to the Election Commission for 
issuance of notification of disqualification of the respondent as a 
Member of the Parliament with effect from 26 April, 2012 when he was CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  59 
convicted by the 7-member bench . Considering the fact that th e 
Speaker’s ruling was a nullity in the eyes of law , and considering 
further the clause in Article 63(2)  which stipulates that if the Speaker  
fails to decide if a question of disqualification has arisen within 30 days 
“it shall be deemed to have been refer red to the Election Commission”, 
this Court has concluded that the matter stood referred to the Election 
Commission . The Election Commission , in turn,  considering it a 
reference deemed to have been sent to it in accordance with the above  
provision, issued the notification of disqualification of the respondent 
in exercise of power vested in it under Article 63(3).   
 
50.   Now we turn to the question of validity of the decisions 
made and the acts or actions performed or done by the respondent as 
Prime Minist er of Pakistan on and from 26 April, 2012, the date of his 
conviction till 19 June, 2012. In this behalf, it is to be noted that this 
Court in the case of Asma Jilani v. Government of Punjab  (PLD 1972 
SC 139) as well as in Sindh High Court Bar Association’ s case  declined 
to protect such actions, which were not in accordance with Constitution 
and the law. In the instant case, the respondent on having been 
convicted under Article 204(2) of the Constitution read with section 3 
of the Contempt of Court Ordinanc e, 2003 with effect from 26th April, 
2012 stood disqualified from being a Member of the National Assembly 
and became a stranger to the House, but continued to hold the office 
of the Prime Minister contrary to the Constitution and the law . 
Therefore, all the decisions made and the acts or actions performed or 
done by him during that period had no constitutional sanctity. 
However, the Federal Government or the Provincial Governments, if 
need be, may refer such matters to the Parliament for the purpose of CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  60 
ratification of all those decisions, acts or actions or otherwise , in light 
of the law laid down by this Court in Sindh High Court Bar 
Association’s case .   
 
51.   Above are the reasons for our short order dated 19 June, 
2012, which reads thus: -  
“For reasons  to be recorded later, the titled petitions are 
disposed of as under: -  
(1) This Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 
184(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan is competent to ensure enforcement of the 
fundamental rights of the cit izens in all matters of 
public importance;   
(2) The Speaker of the National Assembly under Article 
63(2) of the Constitution exercises powers, which 
are not covered by the definition of internal 
proceedings of Majlis -e-Shoora, therefore, this Court, 
in exerci se of power of judicial review, is not 
debarred from inquiring into the order dated 
25.05.2012. Reference in this behalf may be made to 
the cases of Mining Industries of Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd. 
v. Deputy Speaker, Balochistan Provincial Assembly  
(PLD 2006 Quetta 36), Madad Ali v. Province of 
Sindh  (1996 SCMR 366), Shams -ud-Din v. Speaker, 
Balochistan Provincial Assembly  (1994 MLD 2500), 
Muhammad Naeem Akhtar v. Speaker, Sindh 
Provincial Assembly  (1992 CLC 2043), Farzand Ali v. 
Province of West Pakistan  (PLD 197 0 SC 98); 
Muhammad Anwar Durrani v. Province of Baluchistan  
(PLD 1989 Quetta 25); Jagjit Singh v. State of 
Haryana  (AIR 2007 SC 590) and Rajendra Singh 
Rana v. Swami Prasad Maurya  (AIR 2007 SC 1305);    
(3) As a Bench of 7 Hon’ble Judges vide judgment dated 
26.04.2012 followed by the detailed reasons 
released on 08.05.2012 has found Syed Yousaf Raza CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  61 
Gillani guilty of contempt of Court under Article 
204(2) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 read with section 3 of the Contempt 
of Court Ordinance, 2003 and sentenced him to 
undergo imprisonment till rising of the Court under 
section 5 of the said Ordinance, and since no appeal 
was filed against this judgment, the conviction has 
attained finality. Therefore, Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani 
has bec ome disqualified from being a Member of the 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) in terms of Article 
63(1)(g) of the Constitution on and from the date 
and time of pronouncement of the judgment of this 
Court dated 26.04.2012 with all consequences, i.e. 
he has also ceased to be the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan with effect from the said date and the office 
of the Prime Minister shall be deemed to be vacant 
accordingly;    
(4) The Election Commission of Pakistan is required to 
issue notification of disqualification of Syed Y ousaf 
Raza Gillani from being a member of the Majlis -e-
Shoora w.e.f. 26.4.2012; and   
(5) The President of Pakistan is required to take 
necessary steps under the Constitution to ensure 
continuation of the democratic process through 
parliamentary system of gove rnment in the country.  
2. We place on record our thanks and appreciation to 
learned counsel appearing for the parties for providing 
valuable assistance in deciding these petitions.”  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
19 June, 2012 . 
 
  APPROVED FOR REPORTING  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  62 
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  I have gone through the reasons given  by Hon’ble the Chief 
Justice  and by my learned brother Khilji Arif Hussain, J.  in support of the short order 
dated 19.6.2012 and am in respectful agreement with the same. I only wish to add this 
brief note to elaborate a fundamental principle of the Constitution of Pakistan which 
appears to have eluded the learned counsel opposing these petitions.  
2. An argument was advanced by learned counsel for the respondents and by the 
learned Attorney General  which proceeded on the premise  that the elected members of 
Parliament  alone represented the will of the people and, therefore, were not answerable 
to any other organ of the State including this Court. It is on this account that there was a 
misplaced relia nce by them on Article 69 of the Constitution. This argument  (discussed 
in the lead judgment)  proceeds on a false premise. The elected representatives in 
Parliament and the Executive cannot claim any primacy  over and above the 
Constitution. It is t he Const itution which is supreme over all organs of the State because 
it manifests  the will of the people. This is expressly stated in the Constitution itself. In 
the P reamble,  for instance,  the Constitution is mentioned as expressing  the “will of the 
people of Pa kistan to establish [a constitutional]  orde r” and in the Third Schedule, it is stated 
clearly that the Constitution “ embodies the will of the people ”. It is this fundamental 
principle which is the hall-mark of our democratic dispensation.  
3. In an earlier  case we have already observed that in so far a s all three organs of 
the State remain within the limits prescribed by the Constitution, “they have a legitimate 
claim to being enforcers and exponents of the will of the people. Our Constitution conceives of an 
Order wherein the various organs of State are co -equals, each manifesting the will of the people 
and giving effect to such through adjudication, executive action or legislation. It is important tha t 
the primacy of the Constitution over the Government as  also over the judicature be fully 
understood .” (Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani versus Assistant Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan  
(PLD 2012 SC 466  para 34) . To find the will of the people, w e, as Judges , are not required 
to embark upon any theoretical journe y in the realm of abstract political philosophy  or 
to try finding solutions to legal conundrums  in alien constitutional dispensations 
materially different from ours;  we need only examine our own Constitution to ensure 
that the people of Pakistan, the polit ical sovereigns , are obeyed and  their will , as CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  63 
manifested in the Constitution , prevails . This after all is the very essence of a democratic 
order.  
4. When we examine the Constitution, we find that t he people in their wisdom 
have created a balance between Parliament, the Judiciary and the Executive. The 
rationale behind choosing this form of divided and bal anced government was nicely  
articulated by a political thinker in another continent. He stated : “[i]f men were angels, no 
government would be necessary. If angels were to govern men, neither external nor internal 
controls on government would be necessary. In framing a government which is to be 
administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the 
government to control t he governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself. A dependence 
on the people is, no doubt, the primary control on the government; but experience has taught 
mankind the ne cessity of auxiliary precautions ”(James Madison, in Federalist No. 51, T he 
Federalist Papers) . In our Constitution , the division  of powers with its distinct features, 
is perhaps the most important of these “ auxiliary provisions ” which oblige t he 
government and Parliament to themselves  be controlled  by Constitutional norms and 
mechanisms . The people of Pakistan have ordained  that a ll three organs of the State are 
to function in accordance with the Constitution. With the object of ensuring that these 
organs of the State  remain obedient to the Constitution , a simple and uncomplica ted 
mechanism , which relies on th e trichotomy  of powers , has been set out in the 
Constitution.  There is no room for obfuscation on this score.  
5. Since the Executive has  been entrusted by the people with  the physical  and 
material resources of the S tate, the Constitution  has, in unequivocal terms, commanded  
that “all executive and judicial authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in a id of the Supreme 
Court”  (Article 190) . The Supreme Court does not have to exercise executive  or 
enforcement  powers on its ow n because this is not necessary in light of Article 190 ibid. 
The people have willed that the E xecutive shall implement and enforce any order passed 
by the Supreme Court. In order to ensure that t here is no disobedience by the E xecutive , 
the people have  further  willed that this Court  ‘shall have power to punish any person who ... 
disobeys any order of the Court ... scandalizes the Court or otherwise does anything which tends 
to bring the Court …  into hatred, ridicule or contempt …”  (Article 204) . In order t o check any CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  64 
possible disobedience to the Constitution by State organs or members of Parliament  by 
not acting in aid of the Supreme  Court  or actually  refusing to do so,  the people  have 
expressly stipulated that “a person shall be disqualified from being  elected or chosen as, and 
from being  a member of Parliament . . . if he has been convicted  by a Court of competent 
jurisdiction  for …acting in any manner  . . . which defames or brings into ridicule the Judiciary”  
{Article 63(1)(g)} . The people have  thus , in the clearest possible terms , stated that they 
will not allow themselves to be represented by a person who has or earns a 
disqualification under Article 63 ibid. As noted in the judgment of H on’ble the Chief 
Justice , a seven -member Bench of the Supreme Cour t has already convicted  the former 
Prime Minister,  Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani on this count. Mr. Gillani, by not appealing 
this decision, has accepted the verdict of the Court . It would , therefore , amount to 
defiance of the Constitution  for an elected member  of Parliament to insist upon 
disob eying constitutional  orders and yet remain insistent upon remaining  a member of 
Parliament . The cumulative effect of Articles 190, 63 and 204 is hard to miss; it 
effectively ensures adherence to the peoples’ will embodied  in the Constitution. This is 
an important and distinctive feature of our Constitution which is not to  be found in any 
other jurisdictions  that I am aware of .  
6. The above fundamental democratic and constitutional concept can be elaborated 
through a simpl e illustration. If a member of Parliament starts disobeying the 
Constitution by looting the public exchequer and continues to do so  even  when directed 
by this Court to stop the loot and return the plunder,  it is clear that the people have 
armed this Court with the power under Article 204 ibid to convict him. This ensures that 
the Court is not a helpless bystander  incapable of ensuring that the command of the 
people is fulfilled. The Court  can effectively perform the role of the  people s’ sentinel and 
guardia n of their rights by enforcing  their will ; even against members of Parliament who 
may have been elected by the people but who have become disobedient to the 
Constitution and thus strayed from  their will. This mechanism provides a 
straightforward governance  paradigm, controlled ultimately by the people . It says  in 
effect : “abide by our will (i.e. the Constitution) or lose the privilege of being our representative”.  
It is all quite simple .  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  65 
7. This Court and its empowerment by the people through the Constitut ion has to 
be seen as a bedrock of democratic rule. Th e Court, therefore, has performed its 
democratic role stated i n the Constitution to keep elected representatives in compliance 
with  the will of the people manifested in the Constitution. It is in this c ontext that the 
law of contempt has to be understood. It is not a device to be used for self 
aggrandizement by Courts, but must be employed where the will of the people (i.e. the 
Constitution) is being flouted. Seen in this perspective there can be no  hesi tation in 
rejecting  the argument that this Court somehow does not r epresent the will of the people 
or that it should refrain from enforcing such will simply because the respondent 
happens to be the Prime Minister.  This latter claim, which amounts to a claim of special 
privilege, has already been rejected by the Court in I.C.A No. 1 of 2012 filed by  the Prime 
Minister . In that case, we reaffirmed the “ timeless and prophetic principle of governance, 
encapsulated in the well - known saying:  
   . (The leader of a people is their 
servant)”.  We had held that “ [o]ur constitution manifests the embodiment of this very principle 
when it obliges the highest executive functionary to carry out the commandments expressed by 
the people in the form of the constitution and th e law ” (Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani v. Assistant 
Registrar  (PLD 2012 SC 466, para 26) . Even in a case prior to that , we had ela borated the 
principle that all S tate organs and their respective functionaries are in the service of the 
people and can have as thei r raison d’être, only the enforcement of the will of the people 
as manifested in the Constitution and th e law. In Muhammad Yasin v. Federation of 
Pakistan  while examining the legal right of the OGRA Chairman to hold office, we held 
that ”…holders of public  office have to remain conscious that in terms of the Constitution … they 
are, first and foremost, fiduciaries and trustees for the People of Pakistan. And, when performing 
the functions of their Office, they can have no interest other than the interests o f the honourable 
People of Pakistan in whose name they hold office and from whose pockets they draw their salaries 
and perquisites ” Muhammad Yasin v. Federation of Pakistan - (PLD 201 2 SC 132, page 163) . 
Today, in the c ase of the  Prime Minister who is the  highest executive  functionary of the 
State, we have no option but to adhere to the same principle.  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  66 
8. It is also  important to remember that all  organ s of the State have to act in 
harmony  and with due humility as instrumentalities and servants of the people . There is 
no question of any clash of institutional or individual egos  in abiding by the 
Constitution . In Munir Bhatti’s case, we had stated that “there is nothing unusual or 
exceptional about differences as to constitutional questions cropping up between constitutional 
bodies or State functionaries in a democratic dispensation. …. However, as nations mature and 
polities evolve, their maturity is reflected in the manner in which such differences are resolved in  
accordance with the governing compact, which i s the Constitution … [Such differences ] cannot be 
seen as adversarial turf -wars … or as matters of prestige.  (Munir Hussain Bhatti v. Federation of  
Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 407 para  82).  
9. We have also repeatedly held that there can be no instability in the c ountry as 
long as the Constitution is adhered to. We operate in a dispensation of laws and not of 
men. Ind ividuals in such dispensation, are not indispensable ; they are here today but   
may be in the hereafter tomorrow. As Iqbal said:   . In the case titled 
Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani vs. Assistant Registrar, Supreme Court of Pakistan  ibid, we 
have held :  ”What happens to an individual can be of little consequence as long as State 
institutions continue functioning in accordance with the Constitution. The anachronistic notion 
of “après moi, le déluge ” has no room in a Constitutional order based on institutions rather 
than individuals ” (para 31 ) . This observation has been fully vindicated in the recent 
events of the past few weeks. Con stitutional rule has been strengthened by the  fact that a 
former Prime Minister who was disobedient to the C onstitution has been replaced in  
Parliament  and the affairs of State continue unimpeded in accordance with the 
constitutional order which, as noted above, is the embodiment of the will of the people . 
10. At this point it is important to note that clause (g) of Article  63(1) was amended 
in 2010 through the 18th Constitutional A mendment. This amendment is of material 
significance in the present case but the change appears to have escaped the attention of 
the learned Attorney General and learned counsel representing the respondents. Prior to 
the 18th amendment clause (g) of Article 63(1) did not contain  any reference to the 
conviction by a Court of compet ent jurisdiction , of a member of the National Assembly . 
CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  67 
But after the said amendment , clearly there is no room left for the exercise of decision 
making by the Speaker when a member of Parliament stands “convicted by a Court of 
competent jurisdiction ...”.  At this point I respectfully  reiterate the reliance by Hon’ble the 
Chief Justice on the case  law referred to in his detailed reasoning . It is abundantly clear 
from the judgment of the learned seven -member Bench of this Court that the conviction 
of Syed You saf Raza Gillani is, without doubt, in respect of the disqualifying conditions 
of Article 63(1)(g). A substantial part of the argument of learned counsel for Mr. Gillani 
and of the learned Attorney General, were addressed to wards  perceived errors in the 
judgment of the said learned Bench. These, however, have no relevance whatsoever in 
the present  proceedings because the j udgment of the seven -member Bench has attained 
finality  and there is no lawful basis on which we, in these proceedings, or the Speaker 
could have gone  against the said judgment or review ed the same .     
11. While concludi ng this note I would like to add  that there is  no justification  in our 
dispensation , for muddying the cryst al and undefiled waters of our c onstitutional 
stream with alien a nd antiquated, 19th Century  Dice yan concepts  of Parliamentary 
supremacy . These concepts  have lost currency even in their own native lands . As Lord 
Steyn writing in the House of Lords, the highest Court of England (the lan d of our 
former colonial masters ), has written in a recent case, “[t]he classic account given by Dicey 
of the doctrine of supremacy of Parliament, pure and absolute as it was, can now be seen to be out 
of place in the modern United Kingdom” . Jackson  & others (Appellants)  v. Her Majesty’s 
Attorney General  (Respondents)  [(2005) UKHL 560] . It is about time, sixty -five years after 
independence, that we unchain ourselves from the shackles of obsequious intellectual 
servility to colonial paradigms and start adhering to our own peoples’ Constitutio n as 
the basis  of decision making  on constitutional issues .   
 
(Jawwad S. Khawaja)  
Judge             
 
 
 
 
 
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  68 
               KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN, J. - I have gone through the draft 
opinion recorded by Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan in this case. 
However, I would like to record my independent reasoning in reaching 
that outcome.  
 
2.  The facts of the case have be en elaborated in the main 
judgment by the Hon’ble Chief Justice. It would suffice here to 
highlight some key aspects of the events leading up to the hearing of 
this petition. Mr. Yusuf Raza Gilani, former Prime Minister of 
Pakistan, hereinafter referred to  as “the respondent”, was charged by a 
7-member bench of this Court  under Article 204 (2) of the Constitution 
of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read with section 3 of the 
Contempt of Court Ordinance (Ordinance V of 2003). On 26 April, 2012, 
following a  full hearing, the respondent was convicted and sentenced 
under section 5 of the Ordinance to undergo imprisonment till the 
rising of the Court. The 7 -member bench of this court did not, however, 
hold that the respondent was disqualified from being a membe r of the 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) under Article 63(1)(g) of the Constitution 
and, showing great restraint and wisdom, left the same to be 
determined through mechanisms provided for in the Constitution of 
Pakistan.  
 
3.  It must be noted that at this sta ge there were three legal 
possibilities that remained open. Firstly, the respondent could have 
appealed the decision of the 7 -member bench in which case he could 
have presented several substantive arguments, which his counsel CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  69 
unsuccessfully tried to raise in the current proceedings, before a larger 
bench of this Court. Secondly, the Speaker of National Assembly could 
have exercise her independent judgment and referred the question of 
the former Prime Minister’s disqualification as member of Parliament 
to be  determined by the Election Commission pursuant to sub -clauses 
(2) and (3) of Article 63 .  
 
4.  The respondent chose not to appeal. Instead, he waited for the 
Speaker to exercise the limited administrative discretion entrusted to her 
under Art. 63(2) to de termine whether a question of disqualification had 
arisen. In the presence of  this Court  decision finding the respondent guilty of 
contempt and bringing the judiciary into ridicule it ought to have been 
evident to the Speaker how that role were to be perf ormed. However, the 
Speaker failed to bring an impartial approach to the matter and purported to 
decide that no question of disqualification had arisen. In the immediate 
aftermath of the Speaker’s action various petitions were filed under Art. 
184(3) of th e Constitution before this Court challenging the Speaker’s ruling. 
The petitioner prayed that, inter alia, after the judgment of the 7 -member 
bench of this Court the respondent stood disqualified to be a member of the 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) and hence  ceased to be the Prime Minister on 
and from the day and time of his conviction. Such are the genesis of the 
present controversy.  
 
5.  The respondent, by following the above -mentioned course of 
action, dis -abled himself from raising arguments concerning th e validity of 
his conviction and immunity, if any, under the Constitution. As the 
respondent has not questioned his conviction by filing an appeal, the only 
question before the bench in the present case was that of the effect of the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  70 
conviction for contempt  in terms of the disqualification of the contemnor from 
being a member of Parliament. This bench thus neither entertained 
arguments regarding the merits of the conviction and a Prime Minister’s 
immunity from prosecution nor ruled upon them. The only releva nt 
arguments raised by the respondent were with regard to the maintainability 
of the petition, the justiciability of the Speaker’s ruling, and the process of 
disqualification of a member of Parliament under the relevant provisions of 
the Constitution. Thes e matters are discussed in detail below.  
 
MAINTAINABILITY OF THE PETITION  
6.  In the opinion recorded by Hon’ble Chief Justice this aspect of 
the matter has been dealt with in detail, and this petition has been 
entertained under the Original Jurisdiction o f the Supreme Court under 
Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973. Under the said provision 
the Supreme Court may make an order of the nature mentioned in Article 
199 which provides for the ‘Writ’ jurisdiction of the High Courts. Article 
199(1 )(b)(ii) enables the high Courts to make an order, on the application of 
any person, “ requiring a person within the territorial jurisdiction of the Court 
holding or purporting to hold a public office to show under what authority of 
law he claims to hold th at office.” This, as any administrative lawyer would 
recognize, is in the nature of the traditional prerogative writ of quo warranto  
albeit without the technical limitations under which the traditional Common 
Law writs were exercisable. There is no require ment of locus standi  for 
bringing a petition before the High Courts and by extension before the 
Supreme Court. There are, however, two requirements which have to be met 
before the Supreme Court may directly entertain such a petition under its 
Original Juri sdiction under Art. 184(3). The petition must raise “a question of CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  71 
public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II.”  
 
7.  Lawyers, and of course judges too, are by their nature and 
training creatures of habit or ‘tradition’. The counsels appearing for the 
parties in petitions under Art. 184(3) habitually or traditionally make 
arguments for and against the maintainability of such petitions by tying or 
rejecting the tying of the subject ma tter of the petitions to specific 
Fundamental Rights provisions in Chapter I of Part II of the Constitution. In 
the present case one can argue that the petitioner’s Fundamental Rights 
under Art. 17 (Freedom of Association which includes the right of politi cal 
participation and the right to be governed by chosen representatives) is most 
directly affected. However, this practice of identifying individual 
Fundamental Rights which are affected in a case such as this is somewhat 
anachronistic. It is tantamount t o pretending that the remarkable 
developments over the course of nearly two and half decades, since the 
seminal decision of this Court in Benazir Bhutto v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 1988 SC 416) in 1988, i.e. the development of Public Interest Litigation , 
never happened. This court, however, is very mindful of the march of history, 
in particular the collective wisdom of superior court judges of the past and 
present as it has come to be reflected in the progressive development of the 
Writ jurisdiction of t he High Courts and the Original Jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court.  
 
8.  In Benazir Bhutto ’s case, this Court began the process of 
progressively relaxing the requirement of locus standi , one of the hallmarks 
of an adversarial legal system and a legacy of th e ideology which sees citizens 
as individual right -bearing subjects. In relaxing the requirements of locus CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  72 
standi , which were ultimately whittled down by the end of the 20th Century, 
the Court noted that this would render more meaningful the “protection of  
the rule of law given to citizens by Article 4 of the Constitution, that is … [t]o 
enjoy the protection of law and to be treated in accordance with law is the 
inalienable right of every citizen.” Thus, in this decision the Court began 
reading the Fundamen tal Rights provisions in Chapter I of Part II of the 
Constitution in harmony with the other provisions of the Constitution. 
Furthermore, the bench in Benazir Bhutto ’s case also initiated the vital 
process of harmonizing the remedies and processes under the  Original 
Jurisdiction of the court with the Fundamental Rights, hereafter seen as 
collective public rights as much as private individual rights. The Court 
observed that the right of “ access to justice … is not only an internationally 
recognized human righ t but has also assumed constitutional importance as it 
provides a broad -based remedy against the violation of human rights and also 
serves to promote socio -economic justice which is pivotal in advancing the 
national hopes and aspirations of the people perm eating the Constitution and 
the basic values incorporated therein, one of which is social solidarity, i.e. 
national integration and social cohesion by creating an egalitarian society 
through a new legal order. ” In extension of this progressive process of 
development, this Court  subsequently whittled down the requirement of a 
formal petition in the landmark case of Darshan Masih v. The State  (PLD 
1990 SC 513) where this Court converted a telegram from a bonded labourer 
into a petition. Furthermore, even prio r to these developments in Public 
Interest Litigation, the Supreme Court had begun initiating cases suo motu. 
See Shrin Munir v. Government of Punjab  (PLD 1990 SC 295).  
 
9.  Similar developments have taken place with regard to the 
definition of public impo rtance. Whereas in the early years the Court CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  73 
demanded that a matter will be considered one of public importance if it 
affects not just one or a few individuals but the public at large, by mid 1990s 
the Court began to appreciate the inherent link between th e two conditions 
laid down in Art. 184(3). In Shahida Zahir Abbassi v. President of Pakistan  
(PLD 1996 SC 632) the Court observed that:  
 
Public Importance should be viewed with reference to 
freedom and liberties guaranteed under Constitution, their 
protect ion and invasion of these rights in a manner which raises 
a serious question regarding their enforcement, irrespective of 
the fact whether such infraction of right, freedom or liberty is 
alleged by an individual or a group of individuals.  
 
10.  Therefore a nd thereafter this Court has admitted petitions that 
raise matters concerning the interpretation of any of the Fundamental Rights 
or which may affect the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights of the public 
at large for such petitions by definition raise ma tters of public importance.  
 
11.  Furthermore, in Benazir Bhutto ’s case the Court observed that 
individual Fundamental Rights provisions could not be read in isolation. 
Instead the Court’s “ interpretive approach must receive inspiration from a 
the triad o f provisions which saturate and invigorate the entire Constitution, 
namely, the Objectives Resolution (Article 2 -A), the Fundamental Rights and 
the directive principles of State policy so as to achieve democracy, tolerance, 
equality and social justice acco rding to Islam. ”. In Muhammad Nawaz Sharif 
v. President of Pakistan  (PLD 1993 SC 473), this Court observed that Article 
17, the Fundamental Right provision arguably most relevant to the present 
petition, could not meaningfully be read individually and in i solation:  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  74 
 
While construing Article 17 … our approach should 
not be narrow and pedantic but elastic enough to 
march with the changing times and guided by the 
object for which it was embodied in the Constitution 
as a Fundamental Right. Its full import and m eaning 
must be gathered from other provisions such as the 
preamble of the Constitution, principles of policy and 
the Objectives Resolution, which shed luster on the 
whole Constitution.  
 
12.  In another landmark case, that of Shehla Zia v WAPDA  (PLD 
1994 SC  693), this Court pointed out that the Fundamental Rights provisions 
in Chapter I of Part II of the Constitution, including the Right to Life in Art. 
9, were animated by a collective spirit and in turn enlivened the entire 
Constitution, technical procedura l provisions et al . It was held that the 
Fundamental Rights provisions in Chapter I of Part II of the Constitution 
were to be thereafter read in the light of the Principles of Policy provided in 
Chapter II of Part II of the Constitution and in accordance w ith the 
aspirations for social justice and substantive equality incorporated therein.  
 
13.  In the light of the above discussion, it may be surmised that in 
certain classes of cases the threshold of meeting the test of “public 
importance with reference to  the enforcement of any of the Fundamental 
Rights” is invariably low.  In particular, three categories of cases can be 
highlighted in which this Court has found that the test of maintainability is 
rather easily met. These comprise cases that involve the in terpretation of 
constitutional provisions governing the structure, functioning and CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  75 
accountability of the institutions of state under the Constitution. In one such 
category lie cases that raise questions concerning the independent 
functioning, appointment a nd accountability of the superior judiciary.  In the 
seminal case of Al-Jehad Trust v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1996 SC 324) 
the Court observed that “ not only a practicing advocate but even a member of 
the public is entitled to see that the three limbs of the State, namely the 
Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary act not in violation of any 
provision of the Constitution, which affects the public at large .” While the 
above statement was made specifically with reference to the requirement of 
locus  standi  the same principle may be and was in fact extended to other 
conditions of maintainability in that and subsequent cases concerning the 
judicial branch. As the judiciary is the institution responsible for the 
interpretation and ultimately the enforce ment of Fundamental Rights under 
the Constitution, when questions of constitutional interpretation and 
enforcement regarding the independence, appointment and functioning of the 
judiciary are raised, these are by definition questions of public importance 
relating to the enforcement of Fundamental Rights. Notable recent examples 
are the Chief justice of Pakistan Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry v. President 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 61, PLD 2007 SC 578) and Nadeem Ahmed, 
Advocate v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010  SC 1165).  
 
14.  Another category of cases where the threshold requirement of 
“public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights” is relatively low are those involving the processes for 
the election, qualification, disqu alification of the members, and the legislative 
powers of the legislature. This Court has found that such cases meet the test 
of maintainability by their very nature as it is the legislative institutions and 
the legislators who are responsible for framing laws that both give meaning CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  76 
to and impose limitations on the citizens’ rights, including Fundamental 
Rights. It must be noted that a number of Fundamental Rights provisions in 
Chapter I of Part II of the Constitution are subject to restrictions imposed by 
law or otherwise enjoyable within parameters laid down by laws which are 
framed by the legislatures. Such Fundamental Rights provisions include, for 
example, the following: Art 9, Security of person – Art 10, Safeguards as to 
arrest and detention – Art 11( 4), Slavery, Forced labour etc. – Art 14, Dignity 
of man – Art 15, Freedom of movement – Art 16, Freedom of assembly – Art 
17, Freedom of association – Art 18, Freedom of trade – Art 19, Freedom of 
speech – Art 19A, Right to information – Art 20, Freedom o f religion – Art 22 
(3), Safeguards as to religious institutions – Art 23, Provision as to property – 
Art 24, Protection of property rights – Art 25, Equality of citizens – Art 25A, 
Right to education – Art 27, Safeguards against discrimination in services  – 
Art 28, Preservation of language, script and culture. Any case which raises a 
matter of constitutional interpretation and enforcement regarding the 
composition, processes and powers of the legislatures is thus by its very 
nature a case of public importa nce, as it affects the rights of the public at 
large, and also affects the Fundamental Rights of the citizens. This principle 
has been firmly established since Benazir Bhutto  and Nawaz Sharif  cases. As 
a result, in a number of cases, some of which shall be  dealt with in detail in 
the following paras, petitions concerning the qualifications and 
disqualifications of members of the National Assembly have been admitted by 
the Court. The Court has admitted petitions concerning qualifications and 
disqualification s to contest elections to Senate as well [ Javed Jabbar v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2003 SC 955)]. Most recently, in Workers Party 
v. Federation of Pakistan  (C.P. No. 87/2011) the entire process for the 
election of members of national and provincial asse mblies was reviewed by 
the Supreme Court in a petition brought under Art. 184(3).  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  77 
 
15.  A third category of cases which meet the maintainability test of 
Art. 184(3) by their very nature are those which pertain to appointments, 
promotions, dismissals, disci plining, transfers, powers and accountability of 
key executive officials, including but not limited to ministers, senior 
bureaucrats and heads of regulatory bodies and statutory corporations. The 
executive, especially its upper echelons, is the first and f oremost branch of 
the constitutional government which is entrusted with the execution of laws 
and framing and enforcement of policies which directly affect the citizens’ 
rights, including Fundamental Rights. Therefore, any petition which raises 
questions o f constitutional interpretation and enforcement affecting the 
structure, powers and procedures of the top executive, including the elected 
representatives heading ministries, career bureaucrats heading or overseeing 
important functions in the government de partments and top officials 
responsible for the functioning of regulatory bodies and statutory 
corporations by their very nature raise questions of public importance 
concerning Fundamental Rights. In this category fall cases such as 
Muhammad Yasin v. Feder ation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 132), In re Tariq 
Aziz-ud-Din (2010 SCMR 1301), and In the matter of: Alleged Corruption in 
Rental Power Plants, etc.  (2012 SCMR 773).  
 
16.  It does not mean, however, that a case falling under any of the 
above categories wil l be automatically admitted for hearing. There are other 
principles in light of which a petition falling under any of the above 
categories may be denied. The Supreme Court retains the discretion to deny 
petitioners who approach the Court after undue delay or with unclean hands. 
More significantly, since one of the key purposes of this supervisory 
jurisdiction of the Court under Art. 184(3) is to ensure the proper working CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  78 
and reform of lower judicial, quasi -judicial and administrative organs of the 
state, th is Court refuses to exercise its jurisdiction where other forums that 
are efficacious and suitable are available. Furthermore, if a petition involves 
the need for extensive fact -finding which may more appropriately be done by 
another forum this Court will refuse to entertain a petition under Art. 184(3) 
and will direct that it be adjudicated before that forum.  Even otherwise, 
Article 184 (3) and Article 199 of the Constitution regulate the Jurisdiction of 
the superior Court and do not oust it. The question as to whether a particular 
case involves the element of Public Importance is to be determined by this 
Court with reference to the facts and circumstances of the each case.  
 
17.  The present case – which raises questions regarding the 
interpretation and en forcement of Articles 62, 63, 69, 204 and 225 – clearly 
falls in the second category of cases outlined above as it deals with the 
qualifications and disqualifications of members of Parliament and the role of 
the Speaker of National Assembly and the Electio n Commission in the 
disqualification process. Furthermore, as the respondent was also the Prime 
Minister and the elected head of the executive, his case also falls in the third 
category of cases outlined above. Additionally, as this case also raises 
questi ons concerning the interpretation of Articles 63(1)(g) and 204 it also 
falls in the first category of cases outlined above which includes cases that 
deal with the role of the judiciary, the enforcement of its decisions and the 
effects of convictions for co ntempt. There is thus no doubt that this case by its 
very nature raises questions of public importance with reference to the 
enforcement of Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II of the 
Constitution of Pakistan. Additionally, as will be argue d in detail later, the 
Speaker’s ruling rendered the mechanism for adjudicating questions of 
disqualification under Art. 63(2) inefficacious. Therefore, the alternate forum CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  79 
became unavailable. The petition also did not raise any issues of fact -finding 
as the relevant facts were admitted and available on record.  
 
JUSTICIABILITY OF THE SPEAKER’S RULING  
18.  The respondent’s counsel raised certain arguments which if 
accepted would bar a review of the Speaker’s ruling under Art. 63(2) in the 
present case. Barri ster Aitzaz Ahsan, ASC, argued before us that the 
Speaker’s ruling pursuant to art 63(2) is non -justiciable before either the 
High Court in a petition brought under Art. 199, or before the Supreme Court 
in a petition brought under Art. 184(3). His contenti on was that Art. 63(2) 
provides the Speaker with an unfettered, exclusive and complete discretion to 
decide if “ any question arises whether a member of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) has become disqualified from being a member.”  He relied in 
particular on an  amendment to the said provision through the Constitution 
(Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, which inserted the phrase “ unless he 
decides that no such question has arisen” in that provision . The learned 
counsel was of the opinion that through this insertion  the Parliament 
intended the Speaker to have complete and exclusive powers to decide if any 
question of disqualification had arisen in a case. A related argument 
advanced by the Speaker’s counsel, Mr. Munir Piracha, ASC also merits 
consideration. The learn ed counsel referred to Art. 69 of the Constitution 
which provides that:  
 
 69. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament).  
 
(1) The validity of any proceedings in Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) 
shall not be called in question on the gr ound of any irregularity 
of procedure.  
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  80 
(2)  No officer or member of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) in whom 
powers are vested by or under the Constitution for regulating 
procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining order in 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parli ament), shall be subject to the jurisdiction 
of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.  
 
19.  Both these arguments are easily dismissed. Dealing with the 
argument concerning the interpretation of Art. 69 of the Constitution it must 
be pointed out that the Speaker’s ruling under Art. 63(2) does not fall under 
the category of decisions – “regulating procedure or the conduct of business, 
or for maintaining order” – which are held to be immune from review by this 
Court. In Fazalul Quader Ch audhury v. Shah Nawaz  (PLD 1966 SC 105) the 
issue pertained to the vacation of a member’s seat due to a purported 
resignation. The Court faced with the argument that Art. 111 of the 1962 
Constitution (counterpart to Art. 69 of the 1973 Constitution) ousted  its 
jurisdiction observed that:  
 
The question that falls for determination in the 
instant case relates more to the constitution of the 
Legislative Assembly itself, in so far as the point 
raised is whether, on a true interpretation of the 
provisions of the  Constitution, a sitting Member’s seat 
has become vacant or not. No matter relating to “the 
regulation of procedure, the conduct of business or the 
maintenance of order in the Assembly” has been 
brought under review. Article 111 is consequently not 
attract ed to the case and the Court’s jurisdiction is 
not ousted. Indeed, the High Court’s jurisdiction is 
eminently invokable under Article 98 to correct any 
error of law or any transgression of jurisdiction by any 
person or authority in circumstances akin to th ose 
prevailing in the instant case so long as the order to 
be passed is not repugnant to any other provision of 
the Constitution. No such danger exists here. The CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  81 
Constitution contains a scheme for the distribution of 
powers between various organs and autho rities of the 
State, and to the superior judiciary is allotted the very 
responsible though delicate duty of containing all 
other authorities within their jurisdiction, by 
investing the former with powers to intervene 
whenever any person exceeds his lawful authority. 
Legal issues of the character raised in this case could 
only be resolved in case of doubt or dispute, by the 
superior Courts exercising judicial review functions, 
assigned to them by the fundamental law of the land, 
viz., the Constitution which must override all other 
sub-constitutional law. The judges of the High Court 
and of this Court are under a solemn oath to 
“preserve, protect and defend the Constitution” and in 
the performance of this onerous duty they may be 
constrained to pass upon the a ctions of other 
authorities of the State within the limits set down in 
the Constitution not because they arrogate to 
themselves any claim of infallibility but because the 
Constitution itself charges them with this necessary 
function, in the interests of co llective security and 
stability. In this process, extreme and anxious care is 
invariably taken by the Judges to avoid encroachment 
on the constitutional preserves of other functionaries 
of the State and they are guided by the fullest and 
keenest sense of r esponsibility while adjudicating on 
such a matter. The action take by the Speaker was 
clearly not sacrosanct in this case and its legality was 
open to challenge under Article 98 of the Constitution.  
 
20.  Likewise, in Farzand Ali v. Province of West Pakis tan (PLD 
1970 SC 98), a case dealing with the potential disqualification of members of 
the assembly for being in the service of Pakistan,  this Court clearly noted 
that a question of disqualification is a:  
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  82 
[Question affecting the constitution of the House and, 
therefore, it is not a question which can possibly be 
barred from enquiry by the Courts under Article 111 of 
the Constitution. This is not a matter which pertains 
either to the regulation of the procedure of the House or 
the conduct of its business or  the maintenance of order 
in the Assembly or affecting any of its privilege. This is 
not a question, therefore, which … relates to the 
“internal proceedings” of an Assembly. Clause (1) of 
Article 111 bars the Courts only from enquiring into the 
validity of  “proceedings in an Assembly” in the formal 
sense and nothing more.    
 
21.  In subsequent cases the High Courts have consistently upheld 
the principles enunciated in Fazalul Quader Chaudhury  and Farzand Ali . In 
Muhammad Anwar Durrani v. Province of Balochi stan (PLD 1989 Quetta 
25), for example, a four member bench of the learned High Court of 
Balochistan dismissed a challenge to its jurisdiction under Art. 69(1) on the 
basis that the said provision only barred the court from adjudicating on any 
“irregularit y of procedure” and the court was fully entitled to interpret a 
constitutional provision. In Muhammad Naeem Akhtar v. Speaker, Sindh 
Assembly  (1992 CLC 2043) the Divisional Bench of the High Court of Sindh 
ruled that the action of the Speaker in accepting the resignation of certain 
members did not fall under either the definition of “ any proceedings” in Sindh 
Assembly under clause (1) or that of the exercise of power by the Speaker “for 
regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining ord er” 
under clause (2) of Art. 69.  
 
22.  A more recent case in which the Speaker of Senate’s decision 
was held to be subject to review is that of Asif Ali Zardari v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 1999 Karachi 54).  Mr. Zardari had been elected as a senator CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  83 
while he was interned while facing trial in two separate cases and was 
unable to attend the ceremony to take his oath as a Senator. Both the trial 
courts exhibited a willingness to temporarily release Mr. Zardari in order to 
enable him to take the oath if the  Chairman of Senate summoned him for 
this purpose. Rule 72 -A of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
the Senate, 1988, enabled the Chairman to do so. However, the Chairman of 
Senate refused to summon Mr. Zardari on the basis that since he had not 
taken oath he was not yet a senator and hence could not be thus summoned. 
When Mr. Zardari challenged the Chairman Senate’s decision before the 
High Court under Art. 199, the respondent sought immunity from 
proceedings pursuant to Art. 69. In dismissin g this objection the learned 
High Court of Sindh observed that:  
 
The argument, however, overlooks that it is not each 
and every act of such officer or member, as is 
embraced by Article 69(2), inclusive of the 
Chairman, that is protected. It is only an exer cise of 
power, which has a nexus with regulating of 
procedure or the conduct of business or maintaining 
of order in the parliament which is, thus, made 
immune, though subject to time honoured 
constraints. … Besides, it is often overlooked that 
the protecti on in clause (1) of Article 69 to which 
clause (2) also is subject, protects only “any 
irregularity of procedure” and obviously not a patent 
illegality. Summoning a member to a session of a 
House of Parliament does not appear to us to be a 
matter, which pe rtains to the regulation of 
procedure or conduct of business or maintenance of 
order in a House of Parliament and is, therefore, 
speaking strictly, beyond the ambit of immunity.    
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  84 
23.  Likewise, in Mining Industries of Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Deputy 
Spea ker (PLD 2006 Quetta 36) the Full Bench of the High Court found that 
“a question relating to the title of a person to be a Member of the House or to 
continue to sit therein is not a question pertaining to the internal proceedings 
of the house, but a questi on affecting the constitution of the House and not 
barred from inquiry by the Courts under Article 199 .”  
 
24.  The jurisprudence of the Supreme Court of India on this subject 
is particularly worth noting. In Raja Ram Pal v. Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha  
(2007 (3) SCC 184) the Supreme Court noted that the Tenth Schedule to the 
Indian Constitution expressly excluded the jurisdiction of the courts “ in 
respect of any matter connected with the disqualification of a Member of a 
House .” Nonetheless, the court observ ed that “ notwithstanding the existence 
of finality clauses, this Court exercised its jurisdiction of judicial review 
whenever and wherever a breach of fundamental rights was alleged. … [T]he 
Speaker (or the Chairman, as the case may be) deciding questions of 
disqualification … may be acting as authorities entrusted with such 
jurisdiction under the constitutional provisions. Yet, the manner in which 
they exercised the said jurisdiction is not wholly beyond the judicial 
scrutiny .” 
 
25.  These cases clearly es tablish that in performing her function 
under Art. 63(2) the Speaker is acting in an administrative or quasi -judicial 
capacity which does not relate to the internal processes, conduct of business 
or the maintenance of order in the House. Her actions are re viewable under 
the Writ jurisdiction before the High Court or under the Original Jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court like those of any other functionary performing 
administrative or quasi - judicial functions.  
 CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  85 
26.  As regards the argument that recent amendme nt to Art. 63(2) 
has vested untrammelled, subjective and exclusive powers in the Speaker to 
decide if a question concerning disqualification has arisen, while it is correct 
that the Speaker is not merely a post office, it is also evident that her role in 
the disqualification process is very limited. The only discretion that the 
Speaker has under Art. 63(2) is to decide whether “ any question arises 
whether a member of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) has become disqualified 
from being a member.”  In fact, a perus al of the relevant provision in the 
Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business  in the National Assembly, 2007,  
which was left unamended in the aftermath of the Constitution (Eighteenth 
Amendment) Act, 2010, indicates that in the National assembly’s interna l 
view the Speaker has a very limited role in the disqualification process. Rule 
45 in Chapter VI reads as follows:  
 
 45. Unseating, disqualification and death of a member. – 
 
(1). If any member is unseated as a result of an 
election dispute under Art 225 or becomes 
disqualified from being a member under Article 63, 
the Chief Election Commissioner shall 
immediately intimate that fact to the Speaker 
stating the date on which he has been unseated or, 
as the case may be, disqualified from being a 
member and on  receipt of such intimation the 
Speaker shall, as soon as may be, inform the 
Assembly that such member has been unseated or 
disqualified by the Chief Election Commissioner.  
 
27.  As regards the contention by learned Sr. ASC Aitzaz Ahsan that 
the word “any”  has to be given the widest possible meaning, we did not agree 
with this position for otherwise the Speaker’s discretion would have been 
read down to a virtual nullity as it would have been confined to determining CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  86 
if any question whatsoever  has arisen, whi ch test would have been satisfied 
in a much wider category of cases.  
 
28.  In response Mr. A. K. Dogar, ASC, counsel for the petitioner, 
pointed out a much more significant amendment brought in Art. 63(1)(g) by 
the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act,  2010. Through the said 
Amendment Act the requirement of a conviction by a court of competent 
jurisdiction  was added to sub -clause (g) of Art. 63(1). This amendment was 
evidently designed to raise the threshold of disqualification under the said 
sub-clause . Another important consequence of this change, however, has also 
been that the Speaker’s role under Art. 63(2) in the category of cases falling 
under Art. 63(1)(g) has been reduced only to determining as a matter of fact if 
such a conviction exists and wh ether 5 years have elapsed since the date of 
such a conviction. Once a court of competent jurisdiction has found a member 
of Parliament to be guilty of contempt “for propagating any opinion, or acting 
in any manner, prejudicial to the ideology of Pakistan,  or the sovereignty, 
integrity or security of Pakistan, or morality, or the maintenance of public 
order, or the integrity or independence of the judiciary of Pakistan, or which 
defames or brings into ridicule the judiciary  or the Armed Forces of Pakistan” 
the Speaker is bound to refer the matter to the Election Commission under 
Art. 63(2).  
 
THE DISQUALIFICATION PROCESS AND THE COURTS’ ROLE  
29.  Coming now to the crux of the matter, this Court has been asked 
to delineate the process and conditions for the d isqualification of a member of 
Parliament pursuant to Article 63(2) and (3), in particular under the ground 
of disqualification provided for in sub -clause (g) of clause (1) thereof. It has 
been argued by the respondent that the Articles 225 and 63(2) of th e CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  87 
constitution together provide the exclusive mechanism for the 
disqualification of a member of Parliament, meaning that there is no role for 
a superior court in this regard. Let me reproduce the above provisions for 
ease of understanding. Article 225 stat es: 
 
No election to a House or a Provincial Assembly shall 
be called in question except by an election petition 
presented to such tribunal and in such manner as 
may be determined by Act of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament).  
 
Article 63(2) states:  
 
If any questi on arises whether a member of Majlis -e-
Shoora (Parliament) has become disqualified from being 
a member, the Speaker or, as the case may be, the 
Chairman shall, unless he decides that no such 
question has arisen, refer the question to the Election 
Commissio n within thirty days and should he fail to do 
so within the aforesaid period it shall be deemed to 
have been referred to the Election Commission.  
 
Note that while Article 225 expressly provides for the adjudication of 
“election disputes” exclusively before  election tribunals and seeks to oust the 
jurisdiction of the courts, no such exclusionary language is found in Article 
63(2) and would have to be inferred as a matter of necessary intendment. 
Also note that while it is difficult to draw hard and fast dist inctions, Art 225 
appears to provide the mechanism for pre -election disqualification, i.e. 
disqualification that existed at the time of elections, along with other election 
disputes. Art 63(2), on the other hand, appears to provide the mechanism of 
dealing  with post -election disqualification, i.e. disqualification arising after 
the election of a person as a member of Parliament.  CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  88 
 
30.  The respondent’s argument appears to be that these provisions 
are animated by a common spirit and together provide for an e xclusive 
mechanism for dealing with disqualification questions. Thus, if a candidate or 
elected member of Parliament is alleged to suffer from a pre -election 
disqualification, for example if he/she had been convicted of contempt that 
fell within the parame ters of Art.63(1)(g) prior to the election, his/her case 
may be dealt with through an election petition but if a member is convicted of 
contempt after the elections then his/her case ought to be dealt with 
exclusively under Art. 63(2). However, as was poin ted out at the outset, Art. 
199(1)(b)(ii) and 184(3) entrust the courts with the jurisdiction to require a 
person “ holding or purporting to hold a public office to show under what 
authority of law he claims to hold that office.” This appears to provide the  
superior courts with an independent power to adjudicate upon questions of 
disqualifications of members of Parliament along with other persons holding 
or purporting to hold public office. As such, the two sets of provisions need to 
be reconciled with each other and read harmoniously together.  
 
31.  It must be stated upfront that the present case is the first 
instance in which the question of the proper scope and interpretation of Art. 
63(2) has been raised – it is a case of first impression and hence fit fo r 
adjudication under this Court’s Original Jurisdiction. However, there is a 
long line of cases in which this Court has found that the superior courts have 
an independent power of adjudicating questions of qualifications and 
disqualifications of members of  Parliament under Art. 199(1)()(ii) and 184(3) 
despite the seemingly exclusionary nature of Art. 225. The principles stated 
in these cases are by extension equally applicable to questions of 
disqualification falling under the purview of Art. 63(2) meaning thereby that CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  89 
the mechanism provided for in the said provision cannot be the exclusive 
manner of dealing with such questions and must be reconciled with the 
relevant jurisdictions of the superior courts. Following is a detailed analysis 
of the relevant prec edents of the Supreme Court.  
 
32.  An early clear statement of the relevant principles is found in 
the case of Farzand Ali v. Province of West Pakistan  (PLD 1970 SC 98). The 
Court rejected the argument that the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts was 
barred by Art. 171 of the 1962 Constitution (counterpart to Art. 225 of the 
1973 Constitution) and election petitions were the exclusive mechanism for 
dealing with questions of disqualification of members of Parliament on the 
following grounds:  
 
[T]his would b e allowing a person to continue to 
remain a member of an Assembly even though Article 103 of the 
Constitution says that he cannot. Secondly, because, the 
dispute raised after an election is not, a dispute relating to or 
arising in connection with an electi on but a dispute regarding 
the right of the person concerned from being a Member of an 
Assembly. An election dispute is a dispute raised by a voter or a 
defeated candidate in his individual capacity under the Statute. 
It determines the private rights of tw o persons to the same 
office but a proceeding for an information in the nature of quo 
warranto is invoked in the public interest. The latter seeks to 
determine the title to the office and not the validity of the 
election. These are two distinct and indepen dent remedies for 
enforcing independent rights, and the mere fact that the 
disqualification has been overlooked or what is worse, illegally CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  90 
condoned by the authorities who were responsible for properly 
scrutinizing a person’s right to be enrolled as a vote r or his 
right to be validly nominated for election would not prevent a 
person from challenging in the public interest his right to sit in 
the house even after his election if that disqualification is still 
continuing.  …  The introduction of election peti tions to test the 
validity of elections and statutory provisions for appeals, have 
no doubt reduced the demand for the remedy but have not 
excluded it altogether. It will still be available in all cases 
where the matter is, as in the case under considerati on, outside 
the scope of the statutory remedy.  
 
33.  In the aftermath of the promulgation of the 1973 Constitution of 
Pakistan the cases raising the question of disqualification process are very 
much in line with Farzand Ali  (above). There are, however, so me cases which 
incorporate obiter dicta  that support the respondent’s contention that the 
mechanisms provided in Art 225 and 63(2) either completely exclude or 
severely curtail the jurisdiction of the courts. In Election Commission of 
Pakistan v. Javaid Ha shmi  (PLD 1989 SC 396), for instance, made the 
following observations (at pages 416 and 417):  
 
In enacting Article 225 in the Constitution the purpose 
of Legislature is obvious that it did not contemplate two 
attacks on matters connected with the election 
proceedings; one while the election process is on and 
has not reached the stage of its completion by recourse 
to an extraordinary remedy provided by Article 199, 
and another when the election has reached the stage of 
completion by means of an election peti tion. ... It is, 
therefore, that the constitutional provision is expressed 
in the negative form to give exclusive jurisdiction to the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  91 
Tribunals appointed by the Election Commissioner and 
thus to exclude or oust the jurisdiction of all Courts in 
regard to e lection matters and to prescribe only one 
mode of challenge. The purpose is not far to seek as in 
all democratic Constitutions such as is ours the 
Legislatures have an important role to play, and, 
therefore, it is of utmost importance that the election 
should be held as scheduled without being unduly delay 
or prolonged by challenging matters at an intermediate 
stage.  
 
34.  It must be noted, however, that this case involved a challenge to 
the appointment of electoral staff through the Writ jurisdiction of t he High 
Court prior to the holding of elections and the majority of the Court was 
concerned specifically with the disruption to the electoral process. This is 
evident in the above quote in references to the intermediate stage at which 
the Writ petition was  brought and decided. Furthermore, the majority was 
also mindful of the extent of fact -finding required to determine the issues 
raised in the petition which could more appropriately be done in an election 
petition rather than in a petition brought under Ar t. 199. It must also be 
noted that in a forceful dissent Justice Nasim Hasan Shah observed (at p. 
429) that:  
 
[Any decision or order made by a functionary charged 
with the conduct of elections which is made in excess 
of his authority, being coram non judic e, would still be 
subject to the control of the High Court in exercise of 
its jurisdiction under Article 199. The legislature 
expects every statutory authority to act within the 
limits of the law and if any such authority steps out of 
these limits or refus es to function as the law requires 
him to function and he proceeds to make an order not 
within the limits of the law; such an order can be CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  92 
declared under Article 199 of the Constitution as 
without lawful authority and to be of no legal effect.   
 
35.  In Sabir Shah v. Saad Muhammad Khan  (PLD 1995 SC 66) 
several obiter dicta  are found in the majority opinions that appear to suggest 
that under Art. 63(2) the Election Commission is the exclusive forum for 
determining questions of disqualification. However, the se dicta  are of little 
persuasive value as that case dealt with the vires  of a statutory provision, 
namely Section 8 -B of the Political Parties Act, 1962, and not with the 
superior courts independent jurisdictions under the Constitution. The court 
found th at Section 8 -B of the Political Parties Act, 1962 was invalid to the 
extent that it provided a forum other than the Election Commission in the 
form of an appeal to the Supreme Court. The majority of the Court noted that 
while Art 63(1), as it then stood, e nabled the legislature to add to the grounds 
of disqualification, Art 63(2) provided exclusively for the Election 
Commission as the forum at which these grounds could be adjudicated. There 
is no doubt even at present that the Election Commission is the onl y forum 
mentioned in Art 63(2). The question here is whether it is exclusive forum 
provided for in the entire constitutional scheme? An additional basis for 
distinguishing the above case is that the particular ground of disqualification 
at issue was defect ion or withdrawal from a political party which, in the 
aftermath of the Legal Framework Order, 2002 (Chief Executive's Order No. 
24 of 2002)  and the Constitution  (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, is dealt 
with separately under Art. 63 -A of the Constitution. In  Aftab Shahban 
Mirani v. President of Pakistan  (1998 SCMR 1863) also it was stated obiter 
that the mechanism provided in Art. 63(2) is the exclusive process for 
determining questions of disqualification. However, this statement was also 
obiter dictum  and of little persuasive value as this was made in petition for 
leave to appeal which was dismissed on grounds of limitation. Further, the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  93 
dictum had been made in  exclusive reliance on the dicta  to this effect in Sabir 
Shah  case.  
 
36.  In sharp contrast with the above cases, in a number of decisions 
the Supreme Court has enunciated principles which support the proposition 
that the superior courts have an independe nt jurisdiction to deal with 
questions of disqualification of members of Parliament. In Niaz Ahmed v. 
Province of Sind  (PLD 1977 SC 604, 622) Farzand Ali  was affirmed and it 
was clarified that in the “ absence of adequate remedy being available ” the 
writ in  the nature of quo warranto  remains competent despite any ouster 
clauses. This position is very much in line with the general “ principle 
consistently affirmed by all Court that provisions seeking to oust the 
jurisdiction of superior Court are to be constru ed strictly with a pronounced 
leaning against ouster. ” See State v. Zia ur Rahman  (PLD 1973 SC 49), also 
quoted in Federation of Pakistan v. Ghulam Mustafa Khar  (PLD 1989 SC 30, 
44). More recently, in the Short Order in Federation of Pakistan v. 
Muhammad N awaz Sharif  (PLD 2009 SC 644), the Court held that:  
 
The Article 225] places a bar to challenge an election 
dispute except through an election petition under the 
law i.e. the Representation of People Act, 1976. In 
exceptional circumstances, however, the q ualification or 
disqualification of a candidate can be challenged under 
Article 199 of the Constitution provided the order 
passed during the election process is patently illegal , 
the law has not provided any remedy either before or 
after the election ; and the alleged disqualification is 
floating on record requiring no probe and enquiry.  
 
37.  In the detailed judgment in Federation of Pakistan v. 
Muhammad Nawaz Sharif  (PLD 2009 SC 644) my leaned brother Jillani J. CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  94 
analysed the extant case law masterfully and  delineated the relative spheres 
of the two remedies quite clearly, re -affirming the above -stated principles. 
Likewise, in Muhammad Hayat Khan v. Imtiaz Ahmad Khan  (PLD 2008 SC 
85, 103 -104), the Court stated that:  
 
There could not be second opinion that d ispute relating to 
corrupt or illegal practices or illegal acts, alleged to have 
been committed etc. during the polling, cannot be 
adjudicated upon by the High Court or by this Court in 
exercise of Constitution Jurisdiction because these 
questions require to be established on the basis of 
evidence and this Court would never encourage the 
settlement of such dispute by invoking its Constitutional 
Jurisdiction, except in those cases where there is 
undisputed facts and nothing is required to be proved. 
[Therefo re, we are of the opinion that all those disputed 
questions of facts , arising out of pre -election or post -
election disputes, should be determined by the Tribunal 
and where there is no dispute of such like nature, the 
jurisdiction of the High Court can be i nvoked.  
 
38.  It is evident from the above cases that the superior courts have 
an independent jurisdiction to examine questions of disqualification under 
Art. 199 or 184(3), as the case may be. However, the access to the court’s 
jurisdiction is conditiona l upon the meeting of the requirements of 
maintainability mentioned in the first part of this note. In particular, the 
Court will not exercise its powers if a suitable and equally efficacious remedy 
is available through another competent forum, such as an election tribunal or 
through a reference to the Election Commission under Art. 63(2) and (3). 
Even in the case of Intesar Hussain Bhatti v. Vice -Chancellor  (PLD 2008 SC 
313, 319) it was held that the writs in the nature of quo warranto  were 
available despi te the presence of Art. 225 and 63(2) when the forum having CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  95 
jurisdiction “ has failed to exercise the same or it is improperly exercised .” 
Also, see Nayyar Hussain Bukhari v.District Returning Officer, NA -49 (PLD 
2008 SC 487). This Court normally refuses to  exercise its Original 
jurisdiction in such matters if the relevant facts are not admitted or easily 
determinable, requiring an extensive fact -finding probe. For a recent example 
case where the petition was dismissed for failure to meet the above -stated 
conditions one can see Aftab Ahmad Khan v. Muhammad Ajmal  (PLD 2010 
SC 1076), where it was held that the superior courts will avoid exercising 
their writ jurisdiction in such cases.  
 
39.  Having firmly established the basis, and the conditions, for the 
exerc ise of the writ jurisdictions of the superior courts in matters of 
disqualification of members of Parliament let us proceed to a delineation of 
the appropriate process, especially in cases falling under Art. 63(1)(g). In 
Ayatullah Dr. Imran Liaquat Hussain  v. Election Commission of Pakistan  
(PLD 2005 SC 52) a bench of this Court provided an accurate summary of the 
disqualification process. The Court dismissed the petition on the grounds 
that the petitioner, claiming that certain members of Parliament and th e 
provincial assembly of Sindh, had not challenged the eligibility of those 
members of the legislature at the time of the elections and had failed to 
provide any justification for his failure. Furthermore, the Court observed (at 
pp. 59 -60) that if a questi on of disqualification arises subsequent to the 
election then the procedure laid down Art. 63(2) must be followed. However, 
the Speaker or the Chairman of Senate’s “ function under Article 63(2) is 
clearly of a very limited character. He will no doubt apply  his mind to the 
very point whether a question had or had not arisen. In fact, in a proper case, 
he might be directed by the superior courts to make a reference where he had 
refused to do so, if a petition was brought  for that relief .” CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  96 
 
40.  Therefore, it is clear that if an issue of pre -election 
disqualification arises at the time of the election, the petitioner must first 
avail the remedies provided under the relevant statute including an election 
petition. If, however, for reasons beyond the petitioner’s  control the issue 
cannot be raised before the relevant forums provided for in the election laws 
– for example, the basis of disqualification was not known, or an election 
petition is available to candidates only and the petitioner does not fall in that 
category, or the petition has been dismissed by the election tribunal – then 
the petitioner can approach the High Courts under Art 199(1)(b)(ii). The 
petitioner may also approach the Supreme Court directly under Art. 184(3) if 
the petition raises questions o f constitutional interpretation and meets the 
maintainability conditions. Such petitions will not be ousted by Art. 225. If a 
question of post -election disqualification arises under any sub -clause of Art. 
63(1) the matter must be referred to the Speaker or  Chairman of the House of 
Parliament under Art. 63(2). As explained earlier, the Speaker or the 
Chairman has a limited role to perform, i.e. determine if any question of 
disqualification has arisen or not. If the Speaker or the Chairman exercises 
his/her d iscretion under Art 63(2) improperly then his/her decision is 
reviewable by the superior courts as established earlier.  
 
41.  It must, however, be noted that there is an important difference 
between disqualification under sub -clauses (a), (g) and (h) of Ar t 63(1) and 
the other sub -clauses thereunder. Sub -clauses (a), (g) and (h) provide for 
disqualification pursuant to convictions or findings by courts. In such cases 
the Speaker’s or the Chairman’s role is even further curtailed to determining 
whether such convictions exist. It will be interesting to note the history of 
Art. 63(1)(g). Art. 63(1) in its original form at the time of the framing of the CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  97 
1973 Constitution of Pakistan only included sub -clauses (a) to (e). Sub -clause 
(g) was added to this provision  vide a Presidential Order (P.O. 14 of 1985) 
dated 2nd March, 1985. The language of the newly introduced sub -clause (g) 
was as follows:  
 
(g) he is propagating any opinion, or acting in any 
manner, prejudicial to the ideology of Pakistan, or the 
sovereignty , integrity or security of Pakistan, or 
morality, or the maintenance of public order, or the 
integrity or independence of the judiciary of Pakistan, 
or which defames or brings into ridicule the judiciary or 
the Armed Forces of Pakistan;  
 
42.  It has been a rgued by many critics that this change in the 
constitutional provision was brought by a military dictator, along with other 
heads of disqualification under art. 63(1), in order to pressurize elected 
politicians and was thus worded very broadly. In the Cons titution 
(Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, the elected Parliament of Pakistan 
however retained and thus adopted Art. 63(1)(g) although with one 
significant change. The Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, 
added the requirement of a conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction 
implicating any of the grounds stated in sub -clause (g). Furthermore, the 
grounds have been reduced to exclude “ morality, or the maintenance of public 
order.” The provision presently reads as follows:  
 
(g) he has been conv icted by a court of competent 
jurisdiction  for propagating any opinion, or acting 
in any manner, prejudicial to the ideology of 
Pakistan, or the sovereignty, integrity or security 
of Pakistan, or the integrity or independence of the 
judiciary of Pakistan, or which defames or brings 
into ridicule the judiciary or the Armed Forces of CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  98 
Pakistan, unless a period of five years has lapsed 
since his release ; 
 
43.  Thus, prior to the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 
2010, the Speaker or the Chairman had rela tively greater discretion in 
determining whether any question of disqualification on the basis provided 
for in Art. 63(1)(g) had arisen. However, by inserting the requirement of a 
conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction the Constitution (Eighteenth  
Amendment) Act, 2010, fundamentally altered the nature of that sub -clause. 
No doubt the intent of the amendment was to raise the threshold for 
disqualification under the said provision.  
 
44.  However, a necessary consequence of that change is that once a  
court of competent jurisdiction finds a member of Parliament guilty of an 
offence of the nature mentioned in Art. 63(1)(g) the Speaker’s role is greatly 
reduced to merely establishing whether such a conviction exists.  
 
45.  In the present case the 7 -membe r bench of this Court followed 
the above process and despite finding the respondent guilty of contempt of 
court “ acting in any manner”  which brought “ into ridicule the judiciary” it did 
not disqualify him from being a member of the Parliament on the spot. 
Instead, the 7 -member bench of this Court left the question of disqualification 
to be determined through the process laid down in Art. 63(2). The Speaker, by 
claiming much greater authority than she possesses in this regard and by 
misusing her limited powe rs, rendered that mechanism inefficacious. In these 
circumstances a petition under Art. 184(3) became competent in order to 
review the Speaker’s decision. Having determined that the Speaker’s decision 
not to refer the question of disqualification to the El ection Commission was 
flawed because the conviction by the 7 -member bench of this Court clearly CONST. P. 40/2012 etc.  99 
met the conditions laid down in Art 63(1)(g) we are left with no choice but to 
direct the respondent’s disqualification to the Election Commission.  
 
 These are the reasons of our short order dated 19.06.2012.  
 
          
              Judge  
 
 