IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
         (ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
 
 PRESENT:  
 MR. JUSTICE NASIR -UL-MULK  
 MR. JUSTICE ASIF SAEED KHAN KHOSA  
 MR. JUSTICE SARMAD JALAL OSMANY  
 MR. JUSTICE EJAZ AFZAL KHAN  
 MR. JUSTICE IJAZ AHMED CHAUDHRY  
 MR. JUSTICE GULZAR AHMED  
 MR. JUSTICE MUHAMMAD ATHER SAEED  
 
 
 
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 06 OF 2012  
    IN  
SUO      MOT U      CASE      NO.  04    OF    2010  
(Contempt proceedings against Syed Yousaf Raza 
Gillani, the Prime Minister of Pakistan regarding 
non-compliance of this Court’s order dated 
16.12.2009) 
  
 
 
For the Prosecution:  Mr. Irfan Qadir, Prosecutor/  
Attorney -General for Pakistan  
 
 
For the Respondent:  Barrister Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr.  ASC, 
assisted by  Barrister Gohar Ali Khan, 
Mr. Shaukat Ali Javid, Mr. Shahid 
Saeed, Mr. Kashif Malik, Mr. Bilal 
Khokar, Ms. Zunaira Fayyaz, Ms. 
Ayesha Malik, Mr. Fahad Usman, Mr. 
Tayyab Jan, Ch. Babras, Advocates 
with Mr. M. S. Khattak, AOR  
 
 
Dates of Hearing:  19.01.2012, 01.02.2012, 02.02.2012, 
13.02.2012, 22.02.2012, 28.02.2012, 
07.03.2012, 08.03.2012, 21.03.2012, 
22.03.2012, 26.03.2012, 27.03.2012, 
12.04.2012, 13.04.2012, 16.04.2012, 
17.04.2012, 18.04.2012, 19.04.2012, 
20.04.2012,    24.04.2012 and   
26.04.2012  
 Crl.O.P.6/12  2 
JUDGMENT  
  NASIR -UL-MULK, J .— These    proceedings for 
contempt of Court initiated against Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, 
the Prime Minister of Pakistan , emanate from non -compliance 
with the direction s given by this Court to the Federal 
Government in Paragraph s No.177 and 178  in the case of 
DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN  v FEDERATION OF PAKISTA N ( PLD 
2010 SC 265  ) for the revival of the request, withdrawn by 
the former Attorney -General, Malik Muhammad Qayyum, to 
be a civil party in a money laundering case in Switzerland.  To 
understand the context in which the said direction s were 
given by this Court , it is inevitable to state some material 
facts.  
2.  It was in the fall of  1997 when  the then Attorney -
General for Pakistan wrote  a letter to the Swiss Authorities 
investigating a money laundering case involving commissions 
and kickbacks paid by two S wiss Companies, COTECNA & 
SGS, in contracts granted to them by the Government of 
Pakistan . The Attorney -General requested that the 
Government of Pakistan be made a civil party in those 
proceedings  so that  in the event  the payments of commissions 
and kickba cks were proved the amount be returned to the 
Government of Pakistan being its rightful claimant , with a 
further request for mutual legal assistance for the 
prosecution of such cases pending in the Courts in Pakistan. 
The request was granted. It is not necessary for the purpose Crl.O.P.6/12  3 
of the present proceedings to give further details of the 
proceedings held in Switzerland. Of relevance is the fact that 
the proceedings were still pending when on 15.10.2007 the 
President of Pakistan promulgated an Ordinance called  “The 
National Reconciliation Ordinance 2007 ” (now commonly 
referred to as “the NRO”). The stated purpose  for the 
promulgation of the Ordinance was “……to promote national 
reconciliation, foster mutual trust and confidence amongst 
holders of public office an d remove the vestiges of political 
vendetta and victimization, to make the election process more 
transparent and to amend certain laws for that purpose and 
for matters connected therewith and ancillary thereto;”  Broadly 
speaking , the Ordinance was designed  to close investigation 
and prosecution of certain categories of cases pending before 
any of the investigation agencies and the Courts.  Of 
significance  for the present proceedings  is Section 7 of the 
Ordinance which reads: - 
“7. Insertion of new section, Or dinance 
XVIII of 1999. - In the said Ordinance, after 
section 33E, the following new section shall 
be inserted, namely: - 
“33-F. Withdrawal and termination of 
prolonged pending proceedings 
initiated prior to 12th October, 1999 .—
(1) Notwithstanding any thing 
contained in this Ordinance or any 
other law for the time being in force, 
proceedings under investigation or 
pending in any court including a High Crl.O.P.6/12  4 
Court and the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan initiated by or on a reference 
by the National Accountability Bureau 
inside or outside Pakistan including 
proceedings continued under section 
33, requests for mutual assistance 
and civil party to proceedings 
initiated by the Federal Government 
before  the 12th day of October, 1999 
against holders of public office stand 
withd rawn and terminated with 
immediate effect and such holders of 
public office shall also not be liable to 
any action in future as well under this 
Ordinance for acts having been done in 
good faith before the said date:  
   Provided………………………………….”  
3.  The Ordin ance and its various provisions were 
immediately challenged directly before this Court in a number 
of petitions  filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution . 
While those cases  were pending, the then Attorney -General 
for Pakistan, Malik Muhammad Qayyum, i n the light of the 
promulgation of NRO, addressed a letter on 09.03.2008 to the 
Attorney -General of Geneva for withdrawal of proceedings. 
The letter has been reproduced in Para graph No.  124 of the 
judgment in DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN’ s case and because of 
its relevance  to the present proceedings, its contents are 
restated :- 
  “Dear Mr. Attorney -General,  
We write you further to our meeting of 7 April 
2008.  Crl.O.P.6/12  5 
We hereby confirm that the Republic of 
Pakistan having not suffered any damage 
withdraws in capacity of civi l party not only 
against Mr. Asif Ali Zardari  but also 
against Mr. Jens Schlegelmich and any 
other third party concerned by these 
proceedings.  This withdrawal is effective for 
the above captioned proceedings as well as 
for any other proceedings possibly in itiated in 
Switzerland (national or further to 
international judicial assistance). The 
Republic of Pakistan thus confirms entirely 
the withdrawal of its request of judicial 
assistance and its complements, object of the 
proceedings CP/289/97.  
Request for mu tual assistance made by the 
then government, which already stand 
withdrawn, was politically motivated. 
Contract was awarded to reshipment 
inspection companies in good faith in 
discharge of official functions by the State 
functionaries in accordance with ru les.  
The Republic of Pakistan further confirms 
having withdrawn itself as a damaged party 
and apologizes for the inconvenience caused 
to the Swiss authorities.   
Your sincerely,  
Sd/- 
Malik Muhammad Qayyum  
Attorney -General for 
Pakistan .” 
 
4.  On 16.12.2009 this Court in the case of DR. 
MOBASHIR HASSAN  (ibid)  declared the NRO void ab initio  as Crl.O.P.6/12  6 
a whole, particularly , Sections 2, 6 and 7 thereof , being ultra 
vires and violative of various Articles of the Constitution . It 
further declared  that the Ordinance shal l be deemed non est  
from the day of its promulgation  and “as a consequence 
whereof all steps taken, actions suffered, and all orders 
passed by whatever authority, any orders passed by the 
Courts of law including the orders of discharge and acquittals 
recor ded in favour of accused persons, are also declared never 
to have existed in the eyes of law and resultantly of no legal 
effect ”. It was further held that all proceedings terminated in 
view of Section 7  of NRO , shall stand revived and relegated to 
the stat us of pre -5th of October, 2007 position. As to the letter 
written by Malik Muhammad Qayyum, the then Attorney -
General for Pakistan, dated 09.03.2008 to the Attorney -
General of Geneva, reproduced  above, it was declared  in 
Paragraph No.  177 of the judgment :  
“Since in view of the provisions of Article 
100(3) of the Constitution, the Attorney 
General for Pakistan could not have suffered 
any act not assigned to him by the Federal 
Government or not authorized by the said 
Government and since no order or authorit y 
had been shown to us under which the then 
learned Attorney General namely Malik 
Muhammad Qayyum had been authorized to 
address communications to various 
authorities/courts in foreign counties 
including Switzerland, therefore, such 
communications addresse d by him Crl.O.P.6/12  7 
withdrawing the requests for mutual legal 
assistance or abandoning the status of a civil 
party in such proceedings abroad or which 
had culminated in the termination of 
proceedings before the competent fora in 
Switzerland or other countries or in 
abandonment of the claim of the Government 
of Pakistan to huge amounts of allegedly 
laundered moneys, are declared to be 
unauthorized, unconstitutional and illegal 
acts of the said Makik Muhammad Qayyum. ”  
5.  As a consequence of the above declaration that 
Malik Muhammad Qayyum was never authorized to send 
communication to the Attorney -General of Geneva, the Court 
gave the following direction in Para graph No.  178 of the 
judgment: -  
“Since the NRO, 2007 stands declared void 
ab initio, therefore, any actions t aken or 
suffered under the said law are also non est 
in law and since the communications 
addressed by Malik Muhammad Qayyum to 
various foreign fora/authorities/courts 
withdrawing the requests earlier made by the 
Government of Pakistan for mutual legal 
assistance; surrendering the status of civil 
party; abandoning the claims to the allegedly 
laundered moneys lying in foreign countries 
including Switzerland, have also been 
declared by us to be unauthorized and illegal 
communications and consequently of no leg al 
effect, therefore, it is declared that the initial 
requests for mutual legal assistance; securing 
the status of civil party and the claim lodged Crl.O.P.6/12  8 
to the allegedly laundered moneys lying in 
foreign countries including Switzerland are 
declared never to hav e been withdrawn. 
Therefore, the Federal Government and 
other concerned authorities are ordered 
to take immediate steps to seek revival of 
the said requests, claims and status.”           
6.  Despite the above clear declaration and categorical 
direction gi ven by this Court on 16.12.2009, the Federal 
Government took no step s, whatsoever , towards 
implementation of the order. It was not until 29.3.2010 that a 
Bench of this Court, headed by the Hon’ble Chie f Justice, 
while taking suo mot u notice o f a news item regarding 
promotion of one Ahmed Riaz Sheikh an NRO beneficiary as 
head of the Economic Crime Wing of the Federal Investigation 
Agency (FIA)  notice was taken of non -implementation of the 
various directions given in DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN’s  case. 
The Court, th erefore, in strong terms directed compliance 
regarding steps for  revival of the cases, including those 
outside the country.  
7.  To understand why the present action was initiated 
against the Prime Minister of the country , it is necessary  to 
mention some of  the many orders passed  by this Court for the 
implementation of the said direction. The matter  was again 
taken up by the Court on 30.03.2010  when the then Secretary, 
Ministry of Law, Justice & Parliamentary Affairs, Mr. Justice 
(Retd) Aqil Mirza, was summo ned to the Court and questioned Crl.O.P.6/12  9 
about the delay in the implementation. He sought time to 
furnish reply  and  on 31.03.2010 reports were submitted on 
behalf of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Parliamentary Affairs  
as well as the National Accountability Bureau (NAB). Copies of 
the reports were handed over to Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, the 
then Attorney -General for Pakistan, who sought  time to go 
through the same and “appraise the Court with regard to the 
compliance of the judgment in letter and spirit ”. On 01.04.20 10 
the Court was informed that a letter was written to the Swiss 
Authorities by the Chairman NAB. The Court, however, was of 
the view that a request for being civil/damaged party to the 
proceedings in Switzerland shall be made by the Government 
of Pakistan , keeping in view the relations in between the 
sovereign States and by following the procedure adopted 
earlier . The direction was given in the morning and the matter 
was adjourned  to the afternoon of the same day for a positive 
response. However, when the Attorney -General appeared at 
1.30 p.m., he revealed that “he did his best to have access to 
the record of the case lying with Ministry of Law , Justice & 
Parliamentary Affairs, but Mr. Babar Awan, Minister of the 
Ministry , was not allowing him to lay hand s on the same for one 
or the other reason.”  Upon this statement, the Court 
summoned the Secretary,  Minist ry for Law, Justice & 
Parliamentary Affairs, the same day, who informed the Court 
that he had received three sealed envelopes from the Foreign 
Office, on e addressed to him , the other two containing some Crl.O.P.6/12  10 
material for the Attorney -General , Switzerland and another 
functionary. In the letter addressed to him opinion was sought 
regarding sending of the envelopes through D iplomatic Bag s to 
Switzerland. That he k ept the two envelopes at home in safe 
custody and was yet to form an opinion on the matter. Upon 
this disclosure, the Court observed :- 
“….we have noted with great pain that, 
prima facie, the functionaries of the Law 
Department are not really interested to 
implement the judgment of this Court, 
because no sooner Secretary, Law received 
directions of this Court, they should have 
contacted the Attorney General as well as to 
Chairman, NAB to process the cases, during 
course of the day, when now it is already 
4.00 pm rather he had left his house for office 
and kept those envelops in safe custody over 
there. Be that as it may, we direct the 
Secretary, Law to start process now and 
complete the same according to law and the 
diplomatic relations, following the procedu re, 
which was followed when the reference was 
filed in 1997 and submit report in this behalf. 
In the meantime, learned Attorney General 
and Mr. Abid Zubair i, ASC shall remain in 
contact with him and provide whatever 
assistance they can extend to him.”  
8.  The Court ordered the Attorney -General for 
Pakistan and Mr. Abid Zubair i, learned ASC for the NAB , to 
submit report to the Registrar of th e Court to the effect “that 
request for opening of Swiss cases has been forwarded Crl.O.P.6/12  11 
accordingly and no lacuna is left th erein; ” No such report was 
ever submitted. Rather , Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan resigned 
from the office of the  Attorney -General  for Pakistan . 
9.  The matter of implementation of the judgment , 
thereafter , was placed before another Bench of this Court on 
29.4.201 0. On the said date , the Deputy Attorney -General 
appeared on behalf of the Federation, who knew next to 
nothing of the case. After a few adjournments  when  no 
progress was in sight , the Secretary , Ministr y of Law, Justice 
& Parliamentary Affairs, w as summon ed by the Court for 
13.05.2010. By then, Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, had taken over as 
Attorney -General for Pakistan, who informed the Court that 
the Secretary  was indisposed at Lahore. Instead of turning up 
in Court the following day , he sent an application by fax from 
Lahore that he could not attend the Court as he had 
undergone a surgery and that he has resigned from his office . 
After Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, this was the second casualty 
of the implementation process . 
10.  In view of th e above  situation when no clear 
statement on behalf of the Government was forthcoming, the 
Court felt constrained to call the Minister for Law, Justice & 
Parliamentary Affairs. The then Minister, Mr. Babar Awan, 
appeared on 25.05.2010 and after making detailed 
representation, infor med the Court that a summary has 
already been prepared and presented to the Prime Minister of 
Pakistan regarding implementation of the judgment relating to , Crl.O.P.6/12  12 
inter-alia, revival of the Government’s request to the Swiss 
Authorities. He was directed to file c oncise statement with the 
observation  that  it was “clarified that the concise statement 
shall specify expressly the steps taken for the implementation of 
the afore -mentioned judgment.”  
11.  With the concise statement filed on behalf of the 
Federal Governme nt, reference was made to the observation 
given  by the Prime Minister on the Summary presented to him 
by the Ministry of Law, Justice & Parliamentary Affairs,  and 
the same was reproduced in the order of this Court dated 
10.06.2010 “The Prime Minister has o bserved that Ministry of 
Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs has not given any 
specific views in the matter, as per Rules of Business, 1973. 
However, under the circumstances, the prime Minister has been 
pleased to direct that the Law Ministry may contin ue with the 
stance taken in this case.”  Since the observation of the Prime 
Minister indicated that there was no specific view presented by 
the Ministry of Law, Justice & Parliamentary Affairs, we, 
therefore, directed that the very Summary , on which the 
observations were made , be placed before the Court. Upon 
perusal of the Summary on 11.06.2010 the Court found that 
the proposal made to the Prime Minister was not for the 
implementation of Para graph No.  178 of the judgment in DR. 
MOBASHIR HASSAN’s  case but ra ther for its non -
implementation. The Court, therefore, ordered that the said 
Summary be totally ignored and a fresh  one be submitted by Crl.O.P.6/12  13 
the next date of hearing in terms of Para graph No.  178. We 
were, however, disappointed when on the following day , we 
were informed by the Attorney -General for Pakistan that no 
summary at all was presented to the Prime Minister pursuant 
to our order s. There after, these implementation proceedings 
were suspended by a larger Bench of this Court, hearing a 
petition filed by the Federation for review of the judgment in 
DR. M UBASHIR HASSAN’s  case.  
12.  The review petition was dismissed on 25.11.2011 
by a short order, detailed judgment whereof is reported as 
FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN  v. DR. M UBASHIR HASSAN  (PLD 
2012 SC 106). The groun ds taken up in the review petition 
are reproduced in the review judgment, two of which , Nos. XII 
and XIV, relate to Para graph No.  178 of the judgment under 
review. In Para graph No.  11 of the review judgment, reference 
was made to the submissions made on be half of the Federal 
Government , including those relating to the said Para graph 
No. 178. The argument , regarding the said Paragraph , was 
taken note of in Para graph No.  14 of the review judgment and 
rejected. The short order in the review petition has been 
reproduced in the final judgment , which concludes with the 
direction that “the concerned authorities are hereby directed to 
comply with the judgment dated 16.12.2009 in letter and spirit 
without any further delay .” 
13.  After dismissal of the review petitio n, 
implementation of the judgment in DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN’ s Crl.O.P.6/12  14 
case (ibid) , with particular reference to Para graph No.  178 
thereof, was placed before a five-member Bench . The matter 
came up for hearing on 3.1.2012  and  when the Attorney -
General for Pakistan was  asked as to whether any summary 
was submitted to the Prime Minister of Pakistan pursuant to 
the earlier order of 5.7.2010, the Attorney -General expressed 
his ignorance of any such development and , thus, the case 
was adjourned to 10.1.2012. When no positiv e response came 
from the Attorney -General for Pakistan, the Court passed a 
twelve  pages order recapitulating the history of the 
implementation process and mentioned six options, besides 
others, which the Court could  exercise for implementation of 
the judgm ent. The one that was eventually adopted in the first 
instance culminating in the present contempt proceedings was 
Option No.2 which states: - 
“Proceedings may be initiated against the 
Chief Executive of the Federation, i.e. the 
Prime Minister, the Federal Minister for Law, 
Justice and Human Rights Division and the 
Federal Secretary Law, Justice and Human 
Rights Division for committing contempt of this 
Court by persistently, obstinately and 
contumaciously resisting, failing or refusing to 
implement or execut e in full the directions 
issued by this Court in its judgment delivered 
in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (supra)..”  
14.  The Attorney -General for Pakistan was put on 
notice “….to address arguments before this Court on the 
following date of hearing, afte r obtaining instructions from those Crl.O.P.6/12  15 
concerned, as to why any of the mentioned options may not be 
exercised by the Court ”. It further issued a general notice that  
“any person likely to be affected by exercise of the above 
mentioned options may appear before  this Court on the next 
date of hearing and address this Court in the relevant regard so 
that he may not be able to complain in future that he had been 
condemned by this Court unheard. ” The Attorney -General was 
further directed to inform all such persons m entioned in the 
order about its passage and of the next date of hearing. On the 
suggestion of the five-member Bench the Hon’ble Chief Justice 
enlarged its strength to seven . 
15.  On 16.1.2012, the Attorney -General for Pakistan 
appeared and informed the Cou rt that the order of 10.1.2012 
was communicated to all the relevant persons and the 
Authorities mentioned therein, includ ing the President of 
Pakistan and the Prime Minister , but he had not received any 
instruction to be communicated to the Court. It was i n these 
circumstances that the Court felt that it was left with no 
option but to issue show cause notice to the Respondent, the 
Prime Minister of Pakistan , under Article 204 of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan read with 
Section 17 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance  (V of 2003 ), as 
to why he shall not be held in contempt of this Court.  The 
Respondent (Prime Minister of Pakistan) appear ed and 
personally addressed the Court generally, defended his 
inaction by referring to the immunity of the President of Crl.O.P.6/12  16 
Pakistan and having acted on the advice tendered to him in 
the ordinary course of business. After granting preliminary 
hearing to the Respondent in terms of Section 17(3) of the 
Ordinance  and hearing his learned counsel Barrister Aitzaz 
Ahsa n, Sr. ASC , we decided that it was in the interest of 
justice to proceed against the Respondent in the contempt 
proceedings and framed the following charge: - 
“That you, Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, the 
Prime Minister of Pakistan, have willfully 
flouted, disre garded and disobeyed the 
direction given by this Court in Para 178  in 
the case of “ Dr. Mobashir Hassan  v 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010 SC 265)” 
to revive the request by the Government of 
Pakistan for mutual legal assistance and 
status of civil party and  the claims lodged to 
the allegedly laundered moneys lying in 
foreign countries, including Switzerland, 
which were unauthorizedly withdrawn by 
communication by Malik Muhammad 
Qayyum, former Attorney General for 
Pakistan to the concerned authorities, which 
direction you were legally bound to obey and 
thereby committed contempt of court within 
the meanings of Article 204(2) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
1973 read with Section 3 of the Contempt of 
Court Ordinance (Ordinance V of 2003), 
punishable under Section 5 of the Ordinance 
and within the cognizance of this Court. We 
hereby direct that you be tried by this Court 
on the above said charge.”  Crl.O.P.6/12  17 
16.  Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, leaned Attorney -General for 
Pakistan, was appointed to prosecute the Re spondent. On 
behalf of the prosecution, the Attorney -General tendered in 
evidence documents comprising the judgment s in DR. 
MOBASHIR HASSAN ’s case as well as in the review petition 
and all the orders passed from time to time relating to 
implementation of t he judgment  (Ex.P1 to P40) . The 
Respondent in his defence produced only one witness, Ms. 
Nargi s Sethi (D.W.1) who had remained the Princip al Secretary 
to the Prime Minister during the relevant period. She tendered 
in defence two Summaries , Ex.D/1 dated 21. 5.2010 and 
Ex.D/2 dated 21.9.2010,  along with documents appended with 
the Summaries submitted to the Prime Minister. The Prime 
Minister opted not to testify on oath but put up his defence 
through a  written statement  unaccompanied by his affidavit.     
17.  After recording of the evidence was completed and 
the learned counsel for the defence started his arguments, we 
were informed that Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq had  resigned as 
Attorney -General for Pakistan and in his place, the Federal 
Government appointed Mr. Irf an Qadir  who th en took over the 
prosecution .  
18.  The learned counsel appearing for the 
Respondent, raised a preliminary objection to the very trial of 
contempt by this Bench on the ground that since it initiated 
the proceedings suo mot u, issued show caus e notice and 
framed charge, it no longer remained competent to proceed Crl.O.P.6/12  18 
with the trial, for to do so would be in violation of the 
principle of ‘fair trial’  now guaranteed as a fundamental right 
under Article 10A incorporated in the Constitution by the 
Const itution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010. For the sake 
of facility, Article 10A reads:  
“10A. For the determination of his civil 
rights and obligations or in any criminal 
charge against him a person shall be entitled 
to a fair trial and due process.”   
 
19.  The learned counsel maintained that the principle 
of ‘fair trial’  must fulfill two conditions, firstly that ‘no one 
shall be condemned unheard’  and secondly that ‘a person 
cannot be a judge in his own cause’ . Basing his argument on 
second condition, it wa s contended that this Bench having 
already formed an opinion, even if prima facie , about the 
culpability of the Respondent, it was no longer competent to 
proceed with the trial. He clarified that it was not a question 
of recusal by the members of the Bench  but that of their 
disqualification to sit in trial and give judgment. Emphasizing 
the importance of incorporation of Article 10A in the 
Constitution, the learned counsel maintained that it had 
brought about a radical change in the scope of the law 
relatin g to determination of civil rights and obligations as well 
as criminal charge, ensuring that every person shall be 
entitled to ‘fair trial  and due process ’. He pointed out that 
whereas many other fundamental rights enshrined in the 
Constitution had been ma de subject to law , such limits have Crl.O.P.6/12  19 
not been imposed on the fundamental right under Article 
10A. Further drawing distinction between Article 4 and Article 
10A of the Constitution, it was argued that the former 
provision entitles every person to be treated in accordance 
with the law as it exists, whereas the latter confers a 
Constitutional right upon the individuals to a ‘fair trial’  
regardless of, and notwithstanding, any provision in a sub -
constitutional law. That trial by this Bench will be in accord 
with the Contempt of Court Ordinance and would thus fulfill 
the requirements of Article 4 but would be void in view of 
Article 10A for it offends the principle of ‘fair trial’.  That while 
admitting that the principle of the right to a ‘fair trial’  was 
already well entrenched in our jurisprudence, the learned 
counsel argued that Article 10A had graduated the rule to a 
higher pedestal of a fundamental right guaranteed by the 
Constitution. Conceding that under the ordinary law, there 
was an exception to the rule t hat ‘no man can be a judge in 
his own cause’ , allowing a Judge, who takes suo mot u notice 
of contempt, to try a contemnor, he contended that the 
exception is no longer valid after the introduction of Article 
10A. 
20.  On the question as to whether the prov isions of 
the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 allowing the trial of 
contempt by a Judge, who issues notice and frames charge, 
can be challenged in collateral proceedings without a frontal 
attack through separate proceedings, the learned counsel Crl.O.P.6/12  20 
submitted  that if an existing law is void being inconsistent 
with any of the fundamental rights, enshrined in the 
Constitution, it must be ignored, for it becomes unenforceable 
in view of Article 8(1) of the Constitution. To substantiate this 
argument, reliance was  placed upon the cases of FAUJI 
FOUNDATION  v. SHAMIMUR REHMAN  ( PLD 1983 SC 457 ) , 
SAIYYID ABUL A’LA MAUDOODI AND OTHERS  v. THE 
GOVERNMENT OF WEST PAKISTAN AND OTHERS  ( PLD 1964 
SC 673 ) , MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, 
CHIEF JUSTICE OF PAKISTAN  v. THE PRESIDENT OF 
PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2007 SC 578 ) , CHIEF JUSTICE OF 
PAKISTAN, MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY  
v. THE PRESIDENT OF PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2010 SC 61 ) , SINDH 
HIGH COURT BAR ASSOCIATION  v. FEDERATION OF 
PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2009 SC 879 ) , MIR MUHAMMAD IDRIS AND 
OTHERS  v. FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2011 SC 213 ) , 
MUHAMMAD MUBEEN -US-SALAM  v. FEDERATION OF 
PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2006 SC 602 ) . 
21.  When it was pointed out to the learned counsel 
that he has not referred to any particular provision of the 
Contempt  of Court Ordinance 2003, being inconsistent with 
Article 10A of the Constitution, the learned counsel submitted 
that the longstanding practice of the Court allowing a Bench 
taking suo mot u notice, to try the contemnor is ‘usage having 
the force of law’  within the meaning of Article 8 of the 
Constitution. Reference was made to the definition of the Crl.O.P.6/12  21 
word ‘usage’ , in Black’s Law Dictionary, Wharton’s Law 
Lexicon and Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. Furthermore 
that Article 10A is to be read into the Ordinan ce to provide for 
an omission therein so as to bring it in conformity with the 
said fundamental right. That the stipulation in Section 11(3) 
of the Ordinance barring a Judge, who initiates proceedings 
for ‘judicial contempt’  as defined in the Ordinance, to  try the 
contemnor, shall also be read into Section 12 of the 
Ordinance relating to proceedings in case of a ‘civil contempt’ . 
To substantiate his arguments that this Court has in the past 
read into statutes omission made therein on the principle  of 
casus omissus,  the learned counsel cited the case s of AL-
JEHAD TRUST  v. FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN  ( PLD 1996 SC 
324 ) , KHAN ASFANDYAR WALI  v. FEDERATION OF 
PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2001 607 ) . He also referred to the interim 
order in the case of NADEEM AHMED  v. THE FEDERATIO N OF 
PAKISTAN  (Constitution Petition No. 11 of 2010 etc.) , 
where this Court while referring certain proposals to the 
Parliament regarding the new procedure laid down under 
Article 175A in the Constitution for the appointment of 
Judges in the superior Court s, gave certain directions for 
appointments during the interregnum. In the same context 
reference was also made to MD. SONAFAR ALI  v. THE STATE  ( 
1969 SCMR 460 ) .  
22.  The learned counsel maintained that a 
fundamental right can neither be surrendered nor  waived. For Crl.O.P.6/12  22 
this pr oposition   he placed reliance upon GOVERNMENT OF 
PAKISTAN  v. SYED AKHLAQUE HUSSAIN  (PLD 1965 SC 527) , 
PAKISTAN MUSLIM LEGUE (N)  v. FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN   
( PLD 2007 SC 642 )  and OLGA TELLIS  v. BOMBAY 
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION  ( AIR 1986 SC  180 ) , 
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX PATIALA  v. M/S 
ROADMASTER INDS. OF INDIA  ( AIR 2000 SC 1401 ) . That in 
any case the Respondent objected to his trial by this Bench 
after the charge was framed when the trial commenced. 
Additionally it was argued that ‘due process’  under Article 
10A requires that a person can only be tried by a competent 
Court or Tribunal and this Bench being not competent to try 
the Respondent, the trial militates against the principle of 
‘due process’ . Reference in this context was made t o the case s 
of SHARAF FARIDI  v. THE FEDERATION OF ISLAMIC 
REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN  ( PLD 1989 Kar 404 ) , 
GOVERNMENT OF BALOCHISTAN  v. AZIZULLAH MEMON  ( 
PLD 1993 SC 341 )  and AL-JEHAD TRUST  v. FEDERATION 
OF PAKISTAN  (supra).  
23.  On the question as to whether t he trial of the 
Respondent by this Bench would militate against the principle 
of ‘fair trial’ , the learned counsel sought support from THE 
UNIVERSITY OF DACCA  v. ZAKIR AHMED  ( PLD 1965 SC 90) , 
THE GOVERNMENT OF MYSORE AND OTHERS  v. J. V. BHAT 
ETC. ( AIR 19 75 SC 596 ) , FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN  v. 
MUHAMMAD AKRAM SHEIKH  ( PLD 1989 SC 689 ) , NAFEESA Crl.O.P.6/12  23 
BANO  v. CHIEF SETTLEMENT COMMISSIONER, WEST 
PAKISTAN  ( PLD 1969 Lah 480 ) , ANWAR  v. THE CROWN   
( PLD 1955 FC 185 ) , GOVERNMENT OF NWFP  v. DR. 
HUSSAIN AHMAD HAROON  ( 2003 SCMR 104 ) , MOHAPATRA 
& CO AND ANOTHER  v. STATE OF ORISSA AND ANOTHER   
( 1985 SCR 91, 322 AT P. 332) , AMARANTH CHOWDHURY  v. 
BRAITHWAITE AND COMPMANY LTD. & ORS ; ( 2002 (2) SCC 
290).  
24.  For the purpose of disqualification of a Judge due 
to pre -trial o bservation made by him, reliance was placed upon 
two judgments by the Supreme Court of U nited States; 
MURCHISON’S  case 349 US 133  (1955) and DANIEL T. 
TAYLER III  v. JOHN P. HAYES  418 US 488  (1974).    
                  
25.  The principle of right to ‘fair t rial’ has been 
acknowledged and recognized by our Courts since long and is 
by now well entrenched in our jurisprudence. The right to a 
‘fair trial’  undoubtedly means a right to a proper hearing by  an 
unbiased competent forum. The latter component of a ‘fair 
trial’ is based on the age -old maxim  “Nemo debet esse judex in 
propria sua causa ” that “ no man can be a judge in his own 
cause”.  This principle has been further expounded to mean 
that a Judge must not hear a case in which he has personal 
interest, whethe r or not his decision is influenced by his 
interest, for “justice should not only be done but be seen to have 
been done”.  Crl.O.P.6/12  24 
26.  Starting from the case of THE UNIVERSITY OF 
DACCA  v. ZAKIR AHMED  (ibid) this Court has consistently held 
that the principle of na tural justice (right of hearing) shall be 
read in every statute even if not expressly provided for  unless 
specifically excluded . The cases cited by the learned counsel 
from our own as well as from the Indian jurisdiction have only 
reiterated the above well  established principle of law. In the 
case of NEW JUBILEE INSURANCE COMPANY LTD.  v. 
NATIONAL BANK OF PAKISTAN  ( PLD 1999 SC 1126 )  this 
Court has gone to the extent of associating the right to a fair 
trial with the fundamental right of access to justice.    
27.  We agree with the learned counsel for the 
Respondent that the inclusion of the principle of right to a ‘fair 
trial’ is now a Constitutionally guaranteed fundamental right 
and has been raised to a higher pedestal; consequently a law, 
or custom or usag e having the force of law, which is 
inconsistent with the right to a ‘fair trial’  would be void by 
virtue of Article 8 of the Constitution. However, the question 
here is whether trial of the Respondent for contempt by us 
having issued a show cause notice a nd framed the charge, 
would violate the Respondent’s right to a ‘fair trial’  on the 
ground that we have already formed a prima facie  opinion in 
the matter having initiated suo mot u action against the 
Respondent. While issuing a show cause notice for contem pt, a 
Judge only forms a tentative  opinion, which is subject to the 
ultimate outcome at the conclusion of the trial. In this regard Crl.O.P.6/12  25 
one may refer to the lucid pronouncement by the late Hon’ble 
Mr. Justice Hamoodur Rahman, the then Chief Justice of 
Pakistan , while dealing with a Reference of misconduct against 
a Judge of the High Court in THE PRESIDENT  v. SHUAKAT ALI  
( PLD 1971 SC 585 ).  The Respondent Judge had submitted a 
statement of his properties and assets to the Supreme Judicial 
Council under Article 3 of the Judges (Declaration of Assets) 
Order , 1969 and the Council, upon scrutiny of the statement, 
submitted a report to the President, who then made a 
Reference to the Council to proceed against the Judge for gross 
misconduct. One of the objections rais ed by the Judge was 
that the Council as constituted was disqualified from hearing 
the Reference, as it had earlier scrutinized the declaration of 
the assets of the Respondent and was , therefore,  bound to be 
biased. The objection was rejected on two grounds ; firstly, that 
there was no question or allegation of any bias on any 
individual member of the Supreme Judicial Council and the 
mere fact that the Council had scrutinized the declaration of 
assets was not sufficient to establish the likelihood of bias : 
“for, if it were so then no Judge who issues a rule in a motion or 
issues notice to show cause in any other proceedings or frames 
a charge in a trial can ever hear that matter or conduct that 
trial. The reason is that a preliminary inquiry intended to 
determ ine whether a prima facie case has been made out or not 
is a safeguard against the commencement of wholly 
unwarranted final proceedings against a person. To say that a Crl.O.P.6/12  26 
charge should be framed against a person amount s to saying 
nothing more than that the pe rson should be tried in respect of 
it. Anybody who knows the difference between the prima facie 
case and its final trial, would reject the objection as 
misconceived.”  The second ground for rejecting the objection 
was that of necessity, in that if sustained , there would be no 
forum or tribunal to hear the Reference, as the Supreme 
Judicial Council had the exclusive jurisdiction to hear the 
Reference and all its members had at the preliminary stage 
scrutinized the statement of declaration of assets of the Jud ge. 
This ground of necessity was reiterated in the case of 
FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN  v. MUHAMMAD AKRAM SHEIKH  
(ibid)  where this Court, while reaffirming that the principle 
that “ no one should be a judge in his own cause  and justice 
should not only be done but  should manifestly appear to have 
been done , were very salutary and fully e ntrenched judicial 
principles of high standard ”, acknowledged that a Judge , when 
otherwise disqualified on account of the said principles, may 
still sit in the proceedings if in his  absence the tribunal or the 
Court having exclusive jurisdiction would not be complete.  
28.  In the case of THE PRESIDENT  v. SHUAKAT ALI  
(ibid) the Supreme Judicial Council had on its own motion, 
after scrutinizing the statement of the respondent Judge, m ade 
a report to the President. The pronouncement by the then 
Chief Justice Hamoodur Rahman provides a complete answer 
to the objection of the learned counsel for the defence. The Crl.O.P.6/12  27 
learned counsel had tried to draw a distinction between the 
exercise of conte mpt jurisdiction by the Court on its own 
motion and on the complaint of a party and it was contended 
that it is only in the former case that a Judge would stand 
disqualified to try a contemnor. This distinction we do not 
consider to be material. In both si tuations a Judge applies  his 
mind before issuing notice to the respondent and later is to 
form a prima facie opinion after preliminary hearing whether 
or not to frame a charge and proceed with the trial. If it is held 
that a Judge holding a trial after hav ing formed a prima facie  
or tentative opinion on merits of a case violates a litigant’s 
fundamental right guaranteed under Article 10A, it would lead 
to striking down a number of procedural laws and well 
established practices, and may land our judicial sys tem in to 
confusion and chaos; a Judge, who frames a charge in every 
criminal case, will stand debarred from holding trial of the 
accused ; a Judge hearing a bail matter and forming a tentative 
opinion of the prosecution case would then be disqualified to 
try the accused; a Judge expressing a prima facie opinion 
while deciding a prayer for grant of injunction would become 
incompetent to try the suit. There may be scores of other such 
situations. Be that as it may, in all such situations the cause 
is not perso nal to the Judge and he has no personal interest in 
the matter to disqualify him.  
29.  The exception recognized by the two judgments of 
this Court cited above on the ground of necessity to the rule Crl.O.P.6/12  28 
that “ no person shall be a judge in his own cause” is also  
attracted here. After the show cause notice was issued to the 
Respondent, a preliminary hearing was afforded to the 
Respondent in terms of Sub-section (3) of Section 17 of the 
Contempt of Court Ordinance 2003. Upon conclusion of the 
hearing we decided to proceed further and frame  a charge 
against the Respondent. This order was challenged through an 
Intra -Court Appeal filed under section 19 of the Ordinance. It 
was heard by an eight -member Bench of this Court, headed by 
the Hon’ble Chief Justice. The Appeal  was dismissed and the 
order by this Bench, forming a prima facie  opinion to frame the 
charge against the Respondent, was upheld. Like the present, 
the Bench hearing the Intra -Court Appeal had also applied its 
mind to the existence or otherwise of a prima facie case. If the 
argument of the learned counsel is accepted , all the members 
of the Bench hearing the Intra -Court Appeal would be equally 
disqualified, thus, leaving only one Hon’ble Judge of this Court 
unaffected. No Bench could then be constituted to hear the 
contempt matter.  
30.  Out of the many judgments cited by the learned 
counsel , in only two, both by the United States Supreme 
Court, a Judge was held to be disqualified from trying a 
contemnor for his pre -trial conduct. In RE MURCHISON  
(supra), a Judge acting as one man Grand Jury, under the 
Michigan law, was investigating a crime and during the 
interrogation, formed an opinion that a policeman, Murchison, Crl.O.P.6/12  29 
had perjured himself and that another person, by the name of 
White, had committed contempt fo r refusing to answer 
questions. Then acting in his judicial capacity he tried 
Murchison for contempt in open Court. The matter came up 
before the United States Supreme Court and while overturning 
the decision of the Michigan State Supreme Court held, by a 
majority of 7 -3, that on the touchstone of ‘fair trial ’ by a fair 
tribunal the trial by the Judge was in violation of the principle 
that “ no man can be a judge in his own cause” . This judgment 
turns on its own facts where the same person was the 
investigat or, the complainant and the Judge and the 
information that he acquired during secret investigation was 
used by him while sitting in his capacity as a Judge. The 
information on which the Judge held the contemnor in 
contempt was acquired by him not in his ju dicial but 
administrative capacity while investigating a case. That is why 
the Supreme Court observed that the Judge as an investigator 
was a material witness and trying the case deprived the 
contemnor of cross -examining him on the information that he 
had acquired during investigation and had used in the judicial 
proceedings. The case ha s no parallel with the one before us. 
RE-MURCHISON  (supra) does not in any way lay down the 
broad pr oposition that a Judge, who in that capacity forms a 
prima facie  opinion in a contempt matter, stands disqualified 
to try the contemnor. It was in the peculiar circumstances of 
the case that the Supreme Court found that the petitioner was Crl.O.P.6/12  30 
not given a fair tri al by a fair tribunal. Even then three  
member s of the Court dissented,  holding that the contempt 
proceedings could be protected on the principle that a Judge 
can try a person, who commits contempt in the face of the 
Court.  
31.  In DANIEL T. TAYLER III  v. JOHN P. HAYES  (ibid) a 
trial Judge had warned the defence counsel duri ng 
proceedings before the jury in a murder case nine times for 
courtroom conduct that he was in contempt. After the criminal 
case was over, the same Judge sentenced the counsel on nine 
counts of contempt and on each count, sentenced separately 
to run conse cutive ly, totaling almost four and half years. The 
matter came up before the United States Supreme Court and it 
was held that on the facts of the case the contempt charge 
ought not to have been tried by the Judge; that although there 
was no personal attack  on the trial Judge but the record 
showed that the trial Judge had become embroiled in a 
running controversy with the attorney and marked personal 
feelings were present on both sides during the trial, and the 
critical factor for the recusal being the chara cter of the trial 
Judge’s response to the attorney’s misbehaviour during the 
trial, not the attorney’s conduct alone. This case again does 
not in any way lays down that a Judge who forms a prima facie  
opinion in a case of contempt is debarred from trying t he 
contemnor. The Supreme Court of United States considered 
the aversion the Judge had developed during the murder trial Crl.O.P.6/12  31 
against the contemnor that disqualified him to hold his trial 
for contempt.  
32.  In both the above cases what prevailed with the 
Suprem e Court of the United States to hold that the right to a 
fair trial  was violated, was the pre -trial conduct and not the 
pre-trial observations of the Judge.  
33.  While incorporating Article 10A in the Constitution 
and making the right to a ‘fair trial ’ a fundamental right the 
legislature did not define or describe the requisites of a ‘fair 
trial’. By not defining the term the legislature, perhaps 
intended to give it the same meaning as is broadly universally 
recognized and embedded in our own jurisprudence.  Thus in 
order to determine whether the trial of the Respondent by this 
Bench violates the condition or the requisite of a fair trial , we 
have to fall back on the principles enunciated in this respect. 
Neither the learned counsel was able, nor did it come to our 
notice, any precedent or juristic opinion, that disqualifies a 
Judge, on the touchstone of ‘fair trial’ , to try a case of which 
he had made a preliminary tentative assessment. We may add 
that as regards the members of this Bench, the Respondent as 
well as the learned counsel , had expressed full confidence. 
Indeed none of us has the remotest personal interest in the 
matter. The contempt proceedings arose out of non -
implementation of the judgment of this Court. The cause is not 
of any member of the Ben ch but of the Court and in a wider 
sense of enforcement of the law. The legislature has already, in Crl.O.P.6/12  32 
the Contempt of Court Ordinance 2003, provided a safeguard 
against trial by a Judge, who may have personal interest in the 
matter. Sub -section (3) of Sectio n 11 of the Ordinance bars a 
Judge, who has initiated proceedings for ‘judicial contempt’ , 
that is scandalizing or personal criticism of the Judge, to try 
the contemnor. The Judge is required to send  the matter to the 
Chief Justice, who may himself hear or refer the case to any 
other Judge for hearing.   
34.  From the foregoing discussion , it follows that a 
Judge, making a prima facie  assessment of a contempt matter 
whether initiated suo mot u or on the application of a party, 
does not stand disqualified on t he touchstone of the 
requirements of a ‘fair trial ’, from hearing and deciding the 
matter. Thus our trial of the Respondent does not infringe 
upon the Respondent’s fundamental right to a fair trial  
enshrined in Article 10A of the Constitution. The objectio n on 
this account is, therefore, not sustained.  
 
35.  The learned counsel then took up the issue of 
immunity of the President of Pakistan. He did not invoke the 
provisions of Article 248 of the Constitution, 1973, for the 
grant of immunity to the President  of Pakistan and clarified 
that such immunity can be invoked by the President himself. 
His arguments on immunity were based on the Customary 
International Law. He pointed out that the present incumbent 
of the office of the President of Pakistan was tried f or a 
criminal offence in a Court in Switzerland, which case now Crl.O.P.6/12  33 
stands closed, yet the writing of the letter as directed could 
lead to the reopening of the case and trial of the President. 
That being head of the State, the President has absolute and 
inviol able immunity  before all foreign Courts , so long as he is 
in the office, from any civil or criminal matter, for acts, 
private as well as official, done before or after taking office . 
That after leaving the office, he may become liable to such 
proceedings. The learned counsel made reference to the 
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961 and Vienna 
Convention on Consular Relations, 1963, both of which have 
been made part of the law of Pakistan by the Diplomatic and 
Consular Privileges Act, 1972 (IX of  1972). Of relevance for 
the present case is the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic 
Relations, 1961, where although no express provision has 
been made for grant of immunity to the Heads of States but it 
acknowledges in its Preamble the rules of Customary 
International Law and affirms that they shall govern 
questions not expressly regulated by the provisions of the 
Convention. The learned counsel then referred to the 
Memorandum by the Secretariat of the United Nation General 
Assembly approved in the 60th Sessio n of the International 
Law Commission, Geneva in the year 2008 titled “ Immunity 
of State Officials from Foreign Criminal Jurisdiction ” from 
which a number of cases and opinions were cited to show 
that International as well as domestic Courts have all along  
recognized that immunity in civil as well as criminal matters Crl.O.P.6/12  34 
are to be extended to Heads of States. Reference in particular 
was made to the cases decided by the International Court of 
Justice: DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO  v. BELGIUM  ( 
2002 General List N o. 121/ ICJ Reports 2002 p.3 )  known 
as Arrest Warrant case, DJIBOUTI  v. FRANCE  (ICJ Reports 
2008 p.177) , QADDAFI  v. FRANCE                    
( International Law Reports, Vol. 125, pp.508 -510 ) , and 
decision of the House of Lords in REGINA  v. BOW STREET 
METOPOL,ITAN STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATE AND OTHERS, EX 
PARTE PINOCHET UGARTE (NO.30)  (House of Lords [2000] 1 
A.C. 147).  In view of the immunity, internationally 
recognized, granted to the Heads of States while in office, the 
learned counsel maintained that the directions in Para graph 
No. 178 in DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN  v. FEDERATION OF 
PAKISTAN  ( PLD 2010 SC 265 ) , can and will be 
implemented, but only when the tenure of the present 
incumbent of the office to the President expires. The case of 
A. M. QURESHI  v. UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS    
( PLD 1981 SC 377 )  was cited to show that this Court had 
also recognized and applied Customary International law by 
granting immunity to foreign States. With reference to certain 
opinions expressed in Paragraphs No.  215 to 219 of the 
Memorandum by the Secretariat of the United Nation General 
Assembly, referred to above, it was contended that immunity 
is to be extended to the Heads of States whether or not 
invoked.  Crl.O.P.6/12  35 
36.  When the respondent appeared in person in 
response to t he show cause notice and addressed the Court 
briefly, he gave two reasons for not communicating with the 
Swiss Authorities for implementation of the direction of this 
Court, firstly, that the President of Pakistan enjoys complete 
immunity inside and outsid e Pakistan and, secondly, that he 
acted upon the advice tendered to him in the ordinary course 
of business. No written reply to the show cause notice was 
submitted and the Respondent’s plea and defence in writing 
came only in the written statement filed by  him at the close of 
evidence. In his statement, the Respondent did not confine 
his defence to acting upon the advice tendered to him but 
took a categorical stand that the judgment of this Court 
cannot be implemented so long as Mr. Asif Ali Zardari 
remains  the President of Pakistan. This plea of the 
Respondent is evident from Paragraphs No. 5, 46 and 79 of 
the written statement. The relevant parts of those Paragraphs 
are reproduced: - 
“5. I may also respectfully point out that this 
Hon’ble Bench needs first to hear detailed 
arguments on my behalf why Para. 178 of 
the judgment in the NRO case is not 
implementable at present only , for the 
period Mr. Asif Ali Zardari is the incumbent 
President of Pakistan…..”  
46.  I believe  that this is indeed the correct 
positi on in law and fact. As long as a person 
is Head of a Sovereign State he has immunity 
in both criminal as well as civil jurisdiction of Crl.O.P.6/12  36 
all other states under international law. I 
believe this immunity to be absolute and 
inviolable, even though it persists only during 
the tenure of office. It thus vests in the office, 
not in the person. And it represents the 
sovereignty and independence of a country as 
well as its sovereign equality with all other 
states, howsoever strong and powerful. I 
think it wrong to su bject the constitutionally 
elected incumbent President of Pakistan to the 
authority of a Magistrate in a foreign country. 
I think this subjection should be avoided.”  
79.  I therefore, believe that I have committed 
no contempt and that is a sufficient answe r to 
the charge. I also believe that the Sovereign 
State of Pakistan cannot, must not and 
should not  offer its incumbent Head of State, 
Symbol of the Federation (Art. 41), the most 
prominent component of Parliament (Art. 50), 
and the Supreme Commander of i ts Armed 
Forces (Art. 243) for a criminal trial in the 
Court of a foreign Magistrate, during the term 
of his office.”   
37.  The above position of the Respondent was, with 
vehemence, further urged by the learned counsel when 
concluding his arguments: that the Respondent is caught 
between implementing the judgment of this Court and 
maintaining the dignity and respect due to the office of the 
President of Pakistan. Thus, in very clear terms, he declared 
that the Respondent will not presently implement this Co urt’s 
direction. Neither in the personal address by the Respondent 
before this Court nor in the written statement or in the Crl.O.P.6/12  37 
submissions made on his behalf, slightest indication was 
given that the Respondent w as read y to obey the Court’s 
order  as of now .   
38.  It is not necessary to examine or comment upon 
the case law cited by the learned counsel for the Respondent 
as the plea taken  cannot prevail  for a number of reasons. The 
ground of immunity under the International Law was 
expressly taken up by the Fede ral Government in grounds 
(xii) and (xvi) of the Review Petition (Civil Review Petition No. 
129 of 2010 in Civil Petition No. 76 of 2007) in DR. 
MUBASHIR HASSAN ’S case (ibid), with reference to Para graph 
No. 178 of the judgment. The grounds reproduced in 
Paragraph No.  4 of the review judgment reads: - 
“(xii)  that in para 178 of the detailed 
judgment, this Court has erred in ordering the 
Federal Government and other concerned 
authorities to seek revival of the said 
requests, claims and status contrary to the  
principles of International Law in foreign 
countries ; 
(xvi)  that the Court fell in error in not 
appreciating the functions of the Attorney 
General under Article100 of the Constitution 
i.e. it is the office of the said incumbent which 
is empowered to act or not to act in terms of 
its mandate and the letter written by then 
Attorney General for Pakistan to Swiss 
authorities to withdraw the prosecution was 
well within its mandate. The adverse finding 
recorded in this regard offended the principle 
of audi alte ram partem. The observations Crl.O.P.6/12  38 
made in paras 178 and 456 are in derogation 
to Article 4 of the Constitution as well;”  
39.  The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
Federal Government  in the Review , besides others, assailed 
Paragraph No.  178 of the jud gment under review. The Full 
Court of 17 Judges rejected the arguments in Paragraph No.  
14 in the following terms:  
“14. The Court in para 178 of the judgment 
merely held that the communications 
addressed by the then Attorney General were 
unauthorized and t he Federal Government 
was directed to take steps to seek revival of 
the request in that context. Neither during the 
hearing of the main case, learned counsel for 
the Federal Government placed on record any 
instructions of the Federation in this context 
nor during the hearing of this review petition, 
any such material was laid before this Court 
which could persuade us to hold that the said 
communication by the then Attorney General 
was duly authorized to warrant its review.”    
40.  The arguments regarding i mmunity under the 
International Law having been urged before the Full Court in 
review and not accepted, this seven -member Bench is in no 
position to examine the plea. Even otherwise, we are not 
sitting in review and, therefore, cannot go beyond what has 
been held therein.   
41.  When confronted with the above situation, the 
learned counsel submitted that he does not seek review of Crl.O.P.6/12  39 
either Paragraph No.  178 or the decision in the review 
judgment but only prays for postponement of the 
implementation till the t enure of the present incumbent of the 
office of the President comes to an end. This contention, if 
accepted, would delay the implementation until, at least, the 
fall of 2013, when the present tenure of the President expires, 
and would amount to modificatio n of the direction given in 
the main as well as in the review judgment in DR. MOBASHIR 
HASSAN ’s case (ibid). Para graph No.  178 concludes with 
direction to the Federal Government and other concerned 
authorities “ to take immediate steps  to seek revival of th e 
said request, claims and the status ”. Similarly, the short order 
of 25.11.2011 dismissing the review petition carries similar 
direction that “ the concerned authorities are hereby directed to 
comply with the judgment dated 16.12.2009 in letter and sprit 
without any further delay .” Acceptance of the Respondent’s 
plea to delay the implementation of the direction of this Court 
would tantamount  to review of the clear orders passed in both 
the judgments that the implementation is to be carried out 
immediately a nd without delay. This Bench has no power to 
modify the judgments and delay implementation.  
42.  Additionally, we have noted that the criminal 
cases before the Swiss Courts were initiated by the Swiss 
Authorities and not by the Government of Pakistan , whic h 
later applied to be made civil party claiming that the amount, 
if any, found to be laundered, be returned to Pakistan , being Crl.O.P.6/12  40 
its rightful claimant. This position was not disputed by the 
learned counsel. In Paragraph No.  178, the Court had merely 
directed  that the communication earlier made by the form er 
Attorney -General, Malik Muhammad Qayyum, for withdrawal 
of the claim be withdrawn so that the civil claim of the 
Federal Government is revived. The consequences of the 
withdrawal of Malik Muhammad Qayyum’s  communication 
can only be examined and adjudged by the investigators or 
courts in Switzerland, particularly, in view of the controversy 
raised on behalf of the Respondent that the cases were closed 
on merits, though we have noted that the documents speak 
otherwise.  
43.  Since complete facts of the case in Switzerland are 
not before us, we are in no position to form a definite opinion 
about its status when the claim was withdrawn nor indeed 
are we competent to give our own findings on the case, even 
for the  limited purpose of determining the question of 
immunity. It is the authorities or the courts in that country 
alone which can , in the light of the facts before it , examine 
the question of immunity.  The immunity can, thus, be 
invoked before the relevant aut horities in Switzerland and, 
going by the arguments of the learned counsel, if the same is 
indeed available, it may be granted to the President of 
Pakistan without invocation.  
44.  Finally, besides Mr. Asif Ali Zardari there are 
others who were also accuse d in the criminal case in Crl.O.P.6/12  41 
Switzerland. This has been impliedly admitted in the written 
submissions filed on behalf of the Respondent . By Reference 
to Ex.D1/3 and D2/2, mentioned in the Summary prepared 
for the Prime Minister, it is stated that presently, M r. Asif Ali 
Zardari is the only Pakistani surviving accused in the case, 
thereby admitting the indictment of non -Pakistani accused. 
However there is express reference to other accused in the 
letter of Malik Muhammad Qayyum, withdrawing the claim 
stating th at the “ Republic of Pakistan ……. withdraws in 
capacity of civil party not only against Mr. Asif Ali Zardari but 
also against Mr. Jens Schlegelmich and any other third 
party concerned by these proceedings ”. As the claim of the 
Government of Pakistan was to retrieve the launder ed money 
and commissions, whether paid to Pakistani , Swiss or other 
foreign nationals, the defence of immunity, even if available to 
the present President of Pakistan, cannot be pleaded for the 
foreign national accused in the case. To their extent too the 
Respondent is reluctant to revive the claim of the Government 
of Pakistan  for no understandable reasons . 
45.  An ancillary objection was raised by the learned 
counsel to the competence of the Supreme Court to 
implement its own judgments  in view of clause (2) of Article 
187 of the Constitution. The Article reads;  
“187(1) [Subject to clause (2) of Article 
175, the] Supreme Court shall have power to 
issue such directions, orders or decrees as 
may be necessary for doing complete justice Crl.O.P.6/12  42 
in a ny case or matter pending before it, 
including an order for the purpose of securing 
the attendance of any person or the discovery 
or production of any document.  
(2) Any such direction, order or decree 
shall be enforceable throughout Pakistan and 
shall, wh ere it is to be executed in a Province, 
or a territory or an area not forming part of a 
Province but within the jurisdiction of the High 
Court of the Province, be executed as if it had 
been issued by the High Court of that 
Province.  
(3) If a question aris es as to which High 
Court shall give effect to a direction, order or 
decree of the Supreme Court, the decision of 
the Supreme Court on the question shall be 
final.”  
The learned counsel submitted that since implementation of 
the judgment falls within territ orial jurisdiction of the 
Islamabad High Court, that Court alone was empowered to 
implement this Court’s orders or directions. We, however, 
understand  that the said provision does not, in any manner, 
ousts  this Court’s power to enforce its decisions, parti cularly 
in view of its wide powers under Article 190 of the 
Constitution  and under Article 204 to punish  any person for 
disobeying the orders of the Court. Further , clause (1) of 
Article 187 of the Constitution only mandates that when the 
orders of the Sup reme Court are to be enforced within a 
Province they shall be executed as if issued by the High Court 
of that Province ; not that the execution is to be carried out by 
the High Court. We may add that this contention was not  Crl.O.P.6/12  43 
seriously urged and even otherwi se we have found it 
misconceived.  
46.   Before taking up the arguments of the learned 
defence counsel  on the factual aspect s of the case , we may 
note here that Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq, Attorney -General for 
Pakistan, who acted as the prosecutor on our orders an d 
remained associated with this case almost till the end, was 
replaced by Mr. Irfan Qadir , during the submissions by the 
learned defence counsel . The Attorney -General under Article 
100 of the Constitution is appointed by the President on the 
advice of the Prime Minister. We found it intriguing that the 
Respondent exercising his such powers changed the officer of 
the Court prosecuting him. The learned Attorney -General did 
not put forth arguments in favour of the prosecution  rather  
pleaded that there was no e vidence, whatsoever, on the basis 
of which the Respondent could be held guilty of contempt. We 
were, thus,  rendered one sided assistance only.  
47.  The learned Attorney -General in his arguments 
quoted some Paragraphs  from “Guidelines on the Role of 
Prosec utors, Adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on 
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 
Havana, Cuba, 27 August to September 1990 ” to explain his 
role as a prosecutor that he need not support the prosecution 
and was entitled to make  independent assessment of the case 
and assist the Court in accordance with law and his 
conscience . However, all his arguments were in support of the Crl.O.P.6/12  44 
defence and none whatsoever to support the charge against 
the Respondent. The learned Attorney -General beg an by 
submitting that there was no law of contempt in force in the 
country, in that, the Contempt of Court Ordinance 2003 
having lapsed by efflux of time under Article 89 stood 
repealed under Article 264 of the Constitution and that 
Article 270AA did not p rotect the said Ordinance. This 
question squarely came before this Court in Suo Motu Case 
No.1 of 2007  (PLD 2007 SC 688) where it was held that the 
Contempt of Court Ordinance (V of 2003) holds the field. This 
judgment ha d been affirmed by this Court in JUSTICE 
HASNAT AHMED KHAN  v FEDERATION OF PAKISTAN  ( PLD 
2011 SC 680  ). It was pointed out to the learned Attorney -
General that even if there was no sub -constitutional 
legislation regulating proceedings of Contempt of Court, this 
Court was possessed of const itutional power under Article 
204 to punish contemnors , with no restrictions on the 
exercise of power including that regarding quantum of 
punishment that can be imposed on the contemnor. The 
learned Attorney -General went on to criticize parts of the 
judgme nt in “ DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN ’s case  (ibid) . We, 
however, told him that the said judgment has been upheld by 
the Full Court in review and we cannot reopen the questions 
already decided. Concluding his arguments, he submitted, 
without elaborating, that the evi dence on record does not 
establish the charge of contempt against the Respondent.  Crl.O.P.6/12  45 
48.  Coming to the facts of the case, the learned 
defence counsel contended that until the Review Petition of 
the Federal Government was dismissed on 25.11.2011 there 
had bee n no directions by the Court specifically to the 
Respondent. That when the matter of implementation was 
taken up after the dismissal of the review petition on 
25.11.2011, the Court on 03.01.2012 only enquired of the 
Attorney -General for Pakistan as to whet her the Summary 
was prepared and placed before the Prime Minister in view of 
the directions given earlier, but again no direction was given 
to the Respondent. As regards the order of 10.01.2012, 
wherein the Court specifically mentioned the Prime Minister, 
the learned counsel submitted that the same was never 
communicated to the Respondent. That the statement of the 
Attorney -General before the Court on 16.01.2012 that he 
communicated the order of 10.01.2012 to the Prime Minister 
is not evidence of the fact o f such communication without the 
Attorney -General testifying on oath to that effect. Reliance 
was placed on G.S. GIDEON  v. THE STATE  ( PLD 1963 SC 1 ) . 
It was contended that the only order specifically and 
particularly addressed and communicated to the Res pondent 
was the one passed on 16.01.2012, requiring him to appear 
before the Court. It was thus maintained that prior to the 
issuance of show cause notice to the Respondent on 
16.01.2012 no other order with direction directly to the 
Respondent was brought to his notice. The learned counsel Crl.O.P.6/12  46 
made reference to Para graphs No.  74(i) and 74(v) of the 
written statement filed by the Respondent.  
49.  The learned counsel took us through  various 
interim order s in order to show that at the early stages of the 
implement ation process, directions were given to the officials 
of the Ministry of Law and the National Accountability Bureau 
(NAB) but never specifically to the Respondent (the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan) and that too to prepare proper 
summaries for consideration o f the Respondent. That the first 
Summary was returned by the office of the Prime Minister , as 
it did not give any clear opinion and on the second Summary 
the Prime Minister directed that the Supreme Court be 
informed that in view of the immunity to the Pre sident , its 
orders cannot be implemented. Referring to the Rules of 
Business, 1973, and the statement of Ms. Nargis Sethi (DW -1) 
the then Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, the 
learned counsel contended that the Prime Minister was not to 
be blamed for the Summaries if not prepared in conformity 
with the directions of this Court. That it was the task of the 
then Law Secretary and the Attorney -General for Pakistan to 
prepare a proper summary and the contempt, if any, was 
committed by them and not the Respondent. In support of his 
contentions that the Respondent cannot be held personally 
responsible for any wrong advice tendered to him in the 
ordinary course of business, the learned counsel relied upon 
DR. SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY  v. DR. MANMOHAN SINGH , a Crl.O.P.6/12  47 
judgment of the Supreme Court of India in Civil Appeal No. 
1193 of 2012, decided on 31.01.2012.  
50.  The learned counsel finally submitted that since 
the contempt proceedings are criminal in nature, entailing 
punishment, mens rea  of the Respondent is to be est ablished 
and it must be proved that his conduct was contumacious. 
That it would not be so if his decision is justifiable on 
subjective assessment of the information placed before him.  
That knowledge of the Respondent of the orders of this Court 
cannot be p resumed and must be proved. For the purpose of 
standard and burden of proof in contempt matters and 
whether the conduct of the Respondent was contumacious, 
the learned counsel provided us with a long list of cases, 
some of which are MRITYUNJOY DAS AND ANOT HER v. SAYED 
HASIBUR RAHMAN AND OTHERS   2001 (3) SC Cases 739, 
CHHOTU RAM  v. URVASHI GULATI AND ANOTHER  2001 (7) SC 
Cases 530 , THE ALIGAR MUNICIPAL BOARD AND OTHERS  v. 
EKKA TONGA MAZDOOR UNION  1970 (3) SC Cases 98 , BAHAWAL  
v. THE STATE  ( PLD 1962 SC 476 ),  SMT. KIRAN BEDI AND 
JINDER SINGH  v. THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY AND ANOTHER  ( 
AIR 1989 SC 714 ) , ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN  v. 
MUHAMMAD SAEED  ( PLD 1961 SC 192 ) , ABDUL GHAFOOR  v. 
MUHAMMAD SHAFI  ( PLD 1985 SC 407 ) , MIAN MUHAMMAD 
NAWAZ SHARIF  v. THE STATE  ( PLD 2009 SC 814 ).  
51.  Regarding lack of knowledge of the Respondent 
about directions given by this Court from time to time the 
arguments advanced by the learned counsel that he was not Crl.O.P.6/12  48 
informed of any such direction given until 16.01.2012 , loses 
significance in the light of the categorical stand taken by the 
Respondent when he appeared before this Court after issuance 
of the show cause notice , as well as in his written statement , 
that he is not for the time being willing and ready to carry out 
the orde r of this Court. This by itself establishes his 
disobedience. Nevertheless we would proceed to examine his 
plea of acting on advice and that the orders for the 
implementation were not specifically direct ed towards  him.  
52.  The defence examined Ms. Nargis  Sethi (DW -1), the 
then Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister during the 
relevant period. She produced two Summaries prepared for the 
Prime Minister, dated 21.05.2010 (Ex.D1) and dated 
21.09.2010 (Ex. D2) along with all the appended documents 
relating to the implementation of the directions given in DR. 
MOBASHIR HASSAN ’s case (ibid). In the Summary of 
21.05.2010, moved by the Ministry of Law, Justice & 
Parliamentary Affairs . The following proposals were placed 
before the Prime Minister for his approval:  
“6. In view of above, the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister is  requested to:  
(a) approve the Interim Report 
(Annex -A) and the stance taken by the 
then Law Secretary and submitted to 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the form 
of points (Annex -B) 
(b) approve the opinion o f the former 
Attorney General at paras 9 and 10 of 
Annex -C. Crl.O.P.6/12  49 
(c) any other ground which may be 
necessary to be taken in the court; and  
(d) any other instructions the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister may like to give in this 
regard.  
7. This Summary has the approval o f 
Minister of Law, Justice and 
Parliamentary Affairs.”  
 
53.  On 24.05.2010 the following approval was given by 
the Prime Minister (Ex.D1/2)  
“7. The Prime Minister has observed that 
Ministry of Law, Justice & Parliamentary 
Affairs has not given any specific  views in the 
matter, as per Rules of Business, 1973. 
However, under the circumstances, the 
Prime Minister has been pleased to direct 
that the Law Ministry may continue with 
the stance already taken in this case .” 
 
54.  The stance referred to in the above approval taken 
by the Ministry of Law in Annex -B to the Summary (Ex.D1/3), 
about the present issue is mentioned in Paragraphs No. 1 & 2, 
reproduced as under:  
“1. In connection with the question of 
revival of the proceedings which were 
pending before the Sw iss Authorities it has to 
be respectfully brought to the kind notice of 
this Hon’ble Court that the proceedings 
pending in Switzerland against, Shaheed 
Benazir Bhutto, Mr. Asif Ali Zardari, (now 
President of Pakistan) and Begum Nusrat 
Bhutto etc. already s tand disposed of, not Crl.O.P.6/12  50 
only because Malik Muhammad Qayyum the 
Ex-Attorney General for Pakistan had applied 
for the withdrawal of the application for 
mutual assistance and for becoming civil 
party but the same had been closed on 
merits by the Prosecutor Gene ral, Geneva 
vide his order dated 25.08.2008 . 
2. It may be respectfully submitted further 
that the evidence had been recorded in the 
case and the investigation proceedings were 
closed by the Prosecutor General Switzerland 
mainly on account of the evidence r ecorded 
by the Swiss authorities. In this view of the 
matter, it is submitted that no case 
whatsoever is pending which can be 
legally revived . This submission is inline 
with the legal opinion recorded by Mr. Anwar 
Mansoor Khan, former Attorney General for 
Pakistan under Article 100(3) of the 
Constitution, who after perusal of NAB record 
including copies of the orders passed by the 
Swiss authorities opined that the case in 
Switzerland stood disposed of on merits and 
cannot be revived.”  
 
55.  The above Para graphs mention the name of Mr. 
Asif Ali Zardari (now the President of Pakistan) and the stance 
taken is based on the order of the Prosecutor -General, Geneva, 
dated 25.08.2008 and the opinion of the then Attorney -
General for Pakistan, Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, that the case 
in Switzerland had been closed on merits and therefore cannot 
be revived. Since it was time and again stressed that the case 
in Switzerland was closed on merits we need to take a look at Crl.O.P.6/12  51 
the order of the Prosecutor General, Geneva, and the op inion 
of Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan. The former order is reproduced 
in the second Summary of the Ministry of Law (Ex.D2) at page 
No.47:  
“10. As regards Asif Ali Zardari, the Public 
Prosecutor of Pakistan , after having 
initially involved Asif Ali Zardari, drop ped all 
charges against him as well as against Jens 
Schlegelmilch, it being noted that the sentence 
pronounced in 1999 in Pakistan was revoked 
in 2001, that no new trial has been held in 
Pakistan since then that is since nearly 7 
years.  
Besides this, the P ublic Prosecutor  
believed today that the proceedings have 
been initiated against Benazir Bhutto and her 
husband for political reasons.  
Furthermore, Pakistan explains  
withdrawal of proceedings highlighting that 
the procedure of allocation of contract to SG S 
/CONTECNA was not marred by 
irregularities, admitting hence that it believes 
that no act of corruption was committed.  
Finally, the testimonies collected from 
the files and reported above show no 
conclusive evidence that would allow 
invalidating the final  observation made on the 
basis of the file by the Public Prosecutor of 
Pakistan . 
  Therefore, the proceedings, stand closed.”   
 
56.  Reference to Public Prosecutor in the above order is 
to the then Attorney -General for Pakistan (Malik Muhammad Crl.O.P.6/12  52 
Qayyum) and the order has been passed in response to his 
communication. The reason s broadly for closing the case are  
on account of the opinion expressed by Malik Muhammad 
Qayyum, that the proceedings were initiated for political 
reasons; that neither there were irregu larities in the allocation 
of the contract SGS/ CONTECNA, nor any corruption 
committed. Giving due weight  to these observations, the 
Prosecutor General, Geneva closed the case. We, therefore, 
entertain serious doubts regarding the claim that  the case in 
Switzerland was closed on merits. Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, 
in his opinion dated 25.03.2010, also referred to the order of 
the Prosecutor -General, Geneva that the case has been closed 
on merits, but pointedly mentioned the judgment of this Court 
in DR. MOBASHIR  HASSAN ’s case (ibid) in the concluding Para 
(No.12):  
“12. Notwithstanding the above, there is a 
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
Pakistan dated 16.12.2009 in DR. 
MOBASHIR HASSAN  v. FEDERATION OF 
PAKISTAN  (PLD 2010 SC 1) on the issue. It is 
therefo re opined that the Federal Government 
may decide the issue keeping in view the fact 
and the judgment”  
 
57.  In other words the then Attorney -General for 
Pakistan had opined that notwithstanding the closure of the 
case on merits, the judgment of DR.MOBASHIR  HASSAN ’s case 
(ibid) is still in the field. Though he did not put it plainly but 
what he meant was that it had to be enforced.  Crl.O.P.6/12  53 
58.  The Summary referr ed to Rule 5(1) and (2) of the 
Rules of Business  and  emphasized that “it is the Chief 
Executive of the c ountry who has the authority to approve or 
disapprove the view of the Minister.” The said Rule states:  
“(1) No important policy decision shall be 
taken except with the approval of the Prime 
Minister.  
(2) It shall be the duty of a Minister to 
assist the Pri me Minister in the formulation of 
policy.”  
   
59.  Reference was further made to Article 90 of the 
Constitution, clause (2)  of which reads:  
“In the performance of his functions under the 
Constitution, the Prime Minister may act 
either directly or through t he Federal 
Ministers.”  
 
60.  The final decision in the matter was to be taken by 
the Prime Minister, being the Chief Executive of the 
Federation. This position was not disputed even by the 
learned counsel for the Respondent. All the relevant 
documents, in cluding the opinion of the then Attorney -
General for Pakistan, with particular reference to DR. 
MOBASHIR HASSAN ’s case (ibid), along with the up to date 
interim order s of this Court, relating to implementation, were 
appended with the Summary. Out of the fo ur proposals in the 
Summary, the last was for the Prime Minister to give any 
other instruction in that regard. This was not a Summary for 
the Prime Minister relating to a routine business of the Crl.O.P.6/12  54 
Government. It involved implementation of the judgment of 
this Court in a well publicized case of immense public 
importance in which the Federal Government was not only 
represented but had filed also a review  petition . Above all it 
also involved the serving President of the country, whose 
name specifically appeared in Annex -B (Ex.D 1/3) of the 
Summary. Since the Respondent had selected one of the four 
proposals in the Summary, we have reasons to believe that he 
had applied his mind to the case and consciously approved 
the proposal given in Paragraph No.  6 (a), that t he Law 
Minister shall continue with the stance already taken in the 
case, which was to the effect that the case cannot be revived 
as the same has been closed on merits. The decision thus 
taken in the first Summary by the Respondent was not to 
implement thi s Court’s direction.  
61.  By the time the second Summary was placed 
before the Prime Minister on 21.09.2010. Mr. Justice (Retd.) 
Mohammad Aqil Mirza had resigned as Secretary Law and so 
had Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan quit the office of the Attorney -
General. Th e second Summary was prepared and placed by 
the new Law Secretary, Mr. Muhammad Masood Chishti. 
With this Summary, besides the documents appended with 
the first Summary, additional documents with fresh interim 
order s of the Court relating to the reopening of the Swiss 
cases were also appended. In Paragraph No.  17(A) of this 
Summary, besides the stand taken in the first Summary that Crl.O.P.6/12  55 
the investigation in the case already stood closed another 
reason for non -implementation of the judgment was taken, 
namely, tha t “the Federal Government is bound to act under 
the law and the Constitution  and present incumbent being 
the elected President of Pakistan cannot be offered for 
investigation or prosecution etc. to an alien land as it militate 
against the sovereignty of th e Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan .”. It may be noted that in neither of the Summaries 
or the opinions forming part of the Summaries any reference 
was made to the immunity of the President under Article 248 
of the Constitution or under the Customary Internatio nal 
Law. According to Ex.D 2/2 , the Principal Secretary to the 
Prime Minister, Ms. Nargis Sethi , on 23.09.2010, made the 
following note on the Summary:  
“20. The Prime Minister has approved the 
proposal at para 17(A) of the Summary, which 
has also been endo rsed by the Law Minister 
vide para 19, thereof.  
21. The Secretary, Law, Justice and 
Parliamentary Affairs, as well as, the 
Attorney General for Pakistan may 
appropriately explain the position to the 
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan.”  
 
62.  In her state ment before this Court, Ms. Nargis 
Sethi (DW -1) had tried to explain that Paragraph No. 21 
reflects the decision of the Prime Minister. This, however, is 
not reflected  from the Summary, as the Prime Minister had 
only approved the proposal at Paragraph No. 17(A) of the Crl.O.P.6/12  56 
Summary, and it appears that Paragraph No. 21 were the 
instructions coming from the Principal Secretary. Even if 
these were the instructions of the Respondent, the same were 
never communicated to the Court. In any case it only restates 
his consis tent position of non -implementation.  
63.  The implementation proceedings can be 
conveniently divided into two stages. The first is up to the 
date when the Full Court suspended the implementation 
proceedings, and the second, after the dismissal of the Revi ew 
Petition. The defence of the Respondent on merits in the main 
is that in the pre -review period the Court had not given 
direction specifically to the Responden t and orders passed in 
the post -review stage the only one communicated to him was 
of 16.01.2012 , calling upon the Respondent to show cause. 
These pleas would have had some relevance if the Respondent 
upon appearance in the Court in response to the show cause 
notice had expressed his willingness and readiness to comply 
with the Court’s directions. In stead he took a stand that he 
would not implement the directions as he believed that the 
same were not implementable. This stand of the Respondent 
continued right up to the conclusion of the trial. Many a time, 
during the hearing of these proceedings, the learned counsel 
for the Respondent was asked whether the Respondent would 
even now agree to write to the Swiss Authorities. The only 
response we received was that the letter cannot be written so 
long as Mr. Asif Ali Zardari remains the President of Pakista n. Crl.O.P.6/12  57 
The Respondent’s stand amounts to say ing that the order of 
this Court is non -implementable, as he believes that the same 
is not in accord with the Constitution of Pakistan and the 
International law. This argument, if accepted, would set a 
dangerous prec edent and anyone would then successfully 
flout the orders of the Courts by pleading that according to 
his interpretation they are not in accord with the law. A 
judgment debtor would then be allowed to plead before the 
executing Court that the decree agains t him was inconsistent 
with the established law. No finality would then be attached 
to the judgments and orders of the Courts, even those by the 
apex Court of the Country. One may refer to the oft  quoted 
aphorism of Robert Houghwout Jackson, J. about final ity of 
the judgment s of the Supreme Court of United States, “…… 
there is no doubt that if there were a super Supreme Court, a 
substantial proportion of our reversals of the State Courts 
would be reversed. We are not final because we are 
infallible, but we are infallible because we are final. ”  
The executive authority may question a Court’s decision 
through the judicial process  provided for in the Constitution 
and the law but is not entitled to flout it because it believe s it 
to be inconsistent with the law or the Constitution. 
Interpretation of the law is the exclusive domain of the 
judiciary.  
64.  The learned counsel for the Respondent referred to 
the order of this Court dated 01.04.2010 by a Bench headed Crl.O.P.6/12  58 
by the Hon’ble Chief Justice that the matter of reopening of 
Swiss cases was to be dealt with according to the Rules of 
Business 1973, keeping in view the relations between the two 
sovereign States  and that the Federal Government had 
followed the Court’s order by adopting the procedure laid 
down in the Rule s of Business by preparing summaries  for 
the approval of the Prime Minister. The Court undoubtedly, 
and quite rightly, stated that the Rules be followed for the 
purpose of implementation of the Court’s direction  but  
unfortunately the Rules were used for it s non -
implementation. In this context, the learned counsel placed 
heavy reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court of India 
in DR. SUBRAMANIAN SWAMY  v. DR. MANMOHAN SINGH  in 
Civil Appeal No. 1193 of 2012, decided on 31.01.2012. To 
appreciate the decisio n, some relevant facts of the case need 
to be stated. Dr. Subramanian Swamy was a private citizen 
and sought to prosecute for graft the Minister for 
Communication and Information Technology, Mr. A. Raja 
(Respondent No.2), alleging that on account of irregu larities 
committed in the allotment of new licenses in 2G mobile 
services to two companies, Novice Telecom, viz. Swan Telecom 
and Unitech, in violation of the guidelines for the purpose; a 
loss of Rs.50,000/ - crores was caused to the Government; for 
this p urpose he submitted a representation to Respondent 
No.1, Dr. Manmohan Singh, the Prime Minister of India, who 
directed the concerned officers to examine and apprise him of Crl.O.P.6/12  59 
the facts of the case . The representation was placed before a 
Committee, headed by R espondent No.2, the Minister 
concerned . Since no action was taken thereafter on the 
representation, the appellant filed an appeal before the 
Supreme Court of India for prosecution of the Minister; one of 
the questions that came before the Supreme Court was  the 
inaction of the Prime Minister on the representation of the 
appellant and the Court held that “In our view, the officers in 
the PMO and the Ministry of Law and Justice, were duty bound 
to apprise respondent No.1 about seriousness of allegations 
made b y the appellant and the judgments of this Court 
including the directions contained in paragraph 58(I) of the 
judgment in Vineet Narain’s case as also the guidelines framed 
by the CVC so as to enable him to take appropriate decision in 
the matter. By the ve ry nature of the office held by him, 
respondent No.1 is not expected to personally look into 
the minute details of each and every case placed before 
him and has to depend on his advisers and other 
officers.  Unfortunately, those who were expected to give 
proper advice to respondent No.1 and place full facts and legal 
position before him failed to do so. We have no doubt that if 
respondent No.1 had been apprised of the true factual and 
legal position regarding the representation made by the 
appellant, he woul d have surely taken appropriate decision 
and would not have allowed the matter to linger for a period of 
more than one year.”  The Court emphasized two points. Crl.O.P.6/12  60 
Firstly, that the officers in the PMO and the Ministry of Law 
and Justice were under a duty to ap prise the Prime Minister 
about the seriousness of the allegation and that the Prime 
Minister was not expected to look into minute details of each 
and every case placed before him and has to depend upon his 
officers and advisors. The Court further observed that had the 
Prime Minister been properly apprised of the true and legal 
position, he would have taken an appropriate decision. The 
situation in the case before us is totally different from DR. 
MANMOHAN SINGH ’s case (ibid). Here the case did not involve 
any intricate or minute details which required resolution. It 
was a straightforward case for implementation of the 
judgment of this Court on which there could have been no 
two views. Even if there was any, the Respondent never 
approached the Court for clarif ication. It was not a matter 
where the Respondent was left with any discretion. He was 
supposed to give a formal approval or direction to implement 
the decision of the Court. As it turned out during the current 
proceedings, the Prime Minister had never int ended to comply 
with the orders of this Court  regardless of any advice . He 
cannot shift the blame or the responsibility to his advisors for 
not giving him proper advice. The Respondent has taken a 
conscious decision in that and he must accept responsibilit y 
for the same . Even the case of MIAN MUHAMMAD NAWAZ 
SHARIF  v. THE STATE  (ibid) does not further the case as there 
Nawaz Sharif had to take a decision one way or the other on Crl.O.P.6/12  61 
the advice that was tendered to him. The Respondent had no 
option but to order th e implementation of this Court’s 
direction, particularly after the review of the Federal 
Government was dismissed.  
65.  After the review petition filed by the Federal 
Government was dismissed on 25.11.2011 with a clear 
direction that the judgment in DR. M OBASHIR HASSAN ’s case 
(ibid) shall be implemented without any further delay, the 
matter of implementation  proceedings were revived . On 
10.1.2012 (Ex.P.22) a detailed order was passed directly 
putting the Respondent on notice to implement the orders lest 
the proceedings for contempt of Court be initiated. The 
learned Attorney -General on the following date on 16.01.2012 
(Ex.P.23) informed the Court that the said order was duly 
communicated to the President of Pakistan and the Prime 
Minister of Pakistan but that he had not received any 
instruction. The learned counsel for the Respondent 
submitted that the value of such statement by the Attorney -
General is only evidence that statement was made but not of 
its contents unless the Attorney -General testifies on oath  to 
the correctness of the statement. We are afraid we cannot 
accept this argument as the Attorney -General for Pakistan is 
the principal law officer of the Federation and the statements 
made by him before the Court are official communication s 
and shall , thus, be presumed to be correct, unless validly 
contradicted. Although the Respondent, in Paragraph No.  Crl.O.P.6/12  62 
74(i) and (v) of his written statement, has stated that he was 
not made aware of the orders of the Court after September 
23, 2010, until January 2012, mor e specifically 16.01.2012, 
there is, however, no specific denial with regard to the 
Attorney -General’s statement made before the Court on 
16.01.2012. We may mention that when the learned counsel 
for the Respondent during submissions stated that the 
Respond ent was not aware of the orders of the Court, the 
then Attorney -General, Moulvi Anwar -ul-Haq intervened that 
he had conveyed all the relevant orders to the Prime Minister. 
Perhaps, that may have been the reason that before 
arguments could be addressed by t he Attorney -General, he 
was replaced. We have no doubt that the Respondent was 
made aware of the order of 16.01.2012. Be that as it may, on 
his appearance in response to the show cause notice, he still 
expressed his unwillingness to obey the Court’s orders . 
66.  Coming to the evidence in support of the charge, 
the Attorney -General for Pakistan, acting as prosecutor, 
tendered in evidence attested copies of the two judgments in 
DR. MOBASHIR HASSAN ’s case  (ibid)  and the orders of this 
Court for the implementat ion of Para graph No. 178 of the 
original judgment. The learned counsel for the Respondent 
did not raise any objection when these documents were 
tendered in evidence under Article 88 of the Qanun -e-
Shahadat Order, 1984. The only defence witness, M s. Narg is 
Sethi, the then Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, Crl.O.P.6/12  63 
mainly referred to the schedule of the Prime Minister, with a 
view to persuade the Court that the Respondent’s busy 
schedule does not allow him to examine in detail the 
summaries placed before him.  We have already observed that 
this was not a routine Summary and that as a matter of fact, 
the Prime Minister did apply his mind as, not once but twice , 
he consciously decided against the implementation. The 
witness further stated that when the Summary is returned, 
the Minister concerned is obliged to inform the Prime Minister 
of further development. We have, however, already held that 
the option exercised by the Prime Minister in the first 
Summary amounted to non -implementation of the judgment ; 
the observ ation of the Prime Minister that the Law Ministry 
had not given any definite opinion is inconsistent with his 
direction to the Ministry to continue with its stand , which 
amounts to saying that the judgment being not 
implementable shall not be implemented.  
67.  The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted 
that the prosecution had failed to establish the mens rea  of 
the Respondent. The Respondent had been charged for 
“willful”  disobedience. The mens rea  required for such charge, 
is the willfulness of the  Respondent. This is amply 
demonstrated by the conduct of the Respondent, who being 
aware of the direction of this Court, at least, from the time the 
first Summary was presented to him and being Chief 
Executive of the Federation was the ultimate authority to Crl.O.P.6/12  64 
formally carry out the orders of the Court, which he 
persistently declined. His clear direction in the second 
Summary presented to him , as discussed above , and his 
categorical stand before us upon commencement of the 
contempt proceedings when the Respon dent appeared in 
response to the show cause notice establishes beyond 
reasonable doubt that the Respondent willfully flouted, and 
continues to flout, the orders of this Court. As regards the 
second ingredient of the charge, Rule s 5(1) and (2) of the Rule 
of Business and Article 90 of the Constitution, which were 
mentioned in the first Summary , the Respondent had the 
final authority in the matter. This, as observed above, was 
also not disputed by the learned counsel for the Respondent . 
It is now admitted, an d is proved on record, that it was the 
Respondent who took the ultimate decision. With authority 
comes the duty to exercise it whe never required by a lawful 
order. The Respondent failed to obey a lawful  order , which he 
was constitutionally bound to obey.     
68.  After finding the factual allegations against the 
accused to have been established beyond  reasonable doubt , 
we now advert to some legal aspects regarding his guilt and 
punishment. We note in this context that key words used in 
the Charge were “willf ully flouted” , “disregarded”  and 
“disobeyed”  which find a specific mention not only in Section 
2(a) of the Contempt of Court Ordinance (V of 2003) defining 
“civil contempt”  but also in Section 3 of the said Ordinance Crl.O.P.6/12  65 
defining “Contempt of Court” . The said Ordinance V of 2003 
derives its authority from Article 204(3) of the Constitution, 
Article 204(2) of the Constitution itself empowers this Court 
to punish a person for committing “Contempt of Court”  and 
the above mentioned words used in the Charge framed 
against the accused also stand sufficiently covered by the 
provisions of Article 204(2) of the Constitution. It is pertinent 
to mention here that Section 221, Cr.P.C. dealing with Charge 
and its forms clarifies that a Charge is to state the offence 
and if t he offence with which an accused is charged is given a 
specific name by the relevant law then the offence may be 
described in the Charge “by that name only”.  According to 
Section 221, Cr.P.C. “If the law which creates the offence does 
not give it any speci fic name, so much of the definition of the 
offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the 
matter with which he is charged” . It is further provided in 
Section 221, Cr.P.C. that “The law and section of the law 
against which the offence is said t o have been committed shall 
be mentioned in the charge”.  In the case in hand not only the 
name of the offence, i.e. contempt of court had been specified 
in the Charge framed against the accused but even the 
relevant Constitutional and legal provisions defi ning contempt 
of court had been mentioned in the Charge framed. According 
to Section 221(5), Cr.P.C. the fact that the Charge is made in 
the terms noted above “is equivalent to a statement that every Crl.O.P.6/12  66 
legal condition required by law to constitute the offenc e 
charged was fulfilled in the particular case” . 
69.  We further note that even if a Charge framed 
against an accused for committing contempt of court is 
established before a court still for finding him guilty or for 
punishing him, even after establishing of his culpability, the 
provisions of Section 18 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance 
(V of 2003) require the following satisfactions to be recorded 
by the Court:  
“18. Substantial detriment. - (1) No 
person shall be found guilty of contempt of 
court, or punis hed accordingly, unless the 
court is satisfied that the contempt is one 
which is substantially detrimental to the 
administration of justice  or scandalizes 
the court or otherwise tends to bring the court 
or Judge of the court into hatred or ridicule . 
(2)  In the event of a person being found not 
guilty of contempt by reason of sub -section (1) 
the court may pass an order deprecating the 
conduct, or actions, of the person accused of 
having committed contempt.”  
 
70.  These provisions of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance clearly show that despite his culpability having 
been established , a Court seized of a matter of contempt is 
not to hold the offender guilty or punish him for every trivial 
contempt committed and it is only a grave contempt having 
the effects menti oned in Section 18(1) that may be visited 
with a finding of guilt or punishment. It is important to note Crl.O.P.6/12  67 
in this context that the satisfaction of the Court mentioned in 
section 18(1) regarding gravity of the contempt is to be 
adverted to by it after commis sion of the contempt is duly 
established and such satisfaction of the Court is neither an 
ingredient of the offence nor a fact to be proved through 
evidence. In our considered opinion such satisfaction is 
purely that of the Court concerned keeping in view the nature 
of the contempt found to have been committed, its potential 
regarding detrimental effect upon administration of justice or 
scandalizing the Court and its tendency to bring the Court or 
the Judge into hatred or ridicule. At such stage the contemp t 
of Court attributed to the offender already stands established 
and assessment of the tendency of the contempt to possibly 
create the above mentioned detrimental effects is thereafter to 
be undertaken by the Court for its own satisfaction in order 
to deci de whether to convict or punish the offender or not and 
such satisfaction based upon judicially assessed possible 
effects is not to be based upon proofs or evidence to be 
produced during the trial. However, if the Court is not 
satisfied about the above men tioned detrimental effects then 
despite the contempt having been established and proved , it 
may not convict or punish the offender and may resort to 
merely deprecating the conduct or actions of the accused in 
terms of Section 18(2) of the Ordinance. We may  also add that 
the satisfactions of the Court contemplated by Section 18(1) 
of the Ordinance are the minimum thresholds to be crossed Crl.O.P.6/12  68 
and there is no limit  upon a Court regarding not recording 
satisfaction in respect of any graver detriment or tendency 
made possible by the conduct or actions of an offender. In the 
case in hand the accused is the highest Executive functionary 
of the State of Pakistan and he has willfully, deliberately and 
persistently defied a clear direction of the highest Court of the 
coun try. We are, therefore, fully satisfied that such clear and 
persistent defiance at such a high level constitutes contempt 
which is substantially detrimental to the administration of 
justice  and tends not only  to bring  this Court but also  brings 
the judicia ry of this country into ridicule. After all, if orders or 
directions of the highest court of the country are defied by the 
highest Executive of the country then others in the country 
may also feel tempted to follow the example leading to a 
collapse or para lysis of administration of justice besides 
creating an atmosphere wherein judicial authority and 
verdicts are laughed at and ridiculed.  
71.  It may be mention ed that the learned counsel for 
the Respondent in his written submission s brought on the 
record a t the end of his oral arguments had specifically 
adverted to the provisions of section 18 of the Contempt of 
Court Ordinance and, thus, he was fully aware of the 
applicability and implications of the said legal provision vis-à-
vis the case against him. It is, however, another thing that 
throughout his  oral arguments and submissions the learned 
counsel for the accused had failed to utter even a single word Crl.O.P.6/12  69 
on the subject. The Respondent was put on notice through 
Option No.2 in the order dated 10.01.2012 (Ex.P22) of the 
possible consequences of non -compliance of this Court’s 
direction  and the relevant portion of that order reads : 
“5. This brings us to the actions we may 
take against willful disobedience to and non -
compliance of some parts of the judgment 
rende red and some of the directions issued 
by this Court in the case of Dr. Mobashir 
Hassan (supra). This Court has inter alia the 
following options available with it in this 
regard:  
 
------------------------  
------------------------  
 
……… It may not be lost sigh t of that, 
apart from the other consequences, by 
virtue of the provisions of clauses (g) and 
(h) of Article 63(1) read with Article 113 
of the Constitution a possible conviction 
on such a charge may entail a 
disqualification from being elected or 
chosen as , and from being, a member of 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) or a 
Provincial Assembly for at least a period 
of five years.”  
72.  For the above reasons we convicted and 
sentenced the Respondent by short order on 26.04.2012, 
as follows : Crl.O.P.6/12  70 
“For reasons to be reco rded later, the 
accused Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani, Prime 
Minister of Pakistan/Chief Executive of the 
Federation, is found guilty of and 
convicted for contempt of court under 
Article 204(2) of the Constitution of Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan, 1973 read with 
section 3 of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance (Ordinance V of 2003) for willful 
flouting, disregard and disobedience of 
this Court’s direction contained in 
paragraph No. 178 of the judgment 
delivered in the case of Dr. Mobashir 
Hassan  v. Federation of Pakis tan (PLD 
2010 SC 265) after our satisfaction that 
the contempt committed by him is 
substantially detrimental to the 
administration of justice and tends to 
bring this Court and the judiciary of this 
country into ridicule.  
2.  As regards the sentence to be 
passed against the convict we note that 
the findings and the conviction for 
contempt of court recorded above are likely 
to entail some serious consequences in Crl.O.P.6/12  71 
terms of Article 63(1)(g) of the Constitution 
which may be treated as mitigating factors 
towards the sentence to be passed against 
him. He is, therefore, punished under 
section 5 of the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance (Ordinance V of 2003) with 
imprisonment till the rising of the Court 
today.”  
 
      Judge  
   
      Judge    
     
      Judge  
 
      Judge    
  
      Judge  
   
      Judge    
  
      Judge  
ISLAMABAD  
26th April, 2012  
Shirazi & Mudassar .  
“APPROVED FOR REPORTING. ” Crl.O.P.6/12  72 
Asif Saeed Khan Khosa, J. : I have had the privilege of 
going through the proposed judgment authored by my learned brother 
Nasir -ul-Mulk , J. and I am in respectful agree ment  with the same. I 
would, however, add the following note to the proposed judgment.  
 
2. In the context of the case in hand I am reminded of the 
following unforgettable  words of Khalil Gibran  that paint a picture 
which unfortunately appears quite familiar :  
 
Pity the Nation  
 
Pity the nation that is full of beliefs and empty of religion.  
 
Pity the nation that wears a cloth it does not weave,  
eats a bread it does not harvest,  
and drinks a wine that flows not from its own wine -press.  
 
Pity the nation that acclaims the bully as hero,  
and that deems the glittering conqueror bountiful.  
 
Pity the nation that despises a passion in its dream,  
 
Pity the nation that raises not its voice  
save when it walks in a funeral,  
boasts not except among its ruins,  
and will rebel not save when its neck is laid  
between the sword and the block.  
 
Pity the nation whose  statesman is a fox,  
whose philosopher is a juggler,  
and whose art is the art of patching and mimicking.  
 
Pity the nation that welcomes its new ruler with trumpeting,  
and farewells him with hooting,  
only to welcome another with trumpeting again.  
 
Pity the nation whose sages are dumb with years  
and whose strong men are yet in the cradle.  
 
Pity the nation divided into fragments,  
each fragment deeming itself a nation.  
 
3. With an apology to Khalil Gibran, and with reference to the 
present context, I may add as  follows:  
 
Pity the nation that achieves nationhood in the name of a religion  
but pays little heed to  truth, righteousness and accountability  
which are the essence of every religion.  
 Crl.O.P.6/12  73 
Pity the nation that proclaims  democracy as its polity  
but restricts it to queuing up for  casting of ballots only  
and discourages democratic values . 
 
Pity the nation that measures honour with success  
and respect with authority,  
that despises sublime and cherishes mundane,  
that treats a criminal as a hero and considers civility  as weakness  
and that deems a sage a fool and venerates the wicked.  
 
Pity the nation that adopts  a Constitution  
but allows political interests to outweigh constitutional diktat .        
 
Pity the nation that demands justice for all  
but is agitated when jus tice hurts  its political loyalty.  
 
Pity the nation whose servants treat their solemn oaths  
as nothing more than a formality before entering upon an office.  
 
Pity the nation that elects a leader as a redeemer  
but expects him to bend every law  to favour his benefactors . 
 
Pity the nation whose leaders seek martyrdom  
through  disobeying the law  
than giving sacrifices for the glory of law  
and who see no shame in crime.  
 
Pity the nation that is led by those  
who laugh at the law  
little realizing that the law shal l have the last laugh.  
 
Pity the nation that launches a movement for rule of law  
but cries foul when the law is applied against its bigwig , 
that reads judicial verdicts through political glasses  
and that permits  skills of advocacy to be  practised  
more  vigorously outside the courtroom than inside.  
 
Pity the nation that punishes its weak and poor  
but is shy of bringing its high and mighty to book.  
 
Pity the nation that clamours for equality before law  
but has selective justice close to its heart.  
 
Pity the n ation that thinks from its heart  
and not from its head . 
 
Indeed, pity the nation  
that does not discern villainy from nobility.            
 
4. I must clarify that I do not want to spread despair or 
despondency and it m ay be appreciated that no reform or 
improvement is possible until the ills or afflictions are identified and 
addressed.  The respondent’s conduct in this case regrettably appears 
to be symptomatic of a bigger malady which, if allowed to remain Crl.O.P.6/12  74 
unchecked or uncured, may overwhelm or engulf all o f us as a nation 
and I recall here what Johne Donne had written:   
Each man’s death diminishes me,  
For I am involved in mankind.  
Therefore, send not to know  
For whom the bell tolls,  
It tolls for thee.  
 
5. Khalil Gibran had also harped on a somewhat similar  theme as 
under:  
 
On Crime and Punishment  
  
Oftentimes have I heard you speak of one who commits a wrong as 
though he were not one of you, but a stranger unto you and an 
intruder upon your world.  
But I say that even as the holy and the righteous cannot ri se 
beyond the highest which is in each one of you,  
So the wicked and the weak cannot fall lower than the lowest 
which is in you also.  
And as a single leaf turns not yellow but with the silent knowledge 
of the whole tree,  
So the wrong -doer cannot do wrong w ithout the hidden will of you  
all. 
Like a procession you walk together towards your god -self. 
You are the way and the wayfarers.  
And when one of you falls down he falls for those behind him, a 
caution against the stumbling stone.  
Ay, and he falls for those  ahead of him, who though faster and 
surer of foot, yet removed not the stumbling stone.  
 
And this also, though the word lie heavy upon your hearts:  
The murdered is not unaccountable for his own murder,  
And the robbed is not blameless in being robbed.  
The righteous is not innocent of the deeds of the wicked,  
And the white -handed is not clean in the doings of the felon.  
Yea, the guilty is oftentimes the victim of the injured,  
And still more often the condemned is the burden bearer for the 
guiltless and unbla med.  
You cannot separate the just from the unjust and the good from the 
wicked;  
For they stand together before the face of the sun even as the black 
thread and the white are woven together.  
And when the black thread breaks, the weaver shall look into the 
whole cloth, and he shall examine the loom also.  
 
6. I deem it important and relevant to explain here the conceptual 
basis of the law regarding contempt of court. The power to punish a 
person for committing contempt of court is primarily a power of the Crl.O.P.6/12  75 
peop le of this country to punish such person for contemptuous 
conduct or behavior displayed by him towards the courts created by 
the people for handling the judicial functions of the State and such 
power of the people has been entrusted or delegated by the peo ple to 
the courts through the Constitution. It must never be lost sight of that 
the ultimate ownership of the Constitution and of the organs  and  
institutions  created thereunder as well as of all the powers of such 
organs and institutions  rests with the peo ple of the country who have 
adopted the Constitution and have thereby created all the organs and 
institutions established under it. It may be advantageous to reproduce  
here the relevant words of the Preamble to the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of P akistan, 1973:  
 
“we, the people of Pakistan -------  Do hereby, through our 
representatives in the National Assembly, adopt, enact and give to 
ourselves, this Constitution .”  
 
It is, thus, obvious that a person defying a judicial verdict in fact 
defies the  will of the people at large and the punishment meted out to 
him for such recalcitrant conduct or behavior is in fact inflicted upon 
him not by the courts but by the people of the country themselves 
acting through the courts created and established by them . It may be 
well to remember that t he constitutional balance vis-à-vis trichotomy 
and separation of powers between the Legislature, the Judiciary and 
the Executive is very delicately poised and if in a given situation the 
Executive is bent upon defying a f inal judicial verdict and is ready to 
go to any limit in such defiance , including  taking the risk of bringing 
down the constitutional structure itself , then in the final analysis it 
would be the responsibility of the people themselves to stand up for 
defen ding the Constitution and the organs and institutions created and 
established thereunder and for dealing with the delinquent  
appropriately . It shall simply be naïve to underestimate the power of 
the people in matters concerning enforcement of their will. T he recent 
phenomenon known as the Arab Spring is too fresh to be ignored or 
forgotten. Going back a little , when told about the Pope’s anger over Crl.O.P.6/12  76 
the ruthless Stalinist suppression of dissent  within Russia  Joseph 
Stalin dismissively made a  scornful query “The Pope? H ow many 
divisions does he have?" History tells us that the will of the Russian 
people ultimately prevailed over the Soviet Union’s army of countless 
divisions. A page from our own recent history reminds us that the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan did not possess or control any division when 
he refused to obey  the unconstitutional dictates of General Pervez  
Musharraf , who commanded  quite a few divisions, and still emerged 
victorious with the help of the people. The lesson to be learnt is that if 
the cau se is constitutional and just then the strength and support for 
the same is received from the people at large who are the ultimate 
custodians of the Constitution. I am not too sure as to how many 
divisions would a population of over 180 million make!  
 
7. The respondent is the Chief Executive of our Federation who 
has openly and brazenly defied the Constitutional and legal mandate 
regarding compliance of and obedience to this Court’s judgments and 
orders. The following words of Justice Louis Brandeis of the  United 
States Supreme Court in the case of Olmstead  v. United States  (227 
U.S. 438, 485) seem to be quite apt to a situation like this:   
 
“In a government of laws, existence of the government will be 
imperiled if it fails to observe the law scrupulously.  Our 
Government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher.  For good or for 
ill, it teaches the whole people by its example.  Crime is 
contagious.  If the Government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds 
contempt for law; it invites every man to become a law unto 
himse lf; it invites anarchy. ”             
 
The respondent is our elected representative and our Prime Minister 
and in his conviction lies our collective damnation. This surely calls 
for serious introspection. I believe that t he proposed judgment 
authored by my learned brother Nasir -ul-Mulk, J. is a step towards the 
right direction a s it kindles a flame of hope for a future for our nation 
which may establish  a just and fair order , an order wherein the law 
rules and all citizens are equal before the law.  
 Crl.O.P.6/12  77 
 
(Asif S aeed Khan Khosa)  
Judge  
 
 