IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
Mr. Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
 
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 1316  of 2016  
(Against the judgment dated 06.10.2016  passed by the Peshaw ar 
High Court Peshawar  in Crl. A . No.602-P/2013 ) 
 
 
Rooh Ullah, etc.  
 
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
The State, etc.  
 
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Muhammad Ilyas Siddiqi, ASC  
    
For the State : Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi,  
 Addl. Advocate Gener al, KP 
 
For the Respondent(s):  Mr. Talat Mahmood Zaidi, ASC  
 
Date of Hearing : 03.01.2022 . 
 
ORDER  
 
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J .- Tarifullah, 55/60, and 
Muhammad Rawail, 20, were shot dead  on 11.06.2007 at 5:00 p.m.  
within the precincts of Police Station  Razakhel, District Nowshera, in 
the backdrop of a n ongoing  feud over a piece of property; Tariq Azam 
PW survived the assault  to report  the inc ident to the police at 7:25 p.m ; 
the petitioners  claimed trial before a learned Addl. Sessions Judge at 
Nowshera  that culminated into their conviction  both on the charges of 
homicide as well as murderous assault vide judgment dated 
31.10.2013 ; they were sentenced to imprisonment for life as well as  
5-years rigorous imprisonment , respectively ; co -accused Shahid , 
arrayed through supplementary statement,  was, however, acquitted 
from the charge , maintained by the High Court , vide impugned 
judgment dated 06.10.2016, vires whereof, are being assailed by the 
petitioners on the grounds that  prosecution case , fraught with 
contradictions and  doubts , merited outright rejection , in the face of an 
unproved motive . Prosecution’s failure to effect recovery of weapon from 
Rooh Ullah  petitioner  yet another predicament faced by the prosecution  
and, thus,  evidence furnished by the injur ed PW  was far from being the 
whole truth and, thus, was not worthy of implicit reliance, concluded 
the learned counsel . Contrarily, learned Law Officer assisted by learned 
counsel for complainant defended the impugned judgment .  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  We have gone through the statements of eye witnesses  that 
include an injured to find them in a comfortable unison both on the 
salient features of the case as well as matters collateral thereto . No 
doubt, injuries on the person of a witness are not a pa ssport into the 
realm of truth, however, the learned counsel has not been able to point 
out even a single circumstance to suspect testimony of Azam Tariq PW. 
Incident , a daylight affair,  was reported with a remarkable promptitude  
followed by examination of  the injured  as well as  autopsy ,  
circumstances that cumulatively exclude possibility of consultations  or 
deliberations.  Investigating Officer’s failure to recover a weapon from 
Rooh Ullah does not overshadow the preponderance of prosecution 
evidence  that includes recovery from  the principal accused.  Bald 
denial s alone do not override  the prosecution evidence, rightly relied by 
the courts below. Petition fails. Leave refused.  
 
       
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
3rd January , 202 2 
Azmat /- 