IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
        (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
  Present  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
   Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
CMAs Nos.3685 -3686/12  
(6th and 7th progress report by the NAB  in RPPs Case ) 
   IN 
Human Rights Case No.7734 -G/2009  
 
On Court’s Notice:  Mr. Fauzi Kazmi, ADPGA  
    Mr. Raza Khan, Director  
    Mr. Kamran Faisal, Astt. Director/I.O.  
 
Date of hearing :     14.09.2012.  
 
    O R D E R  
 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.   In thi s case judgment was 
passed as back as on 30th March, 2012 wherein alleged corruption in 
rental power plants contracts was highlighted in its different paras. In 
paragraphs  25 and 27 as well as in the concluding paragraph of the 
impugned judgment dated 30th March, 2012 corruption and corrupt 
practices has been specifically mentioned as well as criminal actions on 
the part of the persons who had taken the benefits. In fact, the judgment 
itself speaks about the misappropriation made by the concerned 
authoriti es. Despite specific directions for implementing the judgment 
in letter and spirit the NAB authorities had intentionally avoided to 
implement the same which is a clear violation of 
directions/observations of this Court and thereby prima facie 
committed con tempt of Court as envisaged under Article 204 of the 
Constitution read with Section 3 of the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 
2003. Mr. Fauzi Kazmi, ADPG NAB when questioned, stated that 
Muhammad Rafi, Amir Shahid, Ashgar Khan and presently Kamran 
Faisal is th e I.O. in the case. Mr. Raza Khan, Zahir Shah were also 
supervising the investigation. One Col. Shahzad Anwar Bhatti, D.G. was also heading the investigation team. Show Cause notice be issued 
to the Chairman NAB as well as the above named officers to appea r 
and show cause as to why the contempt proceedings may not be 
initiated against them for non -implementing the Court judgment. We 
may note that the Chairman NAB shall be responsible if the officers 
responsible for delaying the implementation of this Court’ s judgment 
are gone out of country or take any other evasive measures. The reply 
to the show cause notice shall be submitted within seven days. The case 
shall be relisted on 25th September, 2012.  
 
 
         CJ. 
 
         J. 
 
         J. 
Islamabad,   
14.09. 2012.  
M. Azhar Malik  