IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ  
  MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB  
  MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
  MR. JUSTICE MUNIB AKHTAR  
 
 
CMA NO.61 55/2018 IN CONST ITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
Advertisement by  UBL and HBL regarding raising of Funds for Diamer Bhasha and 
Mohmand Dam by the government of Pakistan . 
 
In attendance : Mr. Khalid Jawed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Syed Nayyar Abbas Rizvi, Addl.A.G.P.  
Mr. Tariq Bajwa, Governor State Bank.  
Mr. Ar if Ahmed Khan, Secy. Finance.  
Mr. Saleemullah Khan, Executive Director 
(Finance State Bank).  
Dr. Rahim Awan, Secy.  
Law & Justice Commission  
Mr. Sanaullah Gondal,  
Dy. Legal Advisor (State Bank)  
Syed Ansar Hussain, Assistant Director  
State Bank  
Mr. Muham mad Saleem Baig,  
Chairman PEMRA  
Ms. Rukhsana Yasmeen, Chairman FBR.  
Dr. Muhammad Iqbal, Member FBR.  
Mr. Ali Naseer, Jazz.  
Muhammad Basharat, Telenor.  
Muhammad Ayub, Zong.  
Naveed K. Butt, U -fone) 
Mr. M. Talib Dogar, D. G. (Service) PTA.  
Mr. Arif Sargana , Director  (PTA) ECO.  
Mr. Aadil Umer Khalil, Dir (CA) PTA.  
Mr. Muhammad Khurram Siddiqui , 
(Dir) Law PTA.  
 
  
Date of hearing:  11.07.2018  
 
ORDER  
  Vide order dated 04.07.2018 , passed by this 
Court, we had emphasized the urgent need for construction of 
Dams and appealed to the Nation to make its contribution in 
a fund being established for this purpose by way of donations 
for this National cause. The State Bank of Pakistan has CMA NO.6155/2018 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
 -: 2 :-
accordingly set up an account titled, “Supreme Court of 
Pakistan – Diamer Bhasha & Mohmand Dams – Fund” . The 
account has been set up to receive donations from the Nation 
for the sole purpose of construction of the aforenoted Dams  
(Diamer Bhasha & Mohmand Dams) .  
 
2.  Donations can be made at all Branches of the 
State Bank of Pakistan, all Treasur y Offices  and Branches of 
National Bank of Pakistan as well as  other Banks including 
Micro Finance Banks. Such donations can be made in the 
form of cash, cheques, pay orders, demand drafts, prize 
bonds deposited either at the counters or through  online 
transfers. The Banks receiving such donations shall provide 
duly stamped/signed receipts acknowledging receipt of the 
donations.  
 
3.  Branches of all Banks (15000 approximately)  
across the country receiving  such deposits shall prominently 
display b anners on their entry points stating that donations / 
contributions  are being received in these branches for the 
construction of Diamer Bhasha & Mohmand Dams as ordered 
by the ‘Supreme Court of Pakistan’.  
   
4.  The State Bank of Pakistan has set up a Toll Free 
Helpline No.021 -111-723-273 for answering queries as well 
as receiving complaints from anyone interested in making a 
donation. Other Banks shall also set up their separate 
Helplines which will be notified through their advertisements  
in the Print and  Electronic Media.  CMA NO.6155/2018 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
 -: 3 :-
5.  An IBAN Number has also been allocated to 
facilitate receipt of online donations/contributions in the 
Fund through internet banking and ATMs.  This IBAN Number 
shall be displayed on the websites of the State Bank of 
Pakistan and the S upreme Court of Pakistan.   
 
6.  Persons wishing to make donations through 
Credit/Debit Cards  may do so without any extra charge on 
payments made through such Cards if these are issued 
domestically. However, payments made through credit/debit 
Cards issued outside Pakistan will be subject to charges (if 
any) applicable in the respective countries.  
 
7.  Branchless Banking i.e. Omni/Easy  Paisa , etc 
operated by their approximately 400000 Agents across the 
country shall be made functional within 48 hours from to day. 
All donations/ contributions received in any form and in any 
Bank shall within a maximum time of 30 minutes of the 
transaction s be transmitted to the Fund account with the 
State Bank of Pakistan.  
 
8.  Donations/contributions received by Banks 
through Debit/Credit Cards  transactions and Branchless 
Banking  Agents shall be settled with the State Bank of 
Pakistan within 48 hours.  
 
9.  The State Bank of Pakistan  shall communicate the 
amount s received in its account to the Registrar of this Court 
on hourly basis through its data acquisition portal.  CMA NO.6155/2018 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
 -: 4 :-
10.  The Pakistani Missions as well as all Branches of 
Pakistani Banks abroad shall receive 
donations/contributions. The routing instructions for 
remittances from abroad shall be displayed on the websites of 
this Court as well as the State Bank of Pakistan.  
 
11.  The Ministry of Foreign  Affairs is directed to issue 
appropriate directions to the Pakistani Missions abroad in 
consultation  with the State Bank of Pakistan for receiving 
donations / contributions and tra nsmission of the amounts 
received  by them  to the designated  account of the Fund with 
the State Bank of Pakistan.  
 
12.  Subscribers of cellular mobile  phone  companies 
namely Mobilink (Jazz), Telenor, Zong and Ufone wishing to 
make donations / contributions may dial short code i.e. 8000 
which will result in an automatic deduction of Rs.10/ -. The 
amount so received by the said Companies shall be 
transferred on daily basis to the Fund with the State Bank of 
Pakistan.  All four cellular mobile phone companies sha ll 
display on their websites , the amounts received by them 
which shall be transferred to the Fund account on daily 
basis.  
 
13.  Aforesaid c ellular mobile phone companies have 
voluntarily undertaken  to run a media campaign  of 5-8 
seconds on the Print and E lectronic Media publicizing this 
initiative.  
 CMA NO.6155/2018 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
 -: 5 :-
14.  Mobilink (Jazz) and Telenor shall also facilitate 
receipt of contribution s / donations through Jazz Cash and 
Easy P aisa modes. These companies shall advertise the mode 
and manner through which contributio ns/donations through 
Jazz Cash and Easy P aisa can be made. All amounts received 
in this regard shall be transferred to the Fund with the State 
Bank of Pakistan on daily basis.  
 
15.  All four cellular mobile phone companies through 
their respective Banks s hall provide details of collections to 
the Registrar  of this Court and shall also display details 
thereof on their respective websites on daily basis which shall 
be accessible  to the public.  
 
16.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has 
in consul tation  with the State Bank of Pakistan, Pakistan 
Telecommunication Authority  and Print & Electronic Media 
Regulatory Authority prepared an advertisement campaign  for 
the media to increase public awareness through the Print as 
well as Electronic Media  which  shall be run by all Print and 
Electronic Media houses/channels/FM Radio Station free of 
cost as public service messages . 
 
17.  PEMRA and the Ministry of Information shall 
ensure that the media campaign  for the Fund run effectively 
and efficiently and is allocated sufficient  time during prime 
hours for raising public awareness about the , “Supreme 
Court of Pakistan – Diamer Bhasha & Mohmand Dams – 
Fund”.  CMA NO.6155/2018 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
 -: 6 :-
18.  We direct the Ministry of Law & Justice in 
consultation with Federal Board of Revenue to promulgate an 
Ordinance  for inter alia  making appropriate amendments in 
different laws including the Income Tax Ordinance to ensure 
that donations/contributions made to the F und are not 
subjected to any taxes or deductions. The contributions made 
to the Fund shall be  treated as contributions towards 
charitable purposes and shall not be liable to any tax /duty  
whatsoever. The Ordinance shall also cater for the following: - 
i) Exemption to any income of, “Supreme 
Court of Pakistan  – Diamer Bhasha & 
Mohmand Dams – Fund;  
 
ii) Exem ption to the Fund from minimum tax 
on turn over under Section 113 of the 
Income Tax Ordinance, 2001;  
 
iii) Exemption from withholding tax on payment 
received by the Fund;  
 
iv) All Provincial Governments and their 
respective Revenue authorities shall provide 
appropr iate exemptions under their 
respective Laws and if necessary issue 
appropriate Ordinance s; 
 
v) Any person making donations /contributions 
to the Fund shall not be subjected to any 
inquiry or probe as to the sources of the 
funds utilized for making contributio ns/ 
donations by any Department, authority or 
person; and  
 
vi) The Auditor General of Pakistan  as well as 
all Accountant Generals of the Provinces 
shall assist the Registrar of this Court in CMA NO.6155/2018 IN CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.57/2016  
 -: 7 :-
maintaining, operating and conducting 
audits of the Fund from time to  time.  
 
19.  This Court has not authorized any individual or 
group, etc to collect donations.  
 
20.  We are confident that the systems being put in 
place on the recommendation of the Governor, State Bank of 
Pakistan , various Government Departments as well as 
representatives of the Cellular Mobile Phone Companies and 
other experts shall operate smoothly and seamlessly  towards 
achieving the objective of this national cause. All concerned 
have assured this Court that in case any problems are 
experienced  at any  stage and of any nature in receipt of 
contributions , the same shall immediately be resolved.  
 
21.  Let this matter be listed for hearing 30.07.2018 . 
  
 
  CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISLAMABAD, THE  
11th of July, 2018 . 
ZR/*  
NOT APPROVED FOR REPORTING  
   
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
   
 