IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Sajjad Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 83-P/2013 &  
Jail Petition  No.474/2017  
(Against judgment dated 30.05.2013 passed by the 
Peshawar High Court, Peshawar in Criminal Appeal  No. 
478-P/2012 and Murder Reference No. 19-P/2012 ) 
 
 
Izzat Ullah  
(in Cr.P. No.83 -P/2013)  
Mst. Robina  
(in J.P. No.474 /2017 ) 
 
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State  
…Res pondent  
 
 
For the  petitioner : Mr. Altaf Samad, ASC  
 (in Cr.  Petition No. 83-P/2013)   
 Mrs. Farhana Naz Marwat, ASC  
  (in Jail Petition No. 474-P/2017 ) 
  
For the State:  Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi ,  
 Addl.  A.G., KPK 
   
    
Date of hearing:  27.09.2019 . 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J.   Jail Petition No.474 
of 2017  by Mst. Robina and Criminal Petition for Leave to Appeal  
No.83-P/2013  by her co -convict Izzat  Ullah , bound by a common 
thread, are being decid ed through this single judgment; they were 
intercepted  on 27.3.2010 at 10:00 a.m.  within the precincts of 
Police Station  Muhammad Riaz Shaheed District Kohat  at a check -
post while travelling in a vehicle bearing Registration No. AJD-911 Criminal  Petition  No. 83-P/2013 &  
Jail Petition No.474/2017  2
Sindh. Izzat Ullah  petitioner was on the wheel , Mst. Robina  being 
next to him ; on a suspect response , when questioned , the vehicle 
was extensively searched and the police contingent succeeded to 
discover a secret cavity in the fuel tank wherefrom 20 packs each 
with 1050 grams heroin  were recovered . Soon after  the arrest , Mst. 
Robina was produced before Mr. T illa Muhammad, Judicial 
Magistrate (PW -1) who recorded her confessional statement 
(Ex.PW -1/2). Izzat Ullah  petitioner opted to make his breast clean 
on the following day  through statement (Ex.PW -1/5). As the 
investigation pr ogressed, co-accused Majnoon son of Rustam was 
also taken on board for having dispatched the consignment.  One 
Fida, an alleged privy to the transaction , is still away from the law.  
Upon indictment, the accused claimed trial whereupon prosecution 
produced a s many as eight witnesses , besides the forensic report 
to drive h ome the charge; they confronted prosecution evidence 
with unanimous denials with a reticence as  to why they were roped 
in the case.   The learned trial Judge extended benefit of the doubt 
to Majnoon co -accused, however, vide judgment dated 9.10.2012 
proceeded to convict  Izzat Ullah  and Robina Bibi under section 9(c) 
of the Control of Narcotic Substances Act, 1997 ; the former was 
sentence d to death while l atter to imprisonment for life; their 
convictions were maintained by the High Court , however, death 
penalty awarded to Izzat Ullah  was altered into imprisonment  for 
life and it is so done  on the request of his counsel on account of 
his be ing merely a carrier without deriving much benefit from the 
crime .  
2.  Validity of confessional statements  as well as 
prosecution’s failure to establish safe custody and transmission 
are the main planks stressed on behalf of the convicts  besides non -
availability of public witnesses to attest the recovery.   
3.  Confessional statements before T illa Muhammad , 
Judicial Magistrate  (PW-1), though  retracted subsequently present  
formidable piece of evidence, inexorably pointed upon the convicts’ 
culpability. Mst. Robina made disclosure within a small span of 
time soon after her arrest, during her first appearance before the 
Magistrate ; Izzat Ullah  followed the suit; both of them after having  Criminal  Petition  No. 83-P/2013 &  
Jail Petition No.474/2017  3
been administered warning s and  cautions, t hough disapprovingly 
on a printed  format , nonetheless,  made statements  otherwise 
found by us as voluntary , natural and truthful  with relevant 
details compatible with the salient features of the case ; brief 
interregnum rules out  hypothesis of manipulation. Other pieces of 
evidence have been found by us as independently sufficient to 
drive home the charge ; forensic report confirms the lethal nature of 
the substance , recovered in a quantity  that cannot be possibly 
foisted in routine ; seizure of the vehicle cli nches the case . 
Argument of safe custody does not hold much water as Abdul 
Faraz 28/C (PW -10) took the sample to the Forensic Science 
Laboratory along with Rahdari  Ex.PW8/3 was not cross -examined 
despite opportunity.  Forensic Report ( Ex.PZ) corroborates th e 
position taken by the said PW. Absence of public witnesses is 
beside the mark ; public recusal is an unfortunate norm. 
Prosecution witnesses are in a comfortable unison ; being 
functionaries of the Republic, they are second to none in status  
and their evidence can be relied upon unreservedly, if found trust 
worthy, as in the case in hand . Both the courts below have 
undertaken an exhaustive  analysis of the prosecution case and 
concurred in their conclusion s regarding petitioners’ guilt and we 
have not been able to take a different view  than concurrently taken 
by them . Petitions fail. Dismissed.    
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
27th September,  2019  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /-  
 