IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN
 
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
  PRESENT:
 
  MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, HCJ  
  MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
  MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
 
 
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.05/2012  AND CMA NOS.2382, 
2487, 2492, 2876 & 34 46/2012.
 
(Under Article 184(3) of the Constitution)  
 
 
 
Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi        Petitioner  
 
VERSUS
 
 
Federation of Pakistan thr.  
Secretary Law and others                      Respondents   
 
 
For the petitioner (s):   Petitioner in person  
   (in Const .P.5/2012)  
 
 
For the applicant (s):   Malik Waheed Anjum, ASC , 
In-person   
   (in CMA -2382/12)  
   Dr. Tariq Asad, ASC , 
   In-person  
   (in CMA -2487/12)  
   Ms. Samira Basharat , 
   In-person  
   (in CMA -2876/12)  
   Mr. M. Shoaib Lodhi  
   (absent CMA -2492/12)  
  
On Court Notice:    Mr. M. Irfan Qadir,  
   Attorney General for Pakistan  
   Assisted by  
Barrister Shehryar Riaz Sheikh, Adv.  
 
For the respondents:   Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, DAG  
(1,2,4,6,8,& 10)    Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
Syed Sher Afghan, D.G. (Electi ons)    
 
For respondent No.3:   Mr. Qasim Mir Jat, Addl. A.G. Sindh  
 
 Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 2 :- 
For respondent No.5:   Mr. Jawwad Hassan, Addl. A.G. PB.  
 
For respondent No.7:   Mr. Azam Khattak, Addl.AG Balochistan  
 
For respondent No.9:   Syed Arshad Hussain, Addl. A.G. KPK  
 
For Ms. Farah Naz Isfahani:  Mr. Waseem Sajjad, Sr. ASC  
          Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR assisted by  
          Mr. Idrees Ashraf, Adv.  
 
 
For Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA:  Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  
& Dr. Ahmad Ali Shah, MPA:  
 
For Mr. A. Rehman Malik:  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr.  ASC  
   Mr. Muhammad Azhar Ch., ASC  
   Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR   
 
 
For Ms. Amna Buttar, MPA   Mr. Khawar Mehmood  
& Mr. Wasim Qadir, MPA   Khattana, ASC      
 
 
For Tariq Mehmood Aloana,  Mr. Saeed Yousaf, ASC  
MPA 
 
For Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA  Mian Sultan Tan vir, ASC  
 
For Ms. Anusha Rehman,  Kh. Haris Ahmed, Sr. ASC  
MNA.    With Ms. Anusha Rehman  
 
For Mr. Sabir Ali Baloch,  Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC  
Senator  
Kh. Muhammad Asif, MNA   
in person  
 
For Mr. Jamil Ahmed Malik,          Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, ASC  
MNA.     Mr. Mehr Khan Malik, AOR  
  
 (in CMA -2382/12):    Mr. Muhammad Akhlaq, MPA (Pb) 
   in person  
    Mr. Farhat Mehmood Khan, MNA 
   (absent)  
Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Chohan, MPA                  
(absent)  
    Ms. Nadia Ghabool, MPA (Sindh) (absent)  
      Ch. Kha dim Nadeem, MPA (Pb) (absent)  
 
 
For Sardar Shahjehan Yousaf,  Hafiz S. A. Rehman, Sr. ASC  
MNA    Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR with  
Sardar Shahjehan Yousaf, MNA  
    Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 3 :- 
Dates of hearing:  08th, 10th , 16th , 25th & 30th May, 
04th  13th , 21st  & 25th June,  02nd  
03rd, 04th & 23rd July,  09th,  12th , 
17th , and 18th September 2012.  
 
JUDGMENT  
  KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN, J. — Through this petition, 
filed under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973 [hereinafter referred to as ‘the Const itution’ ], 
the petitioner alleged that in terms of Article 63(1)(c) of the 
Constitution read with Section 14 of Pakistan Citizenship Act, 
1951, any person holding dual citizenship is disqualified from 
being elected or chosen as, and from being, a Member of  Majlis -
e-Shoora (Parliament). He stated that as per only TV program 
aired on Samaa TV Channel, Ch. Zahid Iqbal, MNA; Ch. Iftikhar 
Nazir, MNA and Mr. A. Rehman Malik, Senator have acquired 
citizenship of Britain and as such they are disqualified from 
being  Members of the Parliament. By CMA No.1185 of 2012, he 
further disclosed that Ms. Farah Naz Isfahani, MNA is also 
holder of dual citizenship of Pakistan and United States.  
2.  Accordingly, notices were issued to the respondents 
as well as the learned Atto rney General for Pakistan to file their 
parawise comments. In response to the notice, learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan appeared and raised the question as to 
whether under Article 63(1)(c) of the Constitution “a person 
shall be disqualified from being  elected or chosen as, and from 
being, a member of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament), if he ceases to 
be a citizen of Pakistan, or acquires the citizenship of a foreign Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 4 :- 
State”.  The question raised is of the highest public importance 
and is required to be dealt with as such.  
3.  By order dated 27.03.2012, we expressed our 
expectations that the learned Attorney General for Pakistan may 
collect information from the Members of the Parliament about 
their dual citizenships, and if it is so whether disqualification 
has been got removed or whatever the position may be, and that 
if they desire, they can also appear at their own by filing their 
replies alongwith allied documents to clarify their position.  
4.  In response to our order that any Member of the 
Parliament may  appear on his own by filing a reply, only some 
of the Parliamentarians came forward by appearing in person or 
through counsel.  
5.  The Election Commission of Pakistan also through 
its parawise comments stated that there is nothing on record 
on the basis of which it could be ascertained whether any of the 
Parliamentarians is holding citizenship of a foreign State and 
that while filing the nomination papers every candidate has to 
file certain declaration on oath; one such declaration is 
reproduced herein -below:- 
“I have consented to the above nomination 
and that I fulfill the qualifications specified 
in Article 62 of the Constitution and I am not 
subject to any of the disqualification 
specified in Article 63 of the Constitution or 
any other law for the time being in force for 
being elected as a member of the National 
Assembly/Provincial Assembly”.   Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 5 :- 
however, in the recent election of the Senate the 
declaration, that the candidate has not possess the 
citizenship of any foreign State or County has been 
taken    
6.  On behalf of the respondent No.5 Punjab 
Government, objections were taken about the maintainability of 
the petition, however, relied upon the principles laid down in 
the case of Umar Ahmad Ghumman versus Government of 
Pakistan and others,  (PLD 2002 Lah ore 521).  
7.  `On behalf of the Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa it is stated that according to Article 63 of the 
Constitution a person shall be disqualified from being elected or 
chosen and from being Member of the Parliament in case as 
citizen of Pakista n he has acquired the citizenship of a foreign 
State.  
8.  Malik Waheed Anjum, learned ASC, has filed CMA 
No.2382 of 2012 for impleading the following fourteen 
Parliamentarians who according to him are holders of dual 
nationality: -  
Sr.No.  Name  Political 
Party Nationality  Dual 
1. Muhammad 
Akhlaq  PML (N)  Pakistani  USA 
2. Farhat 
Muhammad Khan  MQM  Pakistani  USA 
3. Tariq Mehmood 
Alloana  PPPP  Pakistani  USA 
4. Dr. Muhammad 
Ashraf Chouhan  PML(N)  Pakistani  GB 
5. Dr. Ahmed Ali 
Shah  PPPP  Pakistani  GB 
6. Nadia Gabol  MQM  Pakistani  GB 
7. Amna Buttar  PPPP  Pakistani  USA 
8. Zahid Iqbal  PPPP  Pakistani  GB 
9. Khawaja Asif  PML(N)  Pakistani  Canada  
10. Abdul Hafez 
Sheikh  PPP Pakistani  USA 
11. Anusha Rehman  PML(N)  Pakistani  Canada  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 6 :- 
12. Sabir Ali Baloch  Dy. 
Chairman 
Senate  Pakistani  -- 
13. Ch. Waseem 
Qadir  PML(N)  Pakistani  Norway  
14. Ch. Nadeem 
Khadim  PML(N)  Pakistani  UK 
  
9.  Mr. M. Shoaib Lodhi has filed CMA No.2492 of 2012 
for impleading of Mr. Jamil Malik, MNA, Mr. Jamshed 
Rahmatullah, ASC has filed C MA No.2953 of 2012 for 
impleading of Mr. Jamil Ashraf, MPA and Mr. Tariq Asad, ASC 
has filed CMA No. 2487 of 2012 alleging that Sardar Shahjehan 
Yousaf, MNA is holding the citizenship of U.K.   
10.  Thus membership of the following Parliamentarians 
and mem bers of Provincial Assembly stand challenged in the 
listed petition and CMAs noted above: -  
1.  “Ms. Farah Naz Isfahani, MNA;  
2. Mr. A. Rehman Malik, Senator;  
3. Ch. Zahid Iqbal, MNA;  
4. Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA;  
5. Mr. Muhammad Akhlaq, MPA;  
6. Mr. Farhat M ehmood Khan, MNA;  
7. Mr. Tariq Mehmood Alloana, MPA;  
8. Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Chohan, MPA;  
9. Dr. Ahmed Ali Shah, MPA;  
10. Mr. Abdul Hafeez Sheikh, Senator;  
11. Ms. Nadia Gabol, MPA;  
12. Ms. Amna Butta r, MPA;  
13. Kh. Muhammad Asif, MNA;  
14. Ms. Anusha Rehma n, MNA;  
15. Mr. Sabir Ali Baloch, MNA;  
16. Ch. Waseem Qadir, MPA;  
17. Ch. Nadeem Khadim, MPA;  
18. Mr. Jameel Ahmed Malik, MNA; and  
19. Mr. Shahjahan Yousaf, MNA.  
 Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 7 :- 
11.  Mr. Wasim Sajjad, learned Sr. ASC in reply on behalf 
of Ms. Farah Naz Isfahani, MNA file d CMA No. 2231 of 2012 and 
admitted that she is a holder of citizenship of USA, Mr. Khawar 
Mehmood Khatana, ASC why filed CMA No. 2797 of 2012 on 
behalf of Ms. Amna Buttar, MPA also admitted that she is 
holder of citizenship of USA and Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC  has filed 
C.M.As. No.1975, 2731, 2296, 2597 and 2913 of 2012 on behalf 
of Ch. Zahid Iqbal, MPA, and stated that he is permanent 
resident of United Kingdom.    
12.  Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA has filed CMA No. 1927 of 
2012 and CMA No. 2362 of 2012 and specifi cally denied that he 
ever acquired the citizenship of United Kingdom.  
13.  Hafiz S.A. Rehman, learned Sr. ASC has filed CMA 
No. 3207 of 2012 on behalf of Sardar Shahjahan Yousaf and 
specifically stated that he (Sardar Shahjahan Yousaf, MNA) is 
not a citize n of any foreign State.  
14.  CMA No. 2456 of 2012 filed by Khawaja Muhammad 
Asif, MNA wherein he specifically denied that he is a holder of 
citizenship of any foreign State, and supported the adjudication 
of the matter relating to dual nationality by the Members of the 
Parliament.  
15.  On behalf of Mr. Jameel Ahmed, MNA, Mr. Imtiaz 
Rashid Siddiqui, ASC filed CMA No.2802/2012, CMA 2882 of 
2012 and CMA 3881 of 2012, wherein he stated that his client 
was adopted by his real uncle in the year 1970 and after 
adoption under the law of Netherland he had acquired 
citizenship of the said country.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 8 :- 
16.  Mr. Wasim Sajjad, learned Sr. ASC for Ms. Farah 
Naz Isfahani, MNA argued that the Constitution must be 
interpreted as a living document to meet the requirements of a ll 
times to come. It is contended that word “or” should be read as 
“and” otherwise Article 6 2(1) of the Constitution will become 
redundant.         
17.  In support of his contentions, he relied upon the 
case of Al-Jehad Trust versus Federation of Pakistan,  (1999 
SCMR 1379). It is contended by him that his client was a born 
citizen of USA and as such she cannot be disqualified to be 
elected as a Parliamentarian. He further contended that the 
restriction under Article 63 (1)(c) of the Constitution relates to a 
citizenship of foreign State acquired by a Member after taking 
the oath of the Parliament. It is further contended by the 
learned counsel that once a person is elected as a Member of 
Parliament he can only be removed by filing an Election 
Petition.  
18.  Mian Abdul Rauf, ASC for Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA 
argued that his client is not a citizen of U.K but is a permanent 
resident of U.K. and as such he cannot be disqualified to remain 
as a member of the Parliament.  
19.  Mr. Imtiaz Rashid Siddiqui, ASC represent ing Mr. 
Jameel Malik, MNA while questioning the maintainability of the 
petition, contended that his client was adopted as son by his 
real uncle in the year 1970 when he was minor and after 
adoption under the law of Netherland he had acquired 
citizenship of  the said country. Further contends that since his Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 9 :- 
client was adopted by his real uncle he had acquired citizenship 
of Netherland on his attaining the age of majority and that the 
Court has to keep difference between the persons who have 
intentionally acqu ired citizenship of foreign States and one who 
has not acquired it intentionally, as in the case of respondent 
who had acquired the citizenship being adopted son of a 
Netherland’s citizen. Further contends that there is no concept 
of citizenship in the Net herland. In reply to a query, learned 
counsel stated that his client has not renounced citizenship of 
Netherland’s till date.  
20.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of Mr. Zahid 
Iqbal, MNA, contended that his client is not holding citizenship 
of Britain , however, he is a permanent resident of the said 
country. We have repeatedly asked him to place on record 
certificate issued by the competent authority in terms of British 
Nationality Act, 1981 to the effect that he is not a citizen of UK 
but he failed to  do so.  
21.  Mr. Ahmed Ali Shah, MPA has not disputed that he 
is holding dual citizenship. Mr. Muhammad Akhlaq, MPA has 
also not disputed that he is holding dual citizenship.  
22.  Ms. Amna Buttar, MPA also admitted her citizenship 
of USA, however, conten ded that she contested the election 
believing that there is no bar for a dual citizen to contest the 
election as a Parliamentarian. It is stated by her learned 
counsel, that she will not contest the election now after she has 
come to know that a person hol ding dual citizenship is not 
qualified to be elected as member of the Parliament.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 10 :- 
23.  Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Sr. ASC appearing on 
behalf of Mr. A. Rehman Malik argued that he has renounced 
his citizenship through his solicitor as per letter dated 
27.04.2 008 by filing an application for renunciation on 
05.04.2008 and has only, travelled thereafter on Pakistani 
passport. It is contended by the learned counsel that law does 
not bar a person who is already holder of citizenship for 
contesting the election of Parliament. It is further contended 
that Articles 62 and 63 of the Constitution are to be read 
together, Article 62 (1)(a) of the Constitution required 
qualification for a member of Parliament to be a citizen of 
Pakistan only and Article 63(1)(c) of the Co nstitution relates to 
the post election disqualification and not to the prior election 
disqualification, if any. It is submitted by learned counsel that 
this Court cannot look into evidence while exercising 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the Constitu tion. He further 
contended that Mr. A. Rehman Malik has resigned from the 
membership of the Senate on 9th July 2012, and subsequent 
thereto contested fresh election of Senate as his request for 
renunciation of citizenship of U.K. has been conveyed to him b y 
the UK Border Agency on 29.05.2012 and if for any reason for 
the sake of arguments it is accepted that he was not qualified to 
contest election as Senator in the year 2008, he was qualified to 
be elected after the acceptance of his request for renunciati on of 
his citizenship of UK in the year 2012 as Member of Parliament 
and as such he was rightly elected as a Senator.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 11 :- 
24.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan has argued 
that none of the respondents acquired citizenship after they 
became Members of Parl iament or a Provincial Assembly. 
According to him Article 62 of the Constitution pertains to pre -
election qualification and Article 63 of the Constitution deals 
only with post -election disqualifications. Further contended that 
if any untrue statement is gi ven at the time of submitting the 
nomination papers stating that he is qualified under Article 62 
of the Constitution and not disqualified under Article 63 of the 
Constitution such statement is nothing more than a mistake on 
the part of the candidate. It i s contended by the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan that Articles 62 and 63 of the 
Constitution have to be read together and only a 
Parliamentarian who has acquired citizenship of a foreign State 
after he was elected and also ceased to be a citizen of  Pakistan 
at the same time becomes disqualified to remain as a member of 
the Parliament and that otherwise there is no bar for him to 
hold dual citizenship. He further contended that the word ‘or’ 
used in Article 63 (1) (c) is to be read as ‘and’ otherwise  Article 
62 (1) (a) will become redundant.  
25.  In reply to a query, learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan stated that at one point of time an amendment in 
Article 63 (1)(c) of the Constitution for allowing a person holding 
dual citizenship to contest elec tion was considered by the 
Government but such bill was not presented before the 
Parliament. He also contended that there is no restriction 
barring top functionaries of the State i.e. President, Chief of Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 12 :- 
Armey Staff, Governors, Chief Justices and Judges of  the 
superior Courts, Auditor General from holding dual citizenship. 
His submission was that merely because some of the 
Parliamentarian are holding dual citizenships they cannot be 
disqualified as member of Parliament, only because they have to 
take import ant decisions or make policy for the country.   
26.  We have taken into consideration respective 
arguments advanced by the learned Counsel and perused the 
record.   
27.  In order to appreciate the issue involved in the 
petition, we would like to reproduce here-in-below  relevant 
parts of relevant parts of Articles 62 & 63 (1) (c) of the 
Constitution as well as Section 14 of Pakistan Citizenship Act, 
1951: - 
“62. (1) A person shall not be qualified to be elected or chosen 
as a member of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parli ament) unless: - 
 
(a) he is a citizen of Pakistan:  
(b) he is, in the case of the National Assembly, not less 
than twenty -five years of age and is enrolled as a 
voter in any electoral roll in — 
 
(c) he is, in the case of the Senate, not less than thirty 
years of age and is enrolled as a voter in any area 
in a Province or, as the case may be, the Federal 
Capital or the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, 
from where he seeks membership,  
(f) he is sagacious, righteous, non -profligate, honest        
and amen, there being no declaration to the contrary 
by a court of law; and  
 
63. (1) A person shall be disqualified from being 
elected or chosen as, and from being, a member of 
the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament), if — Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 13 :- 
(c)  he ceases to be a citizen of Pakistan, or 
acquires the citize nship of a foreign State; or  
 
  For the sake of convenience Section 14 of Pakistan 
Citizenship Act, 1951 is also reproduced herein -below.  
“14. Dual citizenship  or Nationality not 
permitted. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
section if any person is a citizen of Pakistan 
under the provisions of this Act, and is at the 
same time a citizen or national of any other 
country, he shall, unless he makes a declaration 
according to the laws of that other country 
renouncing his status as citizen or national 
there of, cease to be a citizen of Pakistan.”     
28.  To appreciate respective contentions raised by the 
learned ASC, it is necessary to recapitulate basic principles of 
Interpretation of Statutes.  
29.  It is a cardinal principle of construction that the 
words  of a statute are first understood in their natural, ordinary 
or popular sense and phrases and sentences are construed 
according to their grammatical meaning unless that leads to 
some absurdity or unless there is something in the context or in 
the object o f the statute to suggest the contrary by necessary 
implication. The intention of the Legislator is primarily to be 
gathered from the language used, which means that attention 
should be paid to what has been said and also to what has not 
been said. As a con sequence a construction which requires for 
its support, addition or substitution of words or which results 
in rejection of words as meaningless has to be avoided. The 
courts always presume that the Legislature inserted every part Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 14 :- 
thereof for a purpose and the legislative intention is that every 
part of statute should have effect. The Court has to discover 
true legislative intent while interpreting statutes.     
30.  It was held in the case of Tata Consultancy 
Services versus State of Andhra Pradesh , (AIR 20 05 SC 371), 
that literal  construction not to be denied only because the same 
may lead to penalty.  It is not the duty of Court to either enlarge 
scope of legislation or the intention of the Legislators when the 
language of the provision is clear. While cons truing the 
provisions of statutes no provision should be rendered 
meaningless and there is no scope of placing unnatural 
interpretation on the meaning of language used by the 
legislators.  
31.  In “The Interpretation and Application of Statutes’, 
Reed Dicke rson, at page 135 discussed the subject while dealing 
with the importance of context of the statute in the following 
terms: -  
“…..The essence of the language is to 
reflect, express, and perhaps even affect 
the conceptual matrix of established ideas 
and val ues that identifies the culture to 
which it belongs. For this reason, language 
has been called “conceptual map of human 
experience”.  
 
32.  In the case of Reserve Bank of India versus. 
Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd., (AIR 
1987 SC 1023), S upreme Court of India held that: - 
“….If a statues is looked at, in the context of its 
enactment, with the glasses of the statute -maker, Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 15 :- 
provided by such context, its scheme, the sections, 
clauses, phrases and words may take colour and 
appear different than  when the stature is looked at 
without the glasses provided by the context. With 
these glasses we must look at the Act as a whole 
and discover what each section, each clause, each 
phrase and each word is meant and designed to say 
as to fit into the scheme of the entire Act….”.  
33.  To interpret the functions the Court is to discover 
the true legislative intent. To interpret the statute the Court 
must if the words are clear, plain, unambiguous and only one 
meaning given to the word, effect is given to each a nd every 
word used by the legislators. The Court always presumes that 
the legislators inserted every part thereof for a purpose and 
legislative intent in that very part of statute should have effect. 
The construction which attributes redundancy to the legi slators 
will not be accepted except for compelling reasons, such as, 
obvious drafting error. In other words, a construction which 
requires for its support, addition or substitution of words or in 
rejecting words as meaningless is to be avoided. Primary and  
foremost task of a Court to interpret the statute is to ascertain 
intention of the legislators actual or imputed. Having 
ascertained the intention, the Court must then strive to 
interpret the statute as to promote/advance the object and 
purpose of the ena ctment. For this purpose, where necessary 
the Court may even depart from the rule that plain words 
should be interpreted according to their plain meaning. While 
interpreting the provisions of statute, Court should not consider 
redundancy or surplus word or  words.   Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 16 :- 
Can the word “or” used in Article 63 (1) (c) be read as “and”.  
34.  Keeping in view these basic principles of 
interpretation of Statue/Constitution, we will now examine 
Articles 62 and 63 (1)(c) of the Constitution, 1973 to ascertain if 
a person holding citizenship of a foreign State is disqualified to 
be elected or chosen as and from being, a Member of the 
Parliament or not.        
35.  The issue before the Court is not whether a citizen of 
Pakistan holding citizenship of a foreign State is loyal  to our 
country or not but what appears that the framers of 
Constitution, in their wisdom decided that such person should 
be disqualified to be elected as member of Parliament, which is 
the only body to Legislate for the citizens of this country, to 
check Executive, to give guideline for policies of the Government 
including defence, foreign, finance, etc. etc. In the case of 
Iftikhar Ahmad Khan Bar versus Chief Election 
Commissioner Islamabad and others,  (PLD 2010 SC 817), it 
was held that: - 
“The Parliament  of any country is one of its noblest, 
honourable and important institutions making not only 
the policies and the laws for the nation but in fact 
shaping and carving its very destiny.”  
 
36.  The Constitution was framed by its makers keeping 
in view the si tuations and conditions prevailing at the time of its 
making; but being a permanent document, it has been 
conceived in a manner so as to apply to situations and 
conditions which might arise in future. The words and Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 17 :- 
expressions used in the Constitution, in that sense, have no 
fixed meaning and must receive interpretation based on the 
experience of the people in the course of working of the 
Constitution.     
37.  The word “or” is normally disjunctive and “and” is 
normally conjunctive, if any case law is requi red, reference can 
be made to the cases of M/s. Hyderabad Asbestos Cement 
Products versus Union of India,       (AIR 2000 SC 314), and 
Abdul Razak versus Karachi Building Control Authority,  
(PLD 1994 SC 512), but at the time they are read as vice versa 
to give effect to the manifest intention of the Legislature as 
disclosed from the context.  
38.  In the case of Green v. Premier Glynrhonwy Slate 
Company, Limited,  (1928) 1 KB 561, P. 568, it was held by 
SCRUTTON, LJ, that you do sometimes read ‘or’ as ‘and’ i n a 
statute. But you do not do it unless you are obliged because ‘or’ 
does not generally mean ‘and’ and ‘and’ does not generally mean 
‘or’.  
39.  As pointed out by LORD HALSBURY the reading of 
‘or’ as ‘and’ is not to be resorted to, ‘unless some other part  of 
the same statute or the clear intention of it requires that to be 
done (Mersey Docks and Harbour Board vs. Henderson Bros. 
(58 LJ QB 152 (HL)).  
40.  In the Words and Phrases Permanent Edition 7A,  
the word ‘comma’ has been defined as under: - 
“A ‘comma’  is a point used to mark the 
smallest structural divisions of sentence, or a Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 18 :- 
rhetorical punctuation mark indicating the 
slightest possible separation in ideas or 
construction.”  
 
41.  It is interesting to mention that Article 103(d) of the 
Constitution of 1 962, is similar to Article 63(1)(c) of the 
Constitution of 1973. However in Article 103 (d) after the word 
“ceased to citizen” and before word “or” the constitutional 
framer not inserted “comma (,)” as inserted in 1973 
Constitution, which further support v iew, which we have taken 
that “or” used in Article 63(1)(c) can not be read as “and”.  
42.  We have carefully scanned Article 63 of the 
Constitution and from a bare perusal of it, it appears that the 
Legislature before the word ‘or’ put a comma which manife sts 
the intention of Legislature that “ceases to be a citizen of 
Pakistan” to be read separately from “holding of citizenship of 
foreign State” and word ‘or’ cannot be read as ‘and’ .  
Does Article 63 (1) (c) relate to post election disqualification 
only.  
43.  If we compare Article 63 (1) with Article 63(A) of the 
Constitution inserted by 18th Amendment, the intention of the 
Legislature becomes clear that Article 63 (1) of the Constitution 
applied to pre and post election disqualification, whereas Article 
63(A) applies to post election disqualification on the ground of 
defection.  
44.  Article 63 deals with “A person” disqualified from 
being elected or chosen as and from being, a member of the Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 19 :- 
Majlis -e-shoora,  whereas, Article 63(A) deals with the 
disqualifi cation of a Member of the Parliament.  
45.  The Legislature intentionally has not used the word 
“Member of the Parliament” in Article 63 to be disqualified if he 
acquires citizenship of a foreign State. In terms of Article 63(1), 
“a person” who holds dual citizenship but wishes to be elected 
or chosen to become Parliamentarian has to renounce 
citizenship of foreign State first, otherwise he would be 
disqualified to be elected, if at the time of submitting his/her 
nomination paper, he/she was holding citizen ship of foreign 
State. Likewise if any member of the Parliament acquires 
citizenship of foreign State, he will become disqualified to 
remain member of the Parliament.  
46.  As regards the contention of learned counsel for the 
respondents that Article 63 of the Constitution, is related to pre 
and post election disqualification the same has no force. On 
plain reading of the said Article, the Legislature has used the 
word “a person” which demonstrates the intention that any 
person whether he is Member of the Majlis-e-Shoora shall be 
disqualified if any one of the disqualifications mentioned in the 
said Article applicable upon him. The Article further provides 
that the person shall be disqualified “from being elected or 
chosen” relates to pre post election disqua lification whereas 
“from being a Member of Majlis -e-Shoora”  relates to post 
election disqualification. The Article 63 of the Constitution has 
dealt with both i.e. pre and post election disqualification.     Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 20 :- 
47.  The general principle of Interpretation of S tatues is 
equally applicable while interpreting any provision of the 
Constitution. However, while interpreting a provision of the 
Constitution great caution has to be taken by the Court, as the 
Constitution is an instrument i.e. the supreme law which 
creat es the Legislature itself, makes ordinary statutes with 
respect to which canons of statutory interpretation have been 
formulated by the Courts. The task of expounding a 
Constitution is crucially different from that of construing a 
statute. The Statute can easily be enacted and repealed by 
simple majority of Members of Parliament whereas, any 
provision of the Constitution can be amended only by 2/3rd 
majority of both the Houses.      
48.  In the case of Muhammad Yasin versus Federation 
of Pakistan,  (PLD 2012  SC 132), it was held that “meaning of 
the Constitution is to be aggregated from the Constitution as 
interpreted in the rule based on reason.”   
            
49.  It is not out of place to reproduce the oath required 
to be taken at the time of acquiring cit izenship of Britain and 
United States respectively.  
 
“I will give my loyalty to the United Kingdom and 
respect its rights and freedoms.  I will uphold its 
democratic values. I will observe its laws faithfully 
and fulfill my duties and obligations as a Briti sh 
citizen.”   
UNITED STATES  
“I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and 
entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance and 
fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 21 :- 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore 
been a subject or citizen;  that I will support and 
defend the Constitution and laws of the United 
States of America against all enemies, foreign and 
domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance 
to the same; that  I will bear arms on behalf of the 
United States when required by the law; that I will 
perform noncombatant service in the Armed Forces 
of the United States when required by the law; that 
I will perform work of national importance under 
civilian direction when required by the law; and 
that I take this obligation freel y, without any 
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; so help 
me God.”   
 
50.  We have also noted that Members of the National 
Assembly have taken oath under Article 65 of the Constitution, 
whereby they have undertaken that they will perform their 
funct ions honestly always in the interest of the sovereignty, 
integrity, solidarity, well -being and prosperity of Pakistan and 
will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution, whereas on 
the other hand, at the time of acquiring citizenship of United 
States o f America they have taken oath that they will bear true 
faith and allegiance to the US Constitution and will bear arms 
on behalf of the United States when required by the law, etc.  
51.  The issue, whether a person holding citizenship of a 
foreign state is qualified to contest the election or not, had come 
for consideration before the Lahore High Court, in the case of 
Umar Ahmad Ghumman versus Government of Pakistan and 
others,  (PLD 2002 Lahore 521), wherein a learned Judge of this 
Court, Hon’ble Mr. Justice  Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, as a 
Judge of the Lahore High Court, held that: - Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 22 :- 
“38. The contention of the petitioner’s learned counsel 
was that the petitioner is qualified to contest the 
general election for the membership of the Parliament in 
terms of Articl e 62 of the Constitution which pertains to 
qualifications for a member of the Parliament. 
According to learned counsel for the petitioner, in 
absence of any bar for a dual national prescribed in 
Article 62 of the Constitution, petitioner is qualified to 
contest the elections and that the disqualification 
enumerated in Article 63(1) (c) of the Constitution comes 
into force only when a person has been elected as 
Member of the Parliament.  
39. The above interpretation of the Constitutional 
provisions is a rathe r over simplification and would 
lead to anomalous results. Article 63(1) (c) of the 
Constitution explicitly mandates that “a person shall be 
disqualified from being elected or chosen as, and from 
being, a member of the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament), if 
he ceases to be a citizen of Pakistan, or acquires the 
citizenship of a foreign State”. Thus the disqualification 
comes into play the moment a person becomes a 
candidate or seeks election. This Court has declared 
petitioner to be a citizen of Pakistan but ever y citizen of 
a State is not allowed to contest the election. The 
qualifications and disqualifications have been 
enumerated in the Constitution and by the law of the 
land. Since the petitioner has admittedly acquired 
citizenship of a foreign country, he is hit by the afore -
referred provision and cannot contest elections unless, 
of course, he removes this disqualification in terms of 
rule 19 of the Pakistan Citizenship Rules, 1952.”   
  
   Now we will deal with the matter related to respondents.  
 
52.  Ms. Fa rah Naz Isfahani, MNA;  Ch. Zahid Iqbal, 
MNA; Ms. Nadia Gabol, MPA; Ms. Amna Buttar, MPA and Mr. 
Jameel Ahmed Malik, MNA and Dr. Ahmed Ali Shah, MPA  have 
not denied that at the time when they submitted their 
nomination papers, they were holding citizenship  of  a foreign Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 23 :- 
state, made statement on oath that they are qualified under 
Article 62 (1) of the Constitution as well as not disqualified 
under Article 63 (1) of the Constitution, apparently knowing 
well that a person holding citizenship of a foreign sate is 
disqualified from being elected or chosen as a member of the 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament). They apparently made a false 
statement.  
53.  As regards Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA, vide order dated 
18-3-2012, learned ASC appearing for Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA 
was direc ted to file evidence/documents/certificate issued by 
the competent authority in terms of British Nationality Act, 
1981 to the effect that he is not a citizen of UK but he failed to 
do so till date despite giving time, thus we have no option but to 
believe that Mr. Zahid Iqbal, MNA, is holding citizenship of 
United Kingdom, having Passport No. 300997046 of Britain.  
54.  In CMA No. 2382 of 2012 filed by Malik Waheed 
Anjum, ASC The Learned Counsel categorically stated that Mr. 
Farhat Mehmood Khan, MNA is holde r of USA Passport No. 
470939019, Dr. Muhammad Ashraf Chouhan, MPA is holder of 
British Passport No.202052945, Nadia Gabol, MPA is holder of 
British Passport No.706860392. These Members of the 
Parliament have not disputed the question of holding dual 
citize nship of a foreign State despite service, therefore, we have 
no option but to hold that at the time of submitting of their 
nomination papers they were disqualified and ineligible to file 
the same and apparently have made false statements while 
submitting t heir  nomination papers.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 24 :- 
55.  Mr. Jamil Ahmad Malik, MNA, has not denied that 
he is a holder of citizenship of Netherland, however, stated that 
he has acquired citizenship after attaining the age of majority 
as he was adopted by his uncle when he was mino r who was 
citizen of Netherland.  
56.  Article 102 of the Indian Constitution, disqualified a 
person if he “voluntarily” acquired citizenship of a foreign State 
whereas Article 63 (1) (c) of the Constitution has specified 
disqualification if any person who whether voluntarily or not, 
acquired citizenship of a foreign State from being member of 
Parliament. The contention of learned ASC that his client has 
not acquired citizenship voluntarily and cannot be disqualified, 
thus has no force.      
57.  As regards Ch. Waseem Qadir, MPA though learned 
counsel has appeared on his behalf and on one date of hearing 
he has also appeared in person and handed over Pakistani 
Passport to Court Associate but till date no CMA has been filed 
denying the allegation that he is no t holder of citizenship of any 
foreign State.  
58.        Ch. Nadeem Khadim, MPA has also not filed any 
CMA to dispute that he is not a holder of citizenship of any 
foreign State.  
59.  As regards Mr. Sabir Ali Baloch, Senator, Malik 
Waheed Anjum, learned ASC, has filed CMA No.2382 of 2012 
wherein he has alleged that he (Mr. Sabir Ali Baloch, Senator) is 
a holder of dual citizenship but he has not mentioned the name 
of the State of which he is holding citizenship and no material Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 25 :- 
in support of his contention  has been produced, thus request to 
the extent of Mr. Sabir Ali Baloch, Senator to declare him 
disqualified being holder of dual citizenship, is declined.  
60.  Ms. Anusha Rehman, MNA in reply has stated that 
she is a citizen of the Islamic Republic of Pak istan by birth and 
this is the only citizenship/nationality which she has held, and 
still holds and that she belongs to one of the oldest families 
hailing from Lahore, Mr. Waheed Anjum, petitioner also 
withdrew his allegation against Ms. Anusha Rehman thus  to 
her extent the proceeding is also dropped.  
61.  The proceedings against Sardar Shahjehan Yousaf, 
MNA and Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA are also dropped, as learned 
counsel does not press his allegations of holding dual 
citizenship, and tenders apology.  
62.  Khawaja Muhammad Asif, MNA has appeared and 
categorically questioned the allegation leveled against him. 
Learned ASC dropped the allegation leveled against him. He has 
also dropped allegation against Abdul Hafez Sheikh, Senator 
that he is holder of dual n ationality.  
63.  As far as the matter relating to Mr. Tariq Mehmood 
Alloana, MPA is concerned, serious allegations were leveled 
against him. In support of his contentions Malik Waheed 
Anjum learned ASC has placed on record letter No. 
FIA/IBMS/Supreme Cour t/Qurey/1521 wherein it was 
affirmed that on the basis of particulars mentioned, the closest 
travel history of the person has been found in the system and Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 26 :- 
R-11 Form. It is alleged that he was a US National and also that 
he travelled on the US passport.  
64.  On our direction, Mr. Muhammad Azam Khan, 
Director (Law), FIA submitted a report, contents whereof are 
reproduced herein -below: - 
“1. That Malik Waheed Anjum learned ASC submitted 
an application to DG, FIA for the provision of travel 
history of Tariq Mehm ood son of Lal Khan passport 
No.211267712. in this application the following 
two Pakistani passports Nos. allegedly belonging 
to Tariq Mehmood were also mentioned for the 
said purpose.  
a. CW151051  
b. CW0151052  
2. That on search of PISCES/IBMS database it 
transpired that one Tariq Mehmood holding 
passport No.211267712 landed at Islamabad 
airport by PK -718 on 14.2.2006 and departed 
back on 28.2.2006 by PK -717 from Karachi 
airport.  
3. The said Tariq Mehmood holder of American 
Passport No. 211267712 again ent ered in 
Pakistan on 19.07.2008 by PK -718 landed at 
Islamabad airport and from the same airport, he 
left the country on 01.08.2008 by PK -715. R11 -
travel history IBMS data form is attached. (Annex -
A). 
4. Regarding two Pakistani passports 
No.CWD0151051 and CW 0151052, there is 
nothing available in Database System about entry 
or exit of any person on the basis of these 
passports.  
5. On further analysis of the system it transpired that 
on both the occasions when Mr. Tariq Mehmood 
Alloana arrived at Islamabad airp ort, he presented 
his National Identify Card Overseas Pakistanis 
(NICOP).  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 27 :- 
6. On NADRA database verification of NICOP No. 
37201 -1113961 -7 (Annex. B) the following 
information has been produced: -  
i. Name   Tariq Mehmood  
ii. Father’s name  Lal Khan  
iii. Date of Birth  15.05.1960  
iv. Country of Stay   USA  
v. Present Address:  1099 Coney, Island 
Ave.     Brooklyn, New  Your, 11230 
United States.  
vi. Permanent Address:  House No. Bviii -218 Street 
No.4 Mohallah Sarpak Chakwal, District Chakwal, 
Pakistan.  
 
Report is submitted, please.  
   On behalf of Director General  
       Sd/- 
    Muhammad Azam Khan  
      Director/Law  
    03.07.2012.”   
 
65.  We have heard Mr. Khawar Mahmood Khattana, 
ASC and Mr. Malik Waheed Anjum, ASC in detail and vide 
order dated 04.07.2012, the  Additional Registrar of this Court 
was directed to lodge a criminal complaint against the DG, FIA, 
the Deputy Director who signed and furnished the incorrect 
information/documents and all other persons involved, on the 
strength of this order and annexure hereof. The I.G. Police, 
Islamabad was also directed to supervise the investigation of 
the case himself and to submit a report to the Registrar of this 
Court on weekly basis for our perusal in Chamber.   
66.  Malik Waheed Anjum, ASC who filed CMA No. 
No.23 82 of 2012 alleging that Khawaja Muhammad Asif, MNA, 
Mr. Abdul Hafeez Sheikh, Senator, Ms. Anusha Rehman, MNA. Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 28 :- 
Ch. Iftikhar Nazir, MNA, Mr. Sabir Ali Baloch, MNA and Mr.M. 
Tariq Asad, ASC have filed CMA No. 2487 of 2012 praying that 
Sardar Shahjehan Yousaf , MNA is holding the citizenship of 
UK, tendered their apology to these Parliamentarians and 
regretted for the inconvenience caused to them. We in view of 
the acceptance of the apology by the learned 
counsel/respondents, are not imposing cost for filing 
application against them without any material alleging that 
they are holding dual citizenship, however, it is expected that in 
future they (learned counsel) will be more careful    
67.  Keeping in view the principle of Interpretation of 
Statute/Constitution,  as briefly discussed here -in-above,  
Article 63 (1) (c) of the Constitution read with Section 14 of the 
Pakistan Citizenship (Amendment) Act 1972 (Act XVII of 1972), 
we have no doubt in our mind that a person holding dual 
citizenship is disqualified from being elected or chosen as 
member of the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament).  
68.  Now we will deal with the case of Mr. A. Rehman 
Malik, Senator. Admittedly he was holder of Nationality of U.K.  
It is not disputed by him that he (Mr. A. Rehman Malik, 
Senator) ac quired citizenship of U.K, however, he alleged that 
he has renounced his citizenship of UK on 25.03.2008 and a 
letter dated 19.04.2012 was placed on record in support of his 
contention that he had renounced his citizenship of U.K. on 
25.03.2008 and we woul d like to reproduce the contents of the 
said letter which reads: - Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 29 :- 
“MINISTER FOR 
INTERIOR  
Government of 
Pakistan  
Islamabad  
SENATOR A. REHMAN MALIK  
No.I/PS/M/2012  
Dated: 19th April, 
2012  
In Re:  CONSTITUTION PETITION NO.5 OF 2012  
 Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi     
      Petitioner  
     Vs. 
The Federal Government through Secretary Law and   
others         
     Respondents  
 
Please refer to your letter No.1(3)/2012 -AGP dated 31st March 
2012, concerning the above cited Constitutional Petition.  
 
In this regard, it may b e informed that by virtue of my 
continuous exile in UK for nine years due to political 
victimization and life threats in Pakistan, which is a matter of 
public record, I was granted British nationality but I never 
renounced my Pakistani citizenship as dual nationality is 
allowed under the Pakistani law. However, I renounced my 
British nationality on 25.03.2008 before I held public office. I 
thus do not hold any other citizenship including of British 
nationality except that of Pakistani citizenship.  
 
Yours si ncerely  
-sd- 
(Senator A. Rehman Malik)  
 
69.  We have repeatedly asked and granted sufficient 
time and opportunity to learned counsel for Mr. A. Rehman 
Malik to produce certificate issued by the U.K. Border Agency 
in terms of section 12(1) of the British Na tionality Act, 1981 
confirming that he had renounced his citizenship of UK on 
25.03.2008 as alleged and he is no more citizen of U.K.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 30 :- 
70.  Learned counsel appearing on his behalf placed on 
record letter dated 29.05.2012 issued by the UK Border 
Agency. Con tents of the same are reproduced herein -below: - 
“Home Office      
UK Border  
Agency  
 
Mr. A. R. Malik     Our Ref    M751044  
25 Norfolk Crescent     your Ref  
LONDON      Date 29 May 2012  
W22YS  
 
Dear Mr. Malik  
 
Renunciation of British Citizenship  
 
I am writing to inform you are now registered as having 
renounced British Citizenship.  
 
Enclosed is the Declaration of renunciation bearing a stamp of 
registration. This confirms the date on which you ceased to be 
a British Citizen under Section 12(1) of the British N ationality 
Act, 1981.  
 
Yours sincerely,  
 
-sd- 
Mrs CS Hughes  
Managed Migration, Nationality Group  
Department 73”  
 
71.  From the certificate issued by the UK Border 
Agency, it appears that they have informed Mr. A. Rehman 
Malik on 29.05.2012 that “you are now registered as having 
renounced British Citizenship”.   They have enclosed the 
Declaration of renunciation bearing a stamp of registration, the 
date on which he ceased to be a British Citizen under Section 
12(1) of the British Nationality Act, 1981, howeve r, said 
declaration of renunciation had not been placed on record 
despite we repeatedly asked that the same may be placed on 
record.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 31 :- 
72.  From bare reading of the said letter dated 
29.05.2012 by U.K. Border Agency, it appears that Mr. A. 
Rehman Malik has been registered as having renounced British 
Citizenship on 29.05.2012. This aspect of the matter has 
already been discussed in our short order, thus need not be 
discussed in detail again but suffice it to say that apparently 
for this reason realizing legal  position, he has resigned from 
membership of the Parliament on 11.07.2012 and against the 
vacant seat he participated in the fresh elections and was 
declared successful candidate vide notification dated 
24.07.2012.       
73.  In the case of Muhammad Azhar  Siddiqui versus 
Federation of Pakistan,  (PLD 2012 SC 774, in an additional 
note it was held by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja 
that:-  
“The people have thus, in the clearest possible 
terms, stated that they will not allow 
themselves to be represente d by a person who 
has or earns a disqualification under Article 63 
ibid.  
74.     This Court in the judgment reported as Muddasar 
Qayyum Nahra versus Ch. Bilal Ijaz and others, (2011 SCMR 
80) quoted with approval, the paragraphs No. 21 & 22 of an 
earlier j udgment pronounced by this Court, and reported as 
Ch. Bilal Ijaz versus Mudassar Qayyum Nahra and 4 others,  
(2010 CLC 1692) which reads as under: -  
“21. The concept of inserting Article 62 clause (f) 
in the Constitution is very purposeful; 
Constitution of  Islamic Republic of Pakistan, Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 32 :- 
1972 cannot be said to have incorporated the 
said clause without any meaningful objective. 
The holders of Public offices like members of 
National and Provincial Assemblies are expected 
to be persons of unimpeachable character . The 
terms used in clause (f) of Article 62 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973 need to be understood and implemented in 
order to stop dishonest and cheatful persons 
from entering into the corridors of the National 
and Provincial Ass emblies. The words written in 
clause (f) are thus reproduced below which are 
denied and interpreted in well known English 
Dictionaries as are available on web -side 
(site)/internet with universally accepted 
meanings: -- 
Sagacious  
(i) Skillful in statecraft o r management  
(ii) Market by artful prudence expedience and 
shrewdness.  
(iii) Having prompt wisdom.  
(iv) A wise leader.  
(v) Insightful; foresighted  
Righteous  
(i) Morally upright, without guilt or sin.  
(ii) Characterized by accepted standard of 
morality or  justice  
(iii) Good: morally admirable.  
(iv) Clean handed; guiltless.  
(v) Just: Used, especially of what is legally or 
ethically right of proper or befitting  
(vi) Moral: concerned with right and wrong or 
conforming to standards of behavior: 
morally excelle nt worthy.  
(vii) Virtuous; morally excellent worthy.  
(viii) Worthy; having worth or merit or value; 
being Hon’ble or admirable.  
(ix) Honest; blameless.  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 33 :- 
 
Non profligate   
(i) Recklessly wasteful.  
(ii) Wildly extravagant.  
(iii) Shamelessly immoral or deba uched.  
(iv) Spendthrift.  
(v) Prodigal in their expenditures.  
(vi) Squandering  
 
Honest:  
(i) Displaying integrity; upright.  
(ii) Not deceptive or fraudulent.  
(iii) Characterized by truth; not false.  
(iv) Sincere.  
(v) Not given to cheating.  
 
Ameen  (An Ar abic word)  
 Meaning:  
 Trustworthy: faithful.  
22. The concepts projected in using all the 
above terminology is not difficult to understand. 
It demonstrates a keen desire of the Constitution 
that persons desiring to engage themselves in 
the process of law ma king for the country must 
themselves be possessed with High qualities of 
personal character and moral values. A legislator 
who indulges into unfair means in earning or 
procuring his educational documents cannot be 
termed to be possessing the required stand ards 
of high personal characteristics mentioned in 
clause (f) of Article 62 of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973. Members of 
the National or Provincial Assemblies on their 
successful election have been further obliged to 
take oath as i ncorporated in the third schedule 
of the Constitution, with necessary condition of 
undertaking the performance of the duties and 
functions honestly in accordance with 
constitution. Elected members are further likely Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 34 :- 
to be entrusted with the other high and onerous 
offices of the Prime Minister, Federal Minister, 
Speaker of the National and Provincial 
Assemblies, Deputy Speakers of the National 
and Provincial Assemblies and Chief Ministers of 
the Provinces. The swearing of solemn oath from 
such holders of pub lic offices are also prescribed 
in the Constitution requiring similar 
performances of duties and functions with 
honestly and also to be faithful to be 
Constitution and the law. A person who indulges 
into unfair means in procuring his educational 
qualificat ions and is also found guilty by the 
Disciplinary Committee, which is the only 
authority competent to inquire into the matters 
of such allegations against candidates appearing 
in the examination of the said University, does 
not deserve to claim to be an ho nest, righteous 
or Ameen person so that he be assigned the high 
responsibilities of performing national functions 
of running the affairs of the country. The spirit 
with which the words sagacious, righteous, non 
profligate, honest and Ameen have been used b y 
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973 for the eligibility of the candidates 
contesting the elections of Members of National 
or Provincial Assembly cannot be allowed to be 
frustrated if persons who secure their 
educational documents throu gh unfair means 
and are found guilty of such a condemnable act 
by file (the) competent authority are allowed to 
be given any entry into the doors of National or 
Provincial Assemblies or (of) our country. The 
respondent No.1 not only is found guilty of a 
dishonest or cheatful involvement into the use of 
unfair means in procuring his 
B.A./degree/results from the University of 
Punjab but also made deliberately false Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 35 :- 
statement before this Tribunal as well when 
P.W.1 was suggested that he was admittedly not 
holder of the B.A. degree from the University of 
the Punjab whereas in his written statement 
Exh.P12, the respondent where he was 
respondent No.4 in the said writ petition 
categorically took up the plea and claimed to be 
holder of a valid B.A. degree from the University 
of the Punjab. He is thus not worthy of credence 
and cannot be allowed to be entrusted with 
State responsibilities of Law Making; to be in -
charge of the National Exchequer (Exchequer) or 
be eligible to represent the people of Pakistan.’  
      
75.            In the case of Iftikhar Ahmad Khan Bar versus 
Chief Election Commissioner Islamabad and others,  (PLD 
2010 SC 817) it was held that: - 
“An here is a man who being constitutionally and 
legally debarred from being its member, managed 
to sneak int o it by making a false statement on 
oath and by using bogus, fake and forged 
documents polluting the piety of this pious body. 
His said conduct demonstrates not only his 
callous contempt for the basic norms of honesty, 
integrity and even for his own oath b ut also 
undermines the sanctity, the dignity and the 
majesty of the said august House. He is guilty, 
inter alia, of impersonation…posting to be what 
he was not i.e. a graduate. He is also guilty of 
having been a party to the making of false 
documents and t hen dishonestly using them for 
his benefit knowing them to be false. He is further 
guilty of cheating ---cheating not only his own 
constituents but the nation at large.”   
 Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 36 :- 
76  From facts noted herein -above, what appears is that 
respondent was holding of ci tizenship of a foreign State, made 
statement on oath that he is qualified under Article 62(1) (c) of 
the Constitution and not disqualified under Article 63 (1) of the 
Constitution apparently made false statement.  
77.  For ease of reference, we would like to reproduce 
para Nos: 17, 18 and 19 of our short order which read as 
under: - 
17. It is to be noted that a candidate, 
while filing nomination papers signs a 
declaration on oath to the following 
effect: -  
“DECLRATION AND OATH BY THE 
PERSON NOMINATED  
 
I, the above mentioned candidate, hereby 
declare on oath that, —  
(i) I have consented to the above 
nomination and that I fulfill the qualifications 
specified in Article 62 of the Constitution and 
I am not subject to any of the 
disqualifications specified in Ar ticle 63 of the 
Constitution or any other law for the time 
being in force for being elected as a member 
of the National Assembly/Provincial 
Assembly.  
 
18. The above declaration is applicable to the 
candidates of membership of Parliament and 
Provincial Ass emblies, therefore, whoever 
signs such a declaration is meant to be fully 
aware of the constitutional provisions and 
after signing the said declaration if the same Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 37 :- 
turns out to be false, he makes himself liable 
to be disqualified from being elected or 
chosen as Member of the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) or a Provincial Assembly for 
making misstatement or concealment of fact, 
and also exposes himself to criminal 
proceedings contemplated under sections 
193, 196, 197, 198 and 199 PPC.  
19. In view of the const itutional provisions under  
Article 63(1)(c) & (p) of the Constitution read with 
section 99(1)(f) of the Representation of the 
People Act, 1976 it is to be seen as to 
whether their cases are to be dealt with by 
the Speaker/Chairman under Article 63(2) or 
by the Election Commission under Article 
63(3) or are to be de -notified by the Election 
Commission after having been declared to be 
disqualified from being a member of Majlis -e-
Shoora or Provincial Assemblies. This Court 
has earlier dealt with this matter i n the case 
of Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani in Constitution 
Petition No. 40 of 2012, etc. He was 
convicted by a 7 -Member Bench vide 
judgment dated 26.04.2012 for contempt of 
Court under Article 204(2) of the Constitution 
read with section 3 of the Contempt of C ourt 
Ordinance, 2003 and sentenced under 
section 5 of the said Ordinance and the 
reference filed by one Maulvi Iqbal Haider Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 38 :- 
before the Speaker of Assembly to declare 
him disqualified under Article 63(2) was 
answered in the negative. Thereafter, the 
ruling of the Speaker was challenged before 
this Court through Constitution Petitions 
which were allowed and while dealing with 
the similar issue, the Court vide judgment 
dated 19.06.2012 held as under: -   
“As a Bench of 7 Hon’ble Judges vide 
judgment dated 26.0 4.2012 followed by the 
detailed reasons released on 08.05.2012 
has found Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani guilty of 
contempt of Court under Article 204(2) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 read with section 3 of the 
Contempt of Court Or dinance, 2003 and 
sentenced him to undergo imprisonment till 
rising of the Court under section 5 of the said 
Ordinance, and since no appeal was filed 
against this judgment, the conviction has 
attained finality. Therefore, Syed Yousaf 
Raza Gillani has becom e disqualified from 
being a Member of the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) in terms of Article 63(1)(g) of the 
Constitution on and from the date and time 
of pronouncement of the judgment of this 
Court dated 26.04.2012 with all 
consequences, i.e. he has also ce ased to be 
the Prime Minister of Pakistan with effect 
from the said date and the office of the Prime 
Minister shall be deemed to be vacant 
accordingly;      
The Election Commission of Pakistan is 
required to issue notification of 
disqualification of Syed Y ousaf Raza Gillani Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 39 :- 
from being a member of the Majlis -e-Shoora 
w.e.f. 26.4.2012.”  
 
78.  As regards the contention of learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan that no disqualification has been provided 
for other important Constitutional posts like the Presiden t, 
Governors, Chief of Army Staff, Judges of the superior Courts 
and Auditor General. Since this issue is not before us, we are 
not expressing our opinion on it except to say that in terms of 
Article 41 (2) of the Constitution only a person who qualified t o 
be elected as a Member of the National Assembly can be elected 
as a President in accordance with provision of 2nd Schedule by the 
members of the electoral college consisting of members of both 
the houses and the members of the Provincial Assemblies and 
that it is for the Legislature to decide, whether to amend the 
Constitution/Law if they in their wisdom decided  that on the 
other constitutional posts,  persons holding citizenship of a 
foreign state are not qualified to hold such posts.  
Is petition mainta inable under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution  
79.     Although the question of maintainability of petition 
under Article 184(3) of the Constitution has not seriously been 
argued by the learned counsel for the respondents, the issue in 
the petition about the disqualification of a person to be a 
Member of Parliament, the State has to exercise its powers and 
authority through the chosen representatives of the people and 
Parliament one of the noblest, honourable and important Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 40 :- 
institutions of the Country to ma ke the laws for the nation and 
safeguard their fundamental rights, is a question of public 
importance.  
80.  The expression “public importance” has been 
interpreted in a number of cases including Manzoor Elahi 
versus Federation of Pakistan,  (PLD 1975 SC 66) , General 
Secretary, West Pakistan Salt Miners Labour Union (CBA), 
Khewra, Jhelum versus Director Industries and Mineral 
Development, Punjab , (1994 SCMR 2061) and Mrs. Shahida 
Zahir Abbasi versus President of Pakistan,  (PLD 1996 SC 
632). It is quite clear that the question as to whether a 
particular case involves the element of ‘public importance’  is to 
be determined by this Court with reference to the facts and 
circumstances of each case.  
81.  For what has been discussed above, we declare that: - 
 
(a) Ch. Z ahid Iqbal, MNA, Ms. Farah 
Naz Isfahani, MNA, Mr. Farhat 
Mehmood Khan, MNA, Mr. Jamil 
Ahmad Malik, MNA, Mr. 
Muhammad Akhlaq, 
MPA(Punjab), Dr. Muhammad 
Ashraf Chohan, MPA (Punjab), 
Ms. Nadia Gabol, MPA (Sindh), 
Ch. Waseem Qadir, MPA 
(Punjab), Ch. Nadeem Kha dim, 
MPA(Punjab), Ms. Amna Buttar, 
MPA (Punjab), Dr. Ahmad Ali 
Shah, MPA (Sindh) have been 
found disqualified from being Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 41 :- 
members of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) and Provincial 
Assemblies because of their 
disqualification under Article 
63(1)(c) of the Const itution.  
 
(b) The Parliamentarians/Members 
of Provincial Assemblies, who 
have been declared to be 
disqualified, in view of the 
established fact that they have 
acquired the citizenship of 
Foreign States, therefore, no 
question has arisen, which is to 
be det ermined by the 
Chairman/Speaker. Thus, no 
reference under Article 63(2) is 
being made.  
 
(c) The Election Commission is 
directed to de -notify the respective 
memberships of 
Parliament/Assemblies of aforesaid 
persons.  
 
(d) All the Members of the 
Parliament/ Provincial Assemblies 
noted above had made false 
declarations before the Election 
Commission while filing their 
nomination papers and as such appear 
to be guilty of corrupt practice in terms 
of Section 78 of Representation of 
Peoples Act, 1976, therefore, the 
Election Commission is directed to Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 42 :- 
institute legal proceedings against 
them under section 82 of the Act read 
with sections 193, 196, 197, 198 and 
199 PPC in accordance with law.  
 
(e) The members of 
Parliament/Provincial Assemblies 
noted hereinabove, b eing disqualified 
persons are directed to refund all 
monetary benefits drawn by them for 
the period during which they occupied 
the public office and had drawn their 
emoluments etc. from the public 
exchequer including monthly 
remunerations, TA/DA, facilitie s of 
accommodation along with other perks 
which shall be calculated in terms of 
money by the Secretaries of the Senate, 
National Assembly and Provincial 
Assemblies accordingly.  
 
(f) The amount, so recovered from 
all of them by respective 
Secretaries shall  be deposited in 
the public exchequer within a 
period of two weeks and 
compliance report shall be sent to 
the Registrar.  
 
(g) As regards the case of Senator A. 
Rehman Malik, it may be noted 
that at the time of filing of 
nomination papers for election to 
the Senate held in the year 2008, 
he had made a false declaration Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 43 :- 
to the effect that he was not 
subject to any of the 
disqualifications specified in 
Article 63 of the Constitution or 
any other law for the time being 
in force for being elected as a 
member of  the 
Parliament/Provincial Assembly, 
therefore, reference will be 
required to be made to the 
Chairman Senate under Article 
63(2) in view of the provision of 
section 99(1)(f) of the Act of 1976, 
which lays down that a person 
shall not be qualified from bein g 
elected or chosen as a member of 
an Assembly unless he is 
sagacious, righteous and non -
profligate and honest and ameen. 
Mr. A. Rahman Malik, in view of 
the false declaration filed by him 
at the time of contesting the 
election to the Senate held in the 
year 2008, wherein he was 
elected, cannot be considered 
sagacious, righteous, honest and 
ameen within the contemplation 
of section 99(1)(f) of the Act of 
1976. Therefore, for such 
purposes Article 63(p) is to be 
adhered to because the 
disqualification incurr ed by him 
is envisaged under the law, 
referred to hereinabove in view of 
his own statement that he had Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 44 :- 
renounced his citizenship of UK 
whereas the fact remains that 
such renunciation along with 
declaration can only be seen as 
having been made on 
29.05.2012 .  
 
(h) Senator A. Rehman Malik is 
directed to refund all monetary 
benefits drawn by him upto 
11.7.2012 for the period during 
which he occupied the public 
office in the same manner as 
directed in the case of other 
Parliamentarians noted above.  
 
(i) As Mr.  A. Rehman Malik had 
made false declarations while 
filing his nomination papers 
before the Election Commission 
in the election held in the year 
2008, therefore, the Election 
Commission is directed to 
institute legal proceedings 
against him as it has been 
directed in the case of above said 
parliamentarians.  
82.  The Election Commission of Pakistan is also 
directed to examine the cases of the Parliamentarians and the 
members of Provincial Assemblies, individually, by obtaining Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 45 :- 
fresh declaration on oath from all of them that they are not 
disqualified under Article 63(1)(c) of the Constitution.  
83            In view of the above, the titled Constitution Petition 
is disposed of in the above terms.  
84.  These are the reasons of our short order.  
  
 
      Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad  
 
 
                                                                                                                        
Approved for reporting  
  Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 46 :- 
Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  I have had the benefit of going through the reasoning 
of my learned brother Khilji Arif Hussain, J. in support of the short order 
dated 20.9.2012. I am in agreement with his conclusions but am adding this 
concurring opinion giving  my additional  reasons in support of the said 
order.  
2. At the outset it is necessary to set out with clarity the precise issue 
before us: Does our Constitution permit a citizen of Pakistan, who also 
acquires  the citizenship of anoth er State, to become a memb er of Pakistan’s 
Parliament or of a Provincial Assembl y? The Constitution’s answer to this 
question is a simple “No” . The basis for this is Article 63(1)(c) which states in 
the clearest terms  that : “[a] person shall be disqualified from being elected or 
chosen as, and from being, a member of the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament), if: … (c) 
he … acquires the citizenship of a foreign State …” Article 63(1)(c) also receives 
strong textual support from other parts of the Constitution  as elaborated 
later in this opini on. On account of Article 113, the  disqualification  stated in 
Article 63(1)(c)  also extends  to members of the provincial assemblies. This 
constitutional imperative should ha ve been clear to all from the very 
beginning; but  clearly, like  some other constitu tional dictates , it had  not been 
adhered to . As far back as 2002, in the case titled Umar Ahmad Ghumman 
versus Government of Pakistan and others (PLD 2002 Lahore 521), it was held 
that a Pakistani who has acquired the Citizenship of a foreign State is 
disq ualified from membership in Parliament or a Provincial Assembly. 
Today, in deciding the petition presently before us, we have  done nothing 
more than to give  effect to this  rule which already exists  in the Constitution .  
3. We reiterate that the dual citize nship held by  expatriate and overseas 
Pakistanis is not the issue requiring adjudication in this case . The learned 
Attorney General and counsel representing some of the respondents appear Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 47 :- 
to have confused dual citizenship with the Constitutional disqualifi cation 
contained in Article 63(1)(c) ibid. We may clarify that  section 14(1) of the 
Citizenship Act , 1951, confers upon Pakistani citizens the right to hold the 
citizenship of certain other countries  without having to forgo their Pakistani 
citizenship . The right , therefore,  of Pakistani citizens to hold dual citizenship, 
as per law,  remains very much a stat utory right  vested in them.  The extent 
and scope of th at legal right  has no relevance to the question of 
disqualification relating to eligibility for bei ng a member of Parliament or of 
a Provincial Assembly . 
4. In fact, on numerous occasions  in the recent past, th is Court has  
express ed the national sentiment of gratitude for our expatriates , estimated 
to be in the range of 7 to 8  million in number . Most of  them, particularly 
those working in Middle Eastern countries donot hold dual citizenship. 
These sons and daughters of Pakistan toil in foreign land s, away from their 
hearths, homes and loved ones and, in the process, provide an economic 
lifeline to Pakist an in these critical times. In the last financial year, these 
overseas Pakistanis remitt ed more than US$ 13 billion in hard cash, to bolster 
the economy of the country. This figure is slated to increase in the current 
financial year. Yet, at times, these h ardworking and patriotic Pakistani 
expatriates  receive short shrift and humiliating treatment from g overnment 
agencies such as the  Immigration and other services , Civil Aviation 
Authority (CAA) and the Overseas Pakistanis Foundation (OPF), when they 
return  to Pakistan after months or even years away from home. This Court 
has taken suo moto notice  (HRC No. 24770 -G/2011)  of the maltreatment 
which overseas Pakistanis receive at the hands of such authorities.  
5. The particulars of the petitioner s, intervener s and the respondents and 
the arguments presented by them have been sufficiently addressed in the Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 48 :- 
lead opinion. The reasons for considering the present petitions  maintainable  
are also evident . The text of the Constitution is clear enough . It plainly  
disquali fies a person from seeking election to or from being a member of 
Parliament if he acquires the citizenship of another State. What is, however, 
worth emphasizing  is also the spirit behind Article 63 (1)(c)  ibid. This  
becomes clear when we read the article t ogether with certain other relevant 
provisions of the C onstitution. Courts in Pakistan have , repeatedly , held that 
the Constitution is to be read as an organic whole, whose meaning is to be  
gathered holistically through reason ( Munir  Bhatti v. Federation o f Pakistan  
PLD 2011 SC 407 ). This is why it is a matter of utmost importance that the 
spirit behind Article  63(1) (c) is also fully comprehended , when  interpreting 
and applying its clear intent . 
6. When trying to understand the spirit  behind Article 63(1)(c ), the first 
point that needs to be considered is  the fiduciary role envisaged for members 
of  Parliament  in our Constitution.  In a number of judgments, we have 
emphasized the notion that all state authority is in the nature of a “sacred 
trust”  and its be arers should therefore be seen as fiduciaries.  In Muhammad 
Yasin v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 132) , we held that  “holders of 
public office … are, first and foremost fiduciaries and trustees  for the People of 
Pakistan. And, when performing the fun ctions of their Office, they can have no 
interest other than the interests of the honourable People of Pakistan … ”. 
Parliamentarians , while acting as trustees  and the chosen representatives of 
the people , take  decisions which  are often of grave consequence  for the 
protection of the economic, political and  over -all national interests of the 
people of Pakistan. In other words,  theirs is a fiduciary duty of the highest 
order.  In our Parliamentary democracy, members of Parliament also Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 49 :- 
constitute the Governm ent as defined in Article 90 of the Constitution and 
elect the Prime Minister who is the chief executive of the country.  
7. It is well  settled  that the foremost obligation  of a fiduciary is to show  
complete  loyalty to the  principal  and to scrupulous ly avoid situations which  
may  create a conflict of interest  in the performance of such duty . Cognizant 
of this principle,  our  Constitution requires  constitutional functionaries 
including members of the National Assembly,  Senators and members of 
Provincial Assemblies to solemnly swear that they will “ bear true faith and 
allegiance to Pakistan ” and act “ always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, 
solidarity, well -being and prosperity of Pakistan.”   (Third Schedule, Constitution)  
8. It should be obvious that ho lding dual  citizen ship is likely to create  
situations for the holder where he faces a conflict of interest in the discharge 
of fiduciary duty to the people of Pakistan . The conflict of interest is 
particularly evident  when  the acquisition of foreign citize nship entail s taking 
an oath  of allegiance to the  foreign state and re nunciation  of allegiance  to 
Pakistan . Thus , for instance,  when  Ms. Farah Naz Isfahani  (and others such 
as her) acquired citizenship of the United States , she swore  an oath to  bear  
“true faith and allegiance to ” the U nited States , to “bear arms” on its behalf and 
to “renounce and abjure absolutely and entirely all allegiance and fidelity to any 
foreign … state…”  such as Pakistan. This oath is a statutory requirement 
stipulated in the Unite d States Code. Its present wording w as introduced by 
the Immigration and Nationality Act, 1952  and cannot be waived except in 
very rare circumstances , such as being a minor or of unsound mind . 
Similarly,  when Mr. A. Rehman Malik  (and others such as him) acquired 
British citizen ship, he  swore “ by Almighty God that on becoming a British citizen 
[he] will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the 
Second , her heirs and successors … ” and that he will  give his “ loyalty to the Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 50 :- 
United Kingdom.”   Clearly, oath s of this nature, do conflict with the fiduciary 
obligation of unswerving and undivided loyalty to Pakistan and its people . It 
is hard to see how someone who has openly “renounce [d] and abjure[d]”  all 
allegiance to Pakistan  or who h as sworn allegiance to a foreign monarch,  can 
then  be safely  entrusted with the “sacred trust”  of protect ing the interests of 
the people of Pakistan . In sum, therefore, acquiring the  citizenship  of a 
foreign state does  create a serious conflict of interest ; such  conflict of interest  
renders a person  unsuited  for discharging a  fiduciary  duty as onerous as 
being a public representative . This is precisely the spirit in which the framers 
have enacted Article 63(1)(c)  of the Constitution , which  prevents citizens  
who acquire the citizenship of another state  from entering or remaining in 
Parliament and in the Provincial Assemblies.  
9. The conflict of interest situation anticipated in the Constitution is not 
imaginary . It is a real proposition and can easily  be illu strated through an 
issue which is current and topical.  In the case of Ms. Farah Naz Isfahani, for 
instance, the implications of her oath of allegiance to the U nited States  may 
be contemplated. D ebate within and outside Parliament has highlight ed the 
differ ences between the two States  (of which Ms. Isfahani has citizenship ) on 
a number of issues  such as drone strikes by the United States, on Pakistani 
territory and citizens. There exist or may arise similar differences between 
the two States . Situations like  these do put dual citizens like Ms. Isfahani into 
possible conflict of interest . On the one hand, she is committed to 
“perform[ing] her functions… in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, 
well-being and prosperity of Pakistan ”, even if t hat entails consequences which 
are adverse to the interests of the United States. At that same time, she is also 
expected to “ renounce …  all allegiance and fidelity to” Pakistan and, if the need 
arises, “ bear arms on behalf of  the United States ” against Pakistan.  The framers Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 51 :- 
of our Constitution were clear  enough to have found us a way out of such 
conflict  of interest situations by expressly specifying  the disqualification 
stated in Article 63(1)(c)  and thus ensuring that there remain no doubts as to 
the u ndivided loyalty of elected representatives, towards Pakistan  and its 
honourable people .  
10. In this context we may also add that Interior Minister Mr. A. Rehman 
Malik was reported to have made a statement that even after our short Order 
dated 20.9.2012 , there still remain in the houses of Parliament, persons who 
are dual nationals. Notice was issued to Mr. A. Rehman Malik after  
examination of the transcript of his statement. He appeared in Court and 
stated that he will task “his boys” in the Ministry of I nterior who can then 
submit in Court a list of person s in Parliament/Provincial Assemblies 
holding dual citizenship. The Election Commission of Pakistan is also in the 
process of gathering information about such disqualified persons as has been 
reported in  the media  to ensure adherence to the Constitution . It is of the 
utmost importance that actions and decision -making in the highest  elected 
bodies are not tainted and possibly rendered subject to constitutional 
challenge, on account of the presence of disqu alified persons in such elected 
bodies.  
11. We are aware that  the question of the eligibility of dual citizens for 
holding office as publ ic representati ves has been dealt with somewhat 
differently by the Consti tutions of other countries.  In India , the ver y act of 
holding dual nationality is constitutionally barred. The Indian Constitution 
explicitly states: “…  no person shall be a citizen of India… if he has voluntarily 
acquired the citizenship of any foreign State ” (Article 9, Constitution of the 
Republic  of India, 1950) . Since no Indian citizen can be a dual citizen, dual 
citizens are also precluded from holding elected office. It may be noted that Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012  -: 52 :- 
up until the Pakistan Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 197 2, the law in 
Pakistan  also did not allow for holding dual citizenship. It is for this reason  
the Constitutions of 1956 and 1962 did not contain any express 
disqualif ication for dual citizens becoming  parliamentarian s because there 
were no dual citizens  permitted under law . Permission for holding dual 
citizen ship was legally granted in 1972 through the above -mentioned statute . 
The Constitution of 1973 , therefore , contained Article 63(1)(c) to ensure that 
citizens of Pakistan who acquire dual citizenship, donot sit in Parliament . 
The wisdom of the framers of th e Constitution is founded on the 
requirement of absolute and undiluted loyalty to Pakistan as a qualification 
for having the privilege of being a chosen representative of the honourable 
people of Pakistan. In Australia  too, any person who is “ under any 
acknowledgment of allegiance, obedience, or adherence to a foreign power, or is a 
subject or a citizen … of a foreign power… ” is disqualified from becoming a 
Senator or a member of the House of Representatives (Section 44 (i), 
Commonwealth of Australia Consti tution Act) . There may be States where 
dual citizenship will not disqualify the holder from being elected as a 
legislator. Pakistan, however, is not among such States.   
12. The upshot of this brief over -view of  comparative constitutional law is 
that the framers of the Constitution  in different countries strike a balance 
between competing interests in the light of  their own  context . The balance 
struck by the Constitution of Pakistan is  that it does not disall ow dual 
citizenship , but  it does prohibit  dual cit izens from holding high elected 
office. Anyone familiar with the tragic episodes of Pakistan’s history would 
recognize why the framers adopted a careful position in this matter, and why 
this is an  eminently reasonable position  in our context.   Constitution Petition No. 05 of 2012
 -: 53 :- 
13. To sum u p, it should be clear that we do  not question the  citizenship 
rights of dual citizens  under statute, nor does this Court seek to ignore  their 
invaluable services to the nation . In fact, as noted above, the Court has taken 
a number of initiatives to ensure the well -being  of overseas Pakistanis , some 
of who m might also be dual  citizens. It is o nly the privilege of sitting in 
Parliament  and the Provincial Assemblies and the honour of being decision -
makers on behalf of the people of Pakistan which the  Constitut ion, vide 
Article s 63(1)(c ) and 113  requires , be given to persons who are not the 
citizens of another State . This is so because  as di scussed, in view of  the 
onerous fiduciary duties of public representatives, the Constitution 
recognizes the  special need to  avoid all possibl e conflict  of interest situations  
in the elected bodies of the country .  
 
(Jawwad S. Khawaja)  
                        Judge  
 
 20.09.2012  1

 2

 3
 113  (1)(c)63


 
 (PLD 2002 Lahore 521)
 4

 1951 
 14 


 5
 8070 1                                                                                                                                           Const. P. 5/2012  13 


 OPF  (CAA)  (Immigration) 
 ( s u o  m o t u ) 
( H.R.C No 24770-G/2011)
   6
 184(3) 

 63(1)(c) 

 63(1)(c)  PLD 2011 SC 407  

 7
  "  "
 "  PLD 2012 SC 132   

 " 
2                                                                                                                                           Const. P. 5/2012  
      8
   
  "  
" 
 9
 

 " 
 " 
 " 

 " 



  63(1)(c)
 20/09/2012  10

  (my boys) " " 3                                                                                                                                           Const. P. 5/2012   


 11


 " 
 " 

 63(1)(c) 
 12

Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act 44(i)) 
 
 13


4                                                                                                                                           Const. P. 5/2012  