IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
RESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ  
MR. JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL  
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN  
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI  
MR. JUSTICE SARMAD JALAL OSMANY  
MR. JUSTICE AMI R HANI MUSLIM  
 
INTRA COURT APPEALS NO. 3, 4, 6 TO 8 & 11 OF 2011  
 
 
[On appeal against the order dated 02.02.2011 
passed by a 4 -Member Bench of the Supreme 
Court in Criminal Original Petition No.93  etc.] 
 
 
Mr. Justice Hasnat Ahmed Khan    …  APPELLANT   
         (ICA 3/2011)  
 
Mr. Justice Syed Shabbar Raza Rizvi  …  APPELLANT   
         (ICA 4/2011)  
 
Mr. Justice Syed Hamid Ali Shah   …  APPELLANT   
         (ICA 6/2011)  
 
Mr. Justice  (R) Iftikhar Hussain Chaudhary…   APPELLANT   
         (ICA 7/2011)  
 
Mr. Justice   Syed Sajjad Hussain Shah  …  APPELLANT   
         (ICA 8/2011)  
 
Justice Mrs. Yasmin Abbasey   …   APPELLANT   
         (ICA 11/2011)  
     VERSUS  
 
Federation of Pakistan/State   …   RESPONDENT  
 
For the appellants:   Dr. A. Basit, Sr. ASC  
(ICA 3 & 4/2011)    Mr. Ars had Ali Chaudhry, AOR  
 
For the appellants:   Syed Raza Kazim, Sr. ASC  
(ICA 6/2011)    Mr. G.N. Gohar, AOR (absent)  
 
For the appellants:   Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC  
(ICA 7/2011)    Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR   
 
For the appellants:   Sh. Zamir Hussain, Sr. AS C 
(ICA 8/2011)    Mr. Ejaz Muhammad Khan, AOR (absent)  
 ICA 3 /2011  etc. 2 
For the appellants:   Syed Ali Zafar, ASC   
(ICA 11/2011)    Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR (absent)  
 
On Court’s notice:   Maulvi Anwar -ul-Haq 
     Attorney General for Pakistan  
 
Respondent:    Not represente d  
 
Dates of hearing:  18 & 21  February, 3 & 21 March and 4 
April, 2011 
…  
 
ORDER  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ . – Listed Intra 
Court Appeals are directed against the order dated 02.02.2011 passed 
by a 4-Member Bench of this Court  in Criminal Original P etitions No. 
93 to 98, 100 & 104 of 2009 and 2, 3 & 4 of 2011 .  
2.  The facts in brief are that on 03.11. 2007, the then Chief of 
Army Staff, General Pervez Musharraf  (Retd.)  issued a Proclamation of 
Emergency and two other instruments, namely, Provisional 
Constitution Order No. 1 of 2007 [hereinafter referred to as “the PCO, 
2007”] and the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007  [hereinafter 
referred to as “the Oath Order, 2007”] whereby he held the 
Constitution of Pakistan in abeyance  and declared that t he 
Judges of Sup erior Court s had ceased to hold office  and only 
such Judges would continue to hold office who would mak e oath of 
office under those instruments . Paragraph No.3 of the PCO, 2007 is 
reproduced hereinbelow: -  
“(3) Subject to clause (1) above and the  Oath of Office 
(Judges) Order, 2007, all courts in existence immediately before 
the commencement of this Order shall continue to function and 
to exercise their respective powers and jurisdiction . 
Provided that the Supreme Court or a High Court and any oth er 
court shall not have the power to make any order against the 
President or the Prime Minister or any person exercising powers 
or jurisdiction under their authority.”  
 
As per the Oath Order, 2007 a person holding office immediately 
before that Order as Ju dge of the Supreme Court, the Federal Shariat 
Court, or a High Court would cease to hold that office with immediate 
effect; provided  that a person who was given and did make, Oath in 
the form set out in the Schedule, before the expiration of such time 
from such commencement as the President may determine or within 
such further time as may be allowed by the President would be ICA 3 /2011  etc. 3 
deemed to continue to hold the office of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court, the Federal Shariat Court or a High Court, as the case may be. 
On this, in view of afore  noted position, a  7-Member Bench of this 
Court passed a  restraint order in the case of Justice (Rtd.) Wajihuddin 
Ahmad v. Chief Election Commissioner  (PLD 2008 SC 25) wherein, it 
was, inter alia, directed as under: -  
“(i) Governme nt of Pakistan, i.e. President and Prime Minister 
of Pakistan, i.e. President and Prime Minister of Pakistan 
are restrained from undertaking any such action, which is 
contrary to Independence of Judiciary;  
(ii) No judge of the Supreme Court or the High Courts 
including Chief Justice(s) shall take oat h under PCO or 
any other extra -Constitutional step;  
(iii) Chief of Army Staff, Corps Commanders, Staff Officers 
and all concerned of the Civil and Military Authorities are 
hereby restrained from acting on PCO which has b een 
issued or from administering fresh oath to Chief Justice of 
Pakistan or Judges of Supreme Court and Chief Justice or 
Judges of the Provincial High Courts;  
(iv) They are also restrained to undertake any such action, 
which is contrary to independence of Judi ciary. Any 
further appointment of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and 
Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices of High 
Courts or Judges of Provinces, under new development 
shall be unlawful and without jurisdiction;  
(v) Put up before full Court on 5th November 2007.”   
 
It may be mentioned here that above  restraint order was widely 
covered by the electronic media , thus few Judges of the Superior 
Courts  including appellants made oath under the new dispensation , 
whereas, majority of the Judges of superior Co urts declined to make 
oath obviously for their commitment with the Constitution of 1973 and 
in deference  to above judicial order.  It is noteworthy that appellants 
and some other Judges who had made oath under the Oath Order, 
2007, inste ad of showing allegi ance and upholding the Constitution , 
under which thei r appointment had taken place, accept ed fresh 
appointments as Judges of superior Courts under the instruments i.e. 
PCO and Oath O rder, 2007 , thus,  they ceased to hold office under the 
Constitution. Mr. J ustice (R) Abdul Hameed Dogar, a Judge of this 
Court made oath of office of Chief Justice of Pakistan in pursuance of 
the Oath Order, 2007 read with PCO, 2007. Besides him, four other 
Judges of the Supreme Court also made similar oaths.  
3.   In the histor y of the country it is not for the first time that 
Judges of the superior Courts had made oath under instrument other 
than the Constitution and on revival of Constitution the ultra -ICA 3 /2011  etc. 4 
constitutional action had been legitimized by the parliament as it had 
happened in 1977 when the extra-constitutional acts of dictator were 
validated by the Eighth  Constitutional Amendment . Likewise , such  
actions of 12.10.1999 were also legitimized/validated  by means of 
Seventeenth  Constitutional Amendment . It is noteworthy that the 
Judges who made oath under P CO and Oath Order, 2007 were under 
the impression that the action of dictator , violat ing the Constitution on 
3.11.2007 would also be validated  but it was not done by  the 
Parliament existing at the  time when the Constitution was held in 
abeyance and continued till  15.11.2007 , and the new Parliament which 
came into existence on 18.2.2008 as a result of fresh elections held in 
the country under the Constitution. This aspect of the case shall, 
however, be discussed in detail at later stage.  
4.   It is essential to note at this stage that after the 
unconstitutional actions of 3.11.2007, two petitions bearing 
Constitution Petitions No.87 and 88 /2007  were filed by Tikka Iqbal 
Muhammad Khan and Zafarullah Khan on 10th & 12th November , 2007 
respectively, wherein the instruments and measures of 3 .11.2007 
were challenged . The Constitution Petitions were disposed of  by the 
Judges of the  Court who had made oath in violation of the order dated 
3.11.2007  passed by a 7 -Members Bench and it wa s held , inter alia, 
that the actions of 3 .11.2007  were taken by General Pervez Musharraf  
(Retd .) in a situation for which the Constitution provided no solution . 
Consequently , the same were declared to have been validly made by 
him under the principles of s tate necessity and Salus populi est 
suprem a lex i.e. the welfare of the people is the supreme law.  [Tikka 
Iqbal Muhammad Khan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2008 SC 178)]. 
Review petitions filed against the said judgment were dismissed [Tikka 
Iqbal Muhamma d Khan v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2008 SC 615 ).]  
5.   The lawyers, civil society, and the general public  agitated 
against action s of the then Chief of Army Staff and  launched  struggle 
for the restoration of judiciary , which was sacked unconstitutionall y. 
Thus, ultimately vide notification dated 17 .3.2009, the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan was restored to the position he was holding immediately 
before 3.11. 2007.  Similarly vide  different notifications, the Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts, who were dec lared to have ceased to ICA 3 /2011  etc. 5 
hold office on or after 3 .11.2007, were restored to the position they 
were holding prior to 3 .11.2007 .   
6.   In the above background , on the restoration  of Judiciary, 
Constitution Petitions were filed by Sindh High Court Bar Associ ation 
and Nadeem Ahmad Advocate, wherein the constitutionality of the 
actions of 3 .11.2007  and validity of the judgment in the case of Tikka 
Iqbal Muhammad Kha n (PLD 2008 SC 178) were questioned.  This 
Court vide judgment dated 31 .7.2009 , in the case of Sindh High Court 
Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2009 SC 879)  made the 
following observations :-  
“18.  From above, the conclusions drawn are that: -- 
  
(i)  The General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd.) in the garb of 
Emergency Plus and the Provisional Co nstitution Order 
made amendments in the Constitution by self -acquired 
the powers which all are unconstitutional, unauthorized, 
without any legal basis, hence, without any legal 
consequences;  
  
(ii)  Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar, took oath as CJP in 
violation of the order dated 3.11.2007 passed by a 7 
member Bench headed by de -jure Chief Justice of 
Pakistan and in pursuance of unconstitutional 
instruments introduced by General Pervez Musharraf 
(Rtd.), additionally knowing well that the office of Chief 
Justice of Pakistan was not lying vacant;  
  
(iii)  Also, the Judges who were either retired or were not 
holding any judicial office, beside those in High Courts 
took fresh oath on their appointment on and after 
3.11.2007 till 15.12.2007 in Supreme Court where the 
full strength of Judges along with an Ad -hoc Judge 
appointed under the Constitution were already working 
and thus there was no vacancy. Similarly, 'many Judges 
took oath in Provincial High Courts. All of them did so in 
violation of order dated 3.11.200 7 passed by 7 member 
Bench headed by de -jure Chief Justice of Pakistan. Four 
incumbent Judges already functioning in the Supreme 
Court took fresh oath under the influence of and in 
pursuance of unconstitutional steps of General Pervez 
Musharraf (Rtd.);  
  
(iv)  The Petition No.73 of 2007 filed by Mr. Justice (Rtd.) 
Wajihuddin Ahmad challenging the eligibility of General 
Pervez Musharraf (Rtd.) to contest for the office of 
President in uniform was dismissed purportedly on 
merits although the record maintained  in the Supreme 
Court revealed otherwise;  
  
(v)  The decisions in the cases of Tikka Iqbal Muhammad 
Khan granting validity to the actions of General Pervez 
Musharraf (Rtd.) were per incuriam, coram -non-judice, 
without any legal basis hence, of no legal 
consequences;  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 6 
  
(vi)  The amendments in the Supreme Court (Number of 
Judges) Act, (XXXIII, 1997) 1997 by way of Finance 
Act, 2008 raising the strength of Judges in Supreme 
Court from 17 (1+ 16) to 30 (1+29) seemingly aimed 
at providing allocation of funds for  increasing the 
strength of Judges is unconstitutional because the 
strengths of Judges of Supreme Court is be increased 
by Parliament as defined in Article 50 to be read with 
Article 260 of the Constitution which defines the acts of 
Parliaments;  
  
(vii)  Surprisingly, in the past the Courts of the time used to 
extend favours empowering the adventurers to amend 
the Constitution in actual effect were to achieve their 
overt and covert agenda but this time, such powers 
were acquired by the General Pervez Mushar raf (Rtd.) 
himself through the PCO and brought a host of 
unconstitutional amendments for his own benefits; and  
  
(viii)  The present representative of people firmly believe in 
strong and independent judiciary and the democratic 
system which is evident that  the deposed Judges of 
Supreme Court, High Courts and the de -jure Chief 
Justice of Pakistan were restored with effect from 3rd of 
November, 2007 implied that the present 
representatives of people denied the validity of the 
actions of General Pervez Musharr af (Rtd.) taken from 
3.11.2007 to 15.12.2007 during which the Constitution 
remained suspended.    
  
21.  The Proclamation of Emergency issued by General 
Pervez Musharraf as the, Chief of Army Staff (as he then was) 
on November 3, 2007; the Provisional Const itution Order No. 
1 of 2007 issued by him on the same date in his said 
capacity; the Oath of Office (Judges) Order of 2007 issued by 
him also on the same date though as the President of 
Pakistan but in exercise of powers under the aforesaid 
Proclamation of  A Emergency and the Provisional Constitution 
Order No.1 of 2007; the Provisional Constitution 
(Amendment) Order, 2007 issued by him like -wise on 
15.11.2007; the Constitution (Amendment) Order, 2007 being 
President's Order No.5 of 2007 issued on November 2 0, 2007; 
the Constitution (Second Amendment) Order, 2007 being the 
President's Order No.6 of 2007 issued on 14th December, 
2007; the Islamabad High Court (Establishment) Order 2007 
dated 14th December 2007 being the President's Order No.7 
of 20Q7; the High  Court Judges (Pensionary Benefits) Order, 
2007 being. President's Order No.8 of 2007; the Supreme 
Court Judges (Pensionary Benefits) Order, 2007 being 
President's Order No.9 of 2007 dated 14th December, 2007 
are hereby declared to be un -constitutional, ul tra-vires of the 
Constitution and consequently being illegal and of no legal 
effect.  
 
22.  As a consequence thereof: - 
  
(i)  the Chief Justice of Pakistan; the Judges of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan; any Chief Justice of any of 
the High Courts and the Ju dges of the High Courts who 
were declared to have ceased to hold their respective ICA 3 /2011  etc. 7 
offices in pursuance of the afore -mentioned alleged 
judgments or any other such judgment and on account 
of the instruments mentioned in Para 21 above, shall be 
deemed never t o have ceased to be such Judges, 
irrespective of any notification issued regarding their 
reappointment or restoration;  
  
(ii)  it is declared that the office of the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan never f ell vacant on November 3, 2007 and as 
a consequence there of it is further declared that the 
appointment of Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar as the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan was unconstitutional; void ab 
initio and of no legal effect;  
  
Provided that subject to whatever is contained 
hereinafter, the said un -constit utional appointment of 
Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar as the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan shall not affect the validity of any 
administrative or financial acts performed by him or of 
any oath made before him in the ordinary course of the 
affairs of the said o ffice;  
  
(iii)  since Mr. Justice Abdul Hameed Dogar was never a 
constitutional Chief Justice of Pakistan, therefore, all 
appointments of Judges of the Supreme Court of 
Pakistan, of the Chief Justices of the High Courts and of 
the Judges of the High Courts  made, in consultation 
with him, during the period that he, unconstitutionally, 
held the said office from 3.11.2007 to 22.3.2009 (both 
days inclusive) are hereby declared to be un -
constitutional, void ab initio and of no legal effect and 
such appointees sh all cease to hold office forthwith;  
  
Provided that the Judges so un -constitutionally 
appointed to the Supreme Court while holding the 
offices as Judges of any of the High Courts shall revert 
back as Judges of the respective High Courts subject to 
their ag e of superannuation and like -wise, the Judges of 
the High Courts, who were District and Sessions Judges 
before their said un -constitutional elevation to the High 
Courts shall revert back as District and Sessions Judge 
subject to limitation of superannuatio n; 
  
(iv)  the Judges of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, if any, the 
Chief Justices of the High Court, if any, and the Judges 
of any of the High Courts, if any, who stood appointed 
to the said offices prior to 3.11.2007 but who made 
oath or took oath of the ir respective offices in 
disobedience to the order passed by a Seven Member 
Bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan on 3.11.2007 
in C.M.A.No.2869 of 2007 in Constitution Petition No.73 
of 2007, shall be proceeded against under Article 209 of 
the Constitutio n. The Secretary of the Law Division of 
the Government of Pakistan shall take steps in the 
matter accordingly;  
  
Provided that nothing hereinabove shall affect those 
Judges who though had been appointed as Judges/Chief 
Justices of any of the High Courts be tween 3.11.2007 
to' 22.3.2009 but had subsequently been appointed 
afresh to other offices in consultation with or with the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 8 
approval of or with the consent of the Constitutional 
Chief Justice of Pakistan;  
  
(v)  any judgments delivered or orders made or any  decrees 
passed by any Bench of the Supreme Court or of any of 
the High Courts which comprised of or which included 
the afore -described Judges whose appointments had 
been declared void ab initio, are protected on the 
principle laid down in MALIK ASAD ALI'S  CASE (PLD 
1998 SC 161);  
  
(vi)  since the Constitution (Amendment) Order, 2007 being 
the President's Order No.5 of 2007 and the Islamabad 
High Court (Establishment) Order being President's 
Order No.7 of 2007 establishing Islamabad High Court 
for the Feder al Capital Territory, have been declared to 
be un -constitutional and of no legal effect, therefore, 
the said Islamabad High Court shall cease . to exist 
forthwith. All judicial matters pending before the said 
High Court before the passing of this order sha ll 
revert/stand transferred to the courts which had 
jurisdiction in the said matters before the promulgation 
of afore -mentioned President's Order No.5 of 2007 and 
President's Order No.7 of 2007 promulgated on 14th 
December, 2007. The Judges of the said Cou rt shall, as 
a consequence thereof, cease to be Judges except such 
Judges or the Chief Justice of the said court, who prior 
to their appointments in the said Islamabad High Court, 
were Judges of some other High Court who shall revert 
to the court of which they were originally the Judges, 
subject to their age of superannuation. The officers and 
employees of the said Court shall also cease to hold 
their respective appointments and shall become part of 
the Federal Government Surplus Pool for their further 
appointments. However, if any such officer or employee 
was an officer or an employee of some other court or 
department or office, such officers or employees shall 
revert to their respective courts, departments or offices 
to which they belonged before joining t he service in the 
Islamabad High Court, subject again to their age of 
superannuation;  
  
We would like to mention here that establishment of a 
High Court or a Federal Court for the Federal Capital 
Territory might be a desirable act but it is unfortunate 
that such a step was taken in an un -constitutional and a 
highly objectionable manner. We may, therefore, add 
that notwithstanding what has been declared and 
ordered above, the relevant and competent authorities 
may take steps to establish such a court in acco rdance 
with the Constitution/the law;  
  
(vii)  the Ordinances promulgated by the President or a 
Governor of a Province before 3.11.2007 which were 
given permanence by the Provisional Constitution Order 
No.1 of 2007 as also the Ordinances issued by the 
President or a Governor between 3.11.2007 and 
15.12.2007 (both days inclusive) which were also, like -
wise given permanence through the same instrument 
and which legislative measures along with the said 
Provisional Constitution Order had been validated by ICA 3 /2011  etc. 9 
the a fore-mentioned judgment delivered in TIKKA 
IQBAL MUHAMMAD KHAN'S CASE, stand shorn of their 
purported permanence on account of our afore -
mentioned declarations. Since on account of the said 
judgment in TIKKA IQBAL MUHAMMAD KHAN'S CASE 
purporting to be a ju dgment of this Court, the 
presumption that the said Ordinances were valid laws 
not requiring approval of the Parliament or the 
respective Provincial Assemblies in terms of Article 89 
or 128 of the Constitution and since it is today that this 
Court has attr ibuted invalidity to the said legislative 
instruments, therefore, the period of 120 days and 90 
days mentioned respectively in the said Article 89 and 
the said Article 128 of the Constitution, would be 
deemed to commence to run from today and steps may 
be taken to place, the said Ordinances before the 
Parliament or the respective Provincial Assemblies in 
accordance with law;  
  
(viii)  since the Constitution, through its Article 176, 
authorises only the Parliament to determine the number 
of Judges of the Sup reme Court of Pakistan and since 
the Parliament had so done through the Supreme Court 
(Number of Judges) Act XXXIII pf 1997, therefore, the 
increase in the strength of the Judges through the 
Finance Act of 2008 which Act was not passed by the 
Parliament bu t was passed only by the National 
Assembly would be deemed to be valid only for financial 
purposes and not for the purposes of Article 176 of the 
Constitution. It is resultantly declared that the number 
of Judges of the Supreme Court for purposes of the sa id 
Article 176 shall continue to remain, sixteen;  
  
(ix)  in the Code of Conduct prescribed for the Judges of the 
Superior Courts in terms of Article 209(8) of the 
Constitution, a new clause shall be added commanding 
that no such Judge shall, hereinafter, offer any support 
in whatever manner to any unconstitutional functionary 
who acquires power otherwise than through the modes 
envisaged by the Constitution and that any violation of 
the said clause would be deemed to be misconduct in 
terms of the said Artic le 209 of the Constitution;  
  
(x)  in view of our findings above regarding Mr. Justice 
Abdul Hameed Dogar not being a constitutional and a 
valid consultee, the notification dated 26.8.2008 and 
the notification dated 15.9.2008 extending the term of 
office o f Mr. Justice Abdur Rasheed Kalwar and of Mr. 
Justice Zafar Ahmed Khan Sherwani as Additional 
Judges of the High Court of Sindh are declared to be 
unconstitutional and of no legal effect;  
  
(xi)  that the court acknowledges and respects the mandate 
given b y the sovereign authority i.e. electorate to the 
democratically elected Government on 18th February, 
2008 and would continue to jealously guard the 
principle of trichotomy of powers enshrined in the 
Constitution, which is the essence of the rule of law. 
Any declaration made in this judgment shall not in any 
manner affect the General Elections held and the 
Government formed as a result thereof i.e. the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 10 
President, the Prime Minister, the Parliament, the 
Provincial Governments, anything done by these 
instituti ons in the discharge of their functions. These 
acts are fully protected in terms of the age old of 
principle of Salus populi est supremo lex reflected in PLD 
1972 SC 139;  
  
(xii)  Before parting with the judgment, we would like to 
reiterate that to defend,  protect and uphold the 
Constitution is the sacred function of the Supreme 
Court. The Constitution in its preamble, inter alia, 
mandates that there shall be democratic governance in 
the country, "wherein the principles of democracy, 
freedom, equality, tole rance and social justice as 
enunciated by Islam shall be fully observed; …………. 
wherein the independence of judiciary shall be fully 
secured." While rendering this judgment, these abiding 
values have weighed with us. We are sanguine that the 
current democra tic dispensation comprising of the 
President, Prime Minister and the Parliament shall 
equally uphold these values and the mandate of their 
oaths .” 
  
7.  In the detailed reasons, passed in the Sindh High Court 
Bar Association’s case , it was held that the Judges, whether they 
were in this Court or in the High Courts, have all rendered themselves 
liable for consequences under the Constitution for their disobedience of 
the aforesaid order of 3 .11.2007 . Relevant portion from the said 
judgment is reproduced herei nbelow: -      
121.  Proclamation of Emergency, PCO No. 1 of 2007 and Oath 
Order, 2007 per se having been found to be unconstitutional, 
illegal and ultra vires, the next limb of the contention of Mr. 
Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC was that all the acts based upon, or 
flowing from, the actions of 3rd November, 2007 were too, 
unconstitutional, illegal and ultra vires, therefore, all such acts 
including the appointment of Abdul Hameed Dogar, J, as the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan, the oath made by other Judges of the 
Supreme  Court and High Courts, including Chief Justices, etc., 
and the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and High 
Courts in violation of the order dated 3rd November, 2007 
passed by a seven - member Bench of this Court in Wajihuddin 
Ahmed's case and the appointments made in consultation with 
Abdul Hameed Dogar, J, were a nullity in the eye of law and of 
no legal effect and were liable to be so declared by this Court 
and such Judges had also rendered themselves liable for action 
under and in accordance wit h the Constitution and the law 
including action for contempt of Court.  
 
122. ………………… Thus, on 3rd November, 2007 certainly it was 
the first time in the history of Pakistan that the judiciary, 
instead of accepting or acquiescing in the situation as per past  
practice, acted boldly and independently and took the most ever 
needed step, which conspicuously lacked in the past. A seven -
member Bench of this Court, constituted and convened in the 
evening of the fateful day after the issuance of Proclamation of 
Emerg ency, PCO No. 1 of 2007 and Oath Order, 2007, passed ICA 3 /2011  etc. 11 
the restraint order in Wajihuddin Ahmed's case. This was the 
most striking distinction between the action of 3rd November, 
2007 on the one hand m and those of 12th October, 1999, 5th 
July, 1977, 25th Mar ch, 1969 and m 7th October, 1958 on the 
other. In pursuance of the said order, a vast majority of the 
Judges of the superior courts rejected the actions of 3rd 
November, 2007 and did not make oath in pursuance with the 
order dated 3rd November, 2007 passed  by a seven - member 
Bench of this Court in Wajihuddin Ahmed's case. The lawyers, 
members of the civil, society, political activists, the print and the 
electronic media personnel and the general public played their 
role for upholding the rule of law and su premacy of the 
Constitution in the country. Abdul Hameed Dogar, J, and some 
other Judges violated the aforesaid order, dated 3rd November, 
2007 passed by a seven - member Bench of this Court in 
Wajihuddin Ahmed's case. These Judges, whether they were in 
this Court or in the High Courts, have all rendered themselves 
liable for consequences under the Constitution for their 
disobedience of the aforesaid order of 3rd November, 
2007.” (Emphasis provided )         
 
The implication of above order was that the Judge s, who were 
appointed as Judges of the Supreme Court  by the President of Pakistan 
in consultation with Mr. Justice (R) Abdul Hameed Dogar were ceased 
to hold office vide notification No. F.12(4)/2007 -A.II (Vol.II)(a) dated 
2.8.2009, which reads as under: - 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 2nd August, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II)(a). In pursuance of 
the judgment of the full Bench of Supreme Court of 
Pakistan dated 31st July, 2009, in Constitution P etitons 
No.9 and 8 of 2009 (Sindh High Court Bar Association and 
Mr. Nadeem Ahmed, Advocate  Vs. Federation of 
Pakistan), the President is pleased to approve that the 
following Judges of Supreme Court of Pakistan shall cease 
to hold their offices with immed iate effect: - 
 
1. Mr. Justice Muhammad Qaim Jan  
2. Mr. Justice Ijaz -ul-Hassan  
3. Mr. Justice Muhammad Moosa K. Leghari  
4. Mr. Justice Ch. Ejaz Yousaf  
5. Mr. Justice Mian Hamid Farooq  
6. Mr. Justice Syed Zawwar Hussain Jaffery  
7. Mr. Justice Muhammad Farrukh Mamud  
8. Mr. Justice S heikh Hakim Ali  
9. Mr. Justice Sardar Muhammad Aslam  
 
Justice (Retd.)  
(Riaz Kayani)  
Secretary  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 12 
 
8.  It appears that the Judges of the High Court  of 
Balochistan,  who have violated order dated 3.11.2007 instead of 
facing proceedings as noted above tendered resig nations, including the 
Chief Justice of the Balochistan High Court which was accepted and he 
was retired from his position, vide notification dated 5.8.2009, which 
reads as under: -      
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, t he 5th August, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II). In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire Mr. J ustice Amanullah Khan 
Yasinzai, Chief Justice, High Court of Balochistan with immediate 
effect.  
 
Justice (Retd.)  
(Riaz Kayani)  
Secretary  
 
Similarly, all the remaining Judges of the Balochistan High Court were 
also retired from their positions vide notifica tion dated 5.8.2008, which 
is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
 
   Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 5th August, 2009  
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II). In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Article 195 of the Cons titution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire the following Judges of High 
Court of Balochistan with immediate effect: - 
1. Mr. Justice Ahmed Khan Lashari  
2. Mr. Justice Muhammad Nadir Kh an 
3. Mr. Justice Akhtar Zaman Malghani  
4. Mr. Justice Mehta Kailash Nath Kohli  
 
 
Justice (Retd.)  
(Riaz Kayani)  
Secretary  
 ICA 3 /2011  etc. 13 
Likewise, t wo of the Judges of this Court namely Mr. Justice (R) Faqir 
Muhammad Khokhar and Mr. Justice (R) Javed Buttar tendered 
resignati ons, which were accepted vide notification dated 08.08.2009 
which reads as under: - 
 
   Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 8th August, 2009  
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II). In exercise of the powers 
conferre d by Article 179 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire the following Judges of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan with immediate effect: - 
 
1. Mr. Justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar  
2. Mr. Justice M. Javed Buttar  
 
Justice (Retd.)  
(Riaz Kayani)  
Secretary  
 
Some of the Judges, who were elevated from the High Courts to this 
Court in consultation with Mr. Justice (R) Abdul Hameed Dogar, 
reverted to the concerned High Court s. As far as  the Judges of High 
Courts, appointed in consultation with Mr. Justice (R) Abdul Hameed 
Dogar, who was declared not to be a Chief Justice, were removed from 
their positions vide separate notifications.  
9.   A number of Judges filed Review Petitions against  the said 
judgment,  which were returned by the office with certain objections. 
Later, they filed miscellaneous applications seeking permission to file 
review petitions against the judgment dated 31.7.2009 , which were 
dismissed vide judgment dated 13.10.200 9 passed in Justice Khurshid 
Anwar Bhinder v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 483).  Relevant 
para from the said judgment is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“50. It is worth mentioning that in the judgment impugned it 
has been declared that PCO was not a valid  piece of 
legislation, therefore, the entire structure raised on it was 
bound to fall alongwith it. In such view of the matter no 
person can prefer review with the plea that he was deprived 
of the benefit which had accrued to him by the said illegal 
constr uction. It is also to be kept in view that electronic aid 
print media had widely published the proceedings and 
judgment impugned and all the applicants were aware that 
they were deriving their legitimacy under the garb of ICA 3 /2011  etc. 14 
judgment delivered in Tika Muhamma d Iqbal Khan's case 
(supra) and thus it was incumbent upon them to have 
approached this Court for impleadment. They had no other 
legitimacy and no legal right to hold the office of Judges of 
superior Courts once the dictum as laid down in Tikka 
Muhammad Iq bal Khan's case (supra) has been set aside and 
would be too late in the day to take the plea that they were 
unaware and should be afforded proper opportunity of 
hearing.”  
 
Meanwhile, vide order dated 5.10.2009 notices were ordered to be 
issued to all such Judges to explain as to why proceedings against 
them be not initiated under Article 204 of the Constitution read with 
relevant provisions of the law of contempt of court. Relevant portion 
therefrom is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“2.  It is to be noted that in  the detailed reasons of the 
judgment dated 31.07.2009, it has been held that the Judges, 
who violated the order dated 03.11.2007 passed by a seven -
member Bench in Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2007, are also 
liable for committing contempt of Court in ad dition to being 
liable to be proceeded against under Article 209 of the 
Constitution as despite notice, (details of which are mentioned 
in the detailed reasons), they made new oath, though they were 
restrained from doing so by the aforesaid order. Accordin gly, we 
consider it appropriate to issue notices of contempt of Court to 
all those Judges, who were Judges of High Courts prior to 3rd 
November, 2007 and they made oath in violation of the 
aforesaid order, as also the Judges who were appointed between 
3rd November, 2007 and 15th December, 2007 because it has 
been held in the detailed reasons that the order dated 3rd 
November, 2007 remained operative and they were 
constitutionally, legally and morally bound to follow the order so 
passed by the apex Court.  
 
3.  The office is directed to issue notices to all such 
Judges by name, to explain as to why proceedings against them 
be not initiated under Article 204 of the Constitution read with 
sections 3 and 4 of the Contempt of Court Act, 1976 or any 
other enabling  provisions of the relevant law. They may file 
replies on or before the next date of hearing. However, such 
notices shall not be issued, for the time being, to the Judges, 
who have resigned from office in the meantime.”  
 
Thus, Criminal Original Petitions w ere registered and the 
contempt proceedings were initiated against all  the Judges , who opted 
to contest proceedings . A vast majority of the Judges to whom notices 
were issued tendered unconditional apologies.  Many Judges of the 
other High Courts  also opted  for early/premature retiremen t, which 
were accepted and they were retired from their                              ICA 3 /2011  etc. 15 
positions vide se parate notifications. Some of the notifications  are 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
Lahore High Court:  
 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 11th October, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II)(a). In exercise of the 
powers conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 o f 
1997, the President is pleased to retire the following Judges of 
Lahore High Court with immediate effect: - 
 
1. Mr. Justice Mian Muhammad Najum -uz-Zaman.  
2. Mr. Justice Maulvi Anwarul Haq.  
3. Mr. Justice Muhammad Khalid Alvi.  
4. Mr. Justice Syed Sakhi Hussain Bukhari . 
5. Mr. Justice M. Bilal Khan.  
6. Mr. Justice Fazal -e-Miran Chauhan.  
7. Mr. Justice Tariq Shamim.  
8. Mr. Justice Syed Asghar Haider.  
 
(MALAK HAKAM KHAN)  
Draftsman/Additional Secretary  
 
High Court of Sindh : 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 9th October, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.III). - In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire Mr. Justice Agha Rafiq Ahmed 
Khan as Judge High Court of Sindh with immediate effect.  
 
(MALAK HAKAM KHAN)  
Draftsman/Additional Secretary  
 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 11th October, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II)(b). - In exercise of the 
powers conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of ICA 3 /2011  etc. 16 
1997, the President is pleased to retire Justice Mrs. Qaiser Iqbal, 
Judge High Co urt of Sindh with immediate effect.  
 
(MALAK HAKAM KHAN)  
Draftsman/Additional Secretary  
 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 19th October, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II). - In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire following Judges of High Court 
of Sindh with immediate effect.  
 
1. Mr. Justice Munib Ahmed Khan.  
2. Mr. Ju stice Ali Sain Dino Metlo.  
 
 
(MALAK HAKAM KHAN)  
Draftsman/Additional Secretary  
 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 11th October, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II). - In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire following Judges of High Court 
of Sindh with immediate effect: - 
 
1. Mr. Justice Muhammad Afzal Soomro  
2. Mr. Justi ce Azhar Siddiqui  
 
(MALAK HAKAM KHAN)  
Draftsman/Additional Secretary  
 
 
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the  2nd November,  2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.II I).- In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Artic le 195 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire Mr. Justice Zia Perwez as Judge 
High Court of Sindh with immediate effect . ICA 3 /2011  etc. 17 
 
Justice (Retd.)  
(Riaz Kayani)  
Secretary  
 
Peshawar High Court:  
 
Government of Pakistan  
Law and Justice Division  
********  
Islamabad, the 2nd November, 2009  
 
NOTIFICATION  
 
 No.F.12(4)/2007 -A.II-(Vol.III). - In exercise of the powers 
conferred by Article 195 of the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republi c of Pakistan read with President’s Order of 3 of 1997, 
the President is pleased to retire the following Judges of the 
Peshawar High Court with immediate effect: - 
 
1. Mr. Justice Said Maroof Khan  
2. Mr. Justice Hamid Farooq Durrani  
 
(MALAK HAKAM KHAN)  
Draftsman/ Additional Secretary  
For ready reference, apologies tendered by some of the Judges in 
response to notices for contempt of court are reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
REPLY ON BEHALF OF JUSTICE (R) MUHAMMAD NAWAZ ABBASI 
FORMER JUDGE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN TO THE NOTICE 
UNDER ARTICLE 204 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF PAKISTAN 
READ WITH CONTEMPT OF COURT ACT, 1976.  
The replying respondent humbly submits as under: - 
i. The supreme Court of Pakistan in Constitution Petitions 
No.8 and 9 of 2009 declared the proclamation of 
Emerge ncy of 3rd November, 2007 and PCO -1 of 2007 
read with Oath of Office of Judges Order 2007 as illegal 
and unconstitutional, vide judgment dated 31.07.2009.  
ii. The replying respondent, the then Judge of Supreme 
Court of Pakistan, had taken oath under Oath of Ju dges 
Order, 2007, and consequently he has been issued notice 
under Article 204 of the Constitution read with Contempt 
of Court Act, 1976 for violating order daed 03.11.2007 
passed by a seven members’ Bench of the Supreme Court 
of Pakistan  
iii. The replying resp ondent has earlier submitted reply to 
the above notice on 13.10.2009 but in view of the 
Honourable Supreme Court of Pakistan of even date he by 
withdrawing the said earlier reply and in supersession of 
the same submits his reply in the following manner in 
response to the notice dated 9.10.2009 repeated on 
13.10.2009: - ICA 3 /2011  etc. 18 
a. The replying respondent having great respect, 
regard and honour for the Judiciary as a whole and 
for thus Honourable Court in particular with regret 
and repentance without contesting the conte mpt 
notice hereby sincerely tenders unqualified and 
unconditional apology.  
b. The replying respondent while tendering 
unconditional and unqualified apology prays for 
mercy of the Court in its dignity with the request 
that the Honourable Court by taking lenien t view 
may graciously accept his apology and 
discharge/recall the notice issued to him in the 
interest of justice.”  
 
Replying Respondent  
Justice (R) Muhammad Nawaz Abbasi,  
Supreme Court of Pakistan  
*************  
REPLY OF MR. JUSTICE (R) MAULVI ANWAR UL HA Q 
 “In the matter of Notice under Article 204 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan read with Section 3 
& 4 of Contempt of Court Act, 1976 or any other enabling 
provisions of relevant laws.  
May it please your lordships,  
Humbly bowing before t he verdict handed down by my 
honorable peers, I hereby tender unqualified apology and pray 
for condonation of error, about grave, on my part while deciding 
to agree to take oath on 13th November, 2007.  
I pray that Allah Almighty have mercy upon and forgive  us 
all.(Amen)  
 
Maulvi Anwar ul Haq  
Retired Judge  
 
**********  
REPLY ON BEHALF OF MR. JUSTIC MUHAMMAD AKRAM QURESHI 
OF LAHORE HIGH COURT LAHORE TO NOTICE UNDER ARTICLE 
204 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF 
PAKISTAN, 1973.  
Reply respondent Most Humb ly submits as under: - 
In response to notice dated 21. 10.2009 issued to me by this 
Hon’ble Court in pursuance of the Court’s dated o.10.2009 I 
express and place on record my profound regret for having 
taken oath of office as a judge of this Court after the 
“proclamation of emergency” dated 3.11.2007 for which I 
tender my unqualified, unconditional and sincere apology and 
place myself at the mercy of this Hon’ble Court.  
 The undersigned has got the highest regard for the 
judiciary, especially for this Court h ence, while tendering ICA 3 /2011  etc. 19 
unqualified apology pray that a clement view in the matter may 
be taken and notice under reply may be discharged/recalled.  
(Justice Muhammad Akram Qureshi) ”           
10.   The Court after considering the apologies tendered by the 
Judges coupled with the fact that they had resigned or were retired 
from their positions, vide order dated 13.10.2009 passed in  Justice 
Khurshid Anwar Bhinder  (ibid) , inter alia, held that: - 
(1) The notices issued under Article 204 of the Constitution 
read with s ections 3 and 4 of the Contempt of Court 
Act, 1976 or any other enabling provisions of the 
relevant law, to the Judges who have expressed their 
regrets and repentance; by tendering unconditional 
apologies and affirming their remorse through 
withdrawal of t he petitions filed by them and tendering 
of resignations, are discharged;   
(2) Similarly, as to the Judges who have already retired 
and have tendered unconditional apologies and have 
expressed their repentance and remorse, the notices 
issued to them are discha rged;  
(3) As to the Judges, who are contesting notices, they shall 
be proceeded against separately along with the cases of 
those Judges, who have not filed replies and/or have 
prayed for grant of time;  
(4) The Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, 
who tendered resignations after pronouncement of the 
judgment dated 31 -7-2009 in deference thereto shall 
not be proceeded against;  
(5) The Judges who have tendered resignations, but have 
not filed replies to the notices, the process shall be 
repeated to them so as to file the replies within two 
weeks; and  
(6) The Judges, who have neither tendered resignations nor 
have filed replies, are required to file replies within two 
weeks.   
 
However, the contempt proceedings continued against those who 
contested the notices i ssued to them.  
11.   During the contempt proceedings, Dr. Abdul Basi t, Sr. ASC 
on behalf of Mr. Justice Hasnat Ahmed Khan and Mr. Justice Syed 
Shabbar Raza Rizvi filed Criminal Miscellaneous Applications No. 01 & 
02 of 2011 wherein it was inter alia praye d as under: -  
(i) For purposes of due process a notice of the same kind 
as has been served on the present petitioner and 
other judges be also served on the functionaries 
enumerated in sub -paras (i) and (iii) of Restraint 
Order dated 3.11.2007;   
(ii) Even for purpo ses of due process, the functionaries 
who have played major role are to be treated in the 
same fashion as the petitioner whose role is merely for 
taking oath arranged for him and other judges by 
other functionaries.    ICA 3 /2011  etc. 20 
 
The Bench seized with contempt procee dings  by a separate order 
dated 2.2.2011 referred the matter  to the Chief Justice of Pakistan  
with the observation  that the  matter  qua those persons named in the 
application  (the President, Prime Minister, Chief of Army Staff, Corps 
Commanders, Staff Offic ers and all concerned of the Civil and Military 
Authorities) may be proceed ed independently and on their own facts, 
either before th e same Bench or before some other Bench , as may be 
determined . It was further observed that it  was quite unnecessary to 
link or club the proceedings against the respondents therein , with 
those which  may  be taken against the above named persons.  In 
pursuance of above observations, office submitted a note soliciting 
permission for initiating proceedings of contempt of Court again st the 
persons named in the application s. Therefore,  on 2.2.2011,  one of us 
(Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ) passed following 
order :- 
“Put up after the decision of case against Judges of 
superior Courts.”  
12.   The learned Bench, seized with th e contempt matter heard 
the arguments and summarized the moot points agitated on behalf of 
appellants in the follow ing terms :- 
“(i)  Is it constitutionally permissible for this Court to proceed 
under Article 204 of the Constitution against Judges of 
the Su preme Court and of the High Courts, for 
committing contempt of this Court?  
(ii)  If the aforesaid question is answered in the affirmative 
then, as a matter of propriety, should the Supreme Court 
proceed against the said Judges or should it, bearing in 
mind the status of the respondents as Judges of the 
Supreme Court and High Courts, discontinue these 
proceedings and discharge the notices issued to them?  
(iii)  If it is decided that the Constitution does not place 
restrictions on contempt proceedings against  Judges and 
if it is also found that questions of propriety do not stop 
this Court from proceeding against the respondents under 
Article 204 of the Constitution, then is there sufficient 
material available before the Court to charge the 
respondents for com mitting contempt of the Supreme 
Court on account of disobedience of the order dated 
3.11.2007? ” 
 
13.   Vide short order dated 2.2.2011 , which is impugned in 
these Intra Court Appeals, it was held  that the proceedings should be 
taken against the respondents  therein  and they, with the exception of 
Mr. Justice  Zafar Iqbal Chaudhry and Mr. Justice Khurshid Anwar ICA 3 /2011  etc. 21 
Bhindar  be put to trial in accordance with law.  The o perative 
paragraphs from the impugned order are reproduced below: -  
“9. Having considered the arg uments of learned counsel, we 
answer the above noted questions as under: - 
(i) In the facts and circumstances of these matters, the 
Constitution and law does not prohibit proceedings under 
Article 204 of the Constitution against the respondents 
even though they  may be Judges of the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts.  We hold that they are not immune 
from proceedings under Article 204 and the Contempt of 
Court Ordinance V 2003, for committing contempt of this 
Court.  
(ii) Having considered the submissions of learned cou nsel as 
to the propriety of initiating contempt proceedings against 
the respondents and being fully conscious of the status of 
the respondents, we hold that in the circumstances of 
these matters, propriety requires that proceedings should 
be taken against the respondents and they, with the 
exception of Mr. Zafar Iqbal Chaudhry and Khurshid 
Anwar Bhindar, be put to trial in accordance with the 
aforesaid law.  
(iii) Having considered the record, facts and circumstances 
and replies in these matters and after due cons ideration 
of the arguments advanced on behalf of respondents, we 
find that there is sufficient material available before us to 
justify charging the respondents (other than Mr.  Khurshid 
Anwar Bhinder and Mr. Zafar Iqbal  Chaudhry,) for 
committing contempt of  the Supreme Court on account of 
their disobedience of  the order dated 3.11.2007 passed 
by a seven  member Bench of this Court.  
(iv) Having noted the submissions made on behalf of  
respondents Mr. Zafar Iqbal Chaudhry and Mr.  Khurshid 
Anwar Bhindar and the conten ts of their  replies, we find 
that even though they took oath  under the PCO on 
14.12.2007, since they were not  Judges of the Lahore 
High Court whether on  3.11.2007 or at any later point in 
time, they did  not violate the letter of the order dated 
3.11.2007  even though they may have violated its spirit. 
In the circumstances their conduct in taking oath  under 
the PCO and purporting to act as Judges  subsequent 
thereto, is deprecated in terms of  Section 18 (2) of the 
Contempt of Court Ordinance  2003. We hold that  in the 
circumstances they shall  not be charged to face trial 
under the said  Ordinance.  
 … … … … … …  
11. Let the cases now be fixed for framing of charge against 
the aforesaid respondents on 21.02.2011. The respondents, if 
they so  desire, appear on that d ate to enter their plea on the 
charge(s) framed.  In the alternative they may, if they choose, 
enter their pleas through  counsel who are duly instructed. ”    
 
Hence, these Intra Court Appeals under section 19 of the Co ntempt of 
Court Ordinance, 2003.  
14.  As the Criminal Original Petitions were fixed before the 4 -
Member Bench of this Court for 21.2.2011 for framing of charge ICA 3 /2011  etc. 22 
against the appellants and others, therefore, at the request of one of 
the appellants matter was taken up on 18.2.2011. During hearing  of 
the ICA, the appellants in other appeals requested for taking up their 
cases  as well , as such , vide order dated 18.2.2011 they were given 
option to get their cases fixed by making application for early hearing 
till 2:30 pm that day . Accordingly Intra C ourt Appeals No.3,  4, 6 to 11 
of 2011 were fixed.  
15.  Mr. S.M. Zafar, learned Sr. ASC appeared on behalf of Mr. 
Justice (R) Syed Zahid Hussain appellant in ICA No.10 of 2011 and 
addressed the arguments but when we inquired as to whether in 
absence of  legitimacy  granted to the unconstitutional acts of the then 
Chief of Army Staff , General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.)  dated 3.11.2007 
whereby while enforcing unconstitutional emergency, the Constitution 
was held in abeyance and the Oath Order, 2007 was issued decl aring 
the Judges of the superior Courts  to cease to hold their offices  if they 
had not made oath under the Oath Order, 2007 read with PCO, 2007, 
the Judges including the appellants, who instead of showing allegiance 
to Pakistan and defending the Constituti on opted to make oath under 
the instruments o ther then the Constitution  and benefited fro m the 
same , have severed their connection with the Constitution ? He initially 
attempted to answer the proposition but in the meanwhile case was 
adjourned . On the next day i.e. 3.3.2011 he filed an application  on 
behalf of Mr. Justice (R) Syed Zahid Hussain,  under Order XXXIII , 
Rules 5 & 6 of the Supreme Court Rule, 1980 wherein it was 
categorically stated that “he is extremely sorry for having taken 
oath on 03.11.2007 u nder a misunderstanding and has 
regretted for the same.”   He also placed on record notification dated 
1.3.2011 issued by the Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Law & 
Justice whereby his resignation was accepted  and he was allowed 
retire ment. For ready ref erence same is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“In exercise of the powers conferred by Article 179 of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the President is 
pleased to allow retirement to Mr. Justice Syed Zahid Hussain, 
Judge of Supreme Court of Pakis tan with immediate effect in 
terms of Paragraph 15 of the Supreme Court Judge (Leave, 
Pension and Privileges) Order, 1997.”  
 
In view of the above changed scenario vide order dated 3.3.2011, the 
appeal of Justice (R) Syed Zahid Hussain was allowed and proce edings ICA 3 /2011  etc. 23 
for contempt of Court to his extent pending b efore a Bench of this 
Court were terminated  in the following terms: - 
“3.  Mr. S.M. Zafar, learned Sr. ASC for appellant Mr. Justice 
Sayed Zahid Hussain, now retired, has filed an application under 
Order X XXIII, rules 5 & 6 of the Supreme Court Rules, 1980, 
wherein besides mentioning the different dates on which Justice 
Sayed Zahid Hussain had taken oath as an Additional Judge, as 
a Judge and as Chief Justice of the Lahore High Court, and 
thereafter as a Ju dge of the Supreme Court, already referred to 
in the judgment of this Court in Sindh High Court Bar 
Association's case (PLD 2009 SC 879), it is categorically stated 
that “he is extremely sorry for having taken oath on 03.11.2007 
under a misunderstanding an d has regretted for the same”. The 
learned counsel submitted that Mr. Justice Sayed Zahid Hussain, 
for the sake of the dignity and respect of the Institution of 
Judiciary, has sacrificed his four years’ service as a Judge of the 
Apex Court and henceforth h e would be no more adorning the 
Bench, as the notification of his retirement has already been 
issued, therefore, while exercising jurisdiction available to this 
Court to decide not to proceed against a person facing the 
charge of contempt who offers regret s, the proceedings against 
him be terminated.    
4.  The learned Attorney General for Pakistan, after having 
gone through the notification of retirement of Justice Sayed 
Zahid Hussain and the contents of the application containing 
statement of regrets for taking oath on 03.11.2007 stated that 
regrets so expressed by him may be accepted, particularly 
keeping in view that he had stood retired and was no more the 
Judge of this Court.   
5.  It may be observed that in a case of contempt of Court 
like the one in hand all that the Court is required to be satisfied 
is that the dignity and authority of the Court by flouting its 
judgments/orders are not put at stake. The law of contempt is 
primarily intended to ensure that the majesty of the law is 
upheld and the dign ity of the Institution of Judiciary, which is a 
most important pillar of the State, is protected and it also 
restores confidence of the general public in the due and proper 
administration of justice in the country. Indeed, Courts are 
vested with an extraor dinary jurisdiction to punish a person for 
committing contempt of Court, and armed with a powerful 
weapon, but the same is to be exercised/used judiciously and 
sparingly depending upon the facts and circumstances of each 
case. However, with reference to in stant case, it needs to be 
emphasized that on 03.11.2007, a 7 – Member Bench of this 
Court passed a restraint order not only to save the dignity of the 
judiciary, but also to protect Constitution as it is the duty of 
Judges of Superior Courts who have take n oath to preserve and 
protect it. Thus, it was all the more necessary for the Judges of 
the Superior Courts to respect the order in all circumstances. 
However, Mr. Justice Sayed Zahid Hussain having realized that 
he had taken oath under a misunderstanding  has regretted for 
his action and decided to quit in the larger interests of the 
Institution and he would not be adorning the Bench. Therefore, 
we accept the request so made by him. Consequently, appeal 
(ICA No. 10 of 2011) is allowed and proceedings for c ontempt of 
Court to his extent pending before a Bench of this Court are 
terminated.”  
 ICA 3 /2011  etc. 24 
16.  In seque nce of above situation one of other appellants 
namely Justice (R) Abdul Hameed Dogar, who also made oath after 
proclamation of emergency and PCO, 2007 under  the Oath Order, 
2007 and subsequently administered oath to the Judges of Supreme 
Court under the PCO and Oath Order, 2007 , also filed statement  
through Mr. Muhammad Ibrahim Satti, learned Sr. ASC , which reads 
as under :- 
“STATEMENT OF MR. JUSTICE (RETD) AB DUL HAMEED 
DOGAR (APPELLANT)  
 
With all humility and humbleness at my command, it is 
submitted that under abrupt, unexpected changes, confusion, 
misconception and misunderstanding, the order dated 
3.11.2007 could not be complied which is highly regretted wi th 
repentance and sorrow. I stood retired on 21.3.2009 and not 
enjoying good health. It is humbly requested that, in view of my 
ailment, the explained scenario, for which I am really sorry, my 
regrets may very kindly be accepted and notice of contempt 
may please be withdrawn for which I shall highly obliged and 
place myself at the mercy of Court.   
 
Sd/- 
(Abdul Hameed Dogar)  
Appellant  
02.03.2011”  
 
The above statement was also accepted vide order of even date  and 
the proceedings of Contempt of Court were ter minated against him . 
Relevant portion from the said order is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“9.   The learned counsel has submitted that Justice 
(Retd.) Abdul Hameed Dogar has already retired on 
21.03.2009, he is no more a Judge of this Court, he is not 
enjoying  good health and while feeling sorry and expressing 
regrets he has stated that he could not comply with the order 
dated 03.11.2007 under confusion, misconception and 
misunderstanding. Besides, he has placed himself at the mercy 
of the Court, therefore, his  regrets may be accepted and his 
appeal may be disposed of accordingly.   
 
10.   The learned Attorney General for Pakistan, on 
having gone through the statement noted hereinabove has 
stated that as Justice (Retd.) Abdul Hameed Dogar has placed 
himself at t he mercy of the Court, therefore, on account of the 
realization that he ought to have complied with the aforesaid 
order, the request so made by him may be accepted.  
 
11.   We have considered the request made before us 
vide statement reproduced hereinabove  and have also gone 
through the judgments of this Court in the cases of Sindh High 
Court Bar Association  and Justice Khurshid Anwar Bhinder . We 
are of the opinion that as against the past practice, the order 
dated 03.11.2007 was passed by a 7 – Member Benc h for the 
first time in the history of this Court whereby Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts including Chief Justices of High ICA 3 /2011  etc. 25 
Courts were restrained not to take oath under PCO or any 
other extra -constitutional act with a view to block the 
imposition o f martial law and abrogation of the Constitution as 
it has already been clarified hereinabove, as the dignity and 
respect of the Institution of Judiciary are to be guarded first of 
all by its own members. Admittedly, Justice (Retd.) Abdul 
Hameed Dogar viol ated the order dated 03.11.2007 as it is 
evident from the conclusion drawn by this Court in the case of 
Sindh High Court Bar Association  (ibid). However, in the case 
of Justice (Retd.) Abdul Hameed Dogar much water has already 
flown under the bridges, duri ng course whereof all the actions 
taken by the then Chief of Army Staff had been declared 
unconstitutional including appointment of Judges of Supreme 
Court and High Courts. Reference may be made to the case of 
Justice Khurshid Anwar Bhinder  (ibid). At this  stage, Mr. Justice 
(Retd.) Abdul Hameed Dogar has regretted for his actions and 
has also thrown himself at the mercy of the Court. In the case 
in which helplessness has been shown by a person facing 
contempt proceedings has persuaded us to exercise jurisd iction 
of contempt sparingly. We accept appeal (ICA No. 9 of 2011) 
and terminate the contempt proceedings against him too. 
However, no exception of whatsoever nature shall be claimed 
by him in respect of observations made in the Sindh High Court 
Bar Associ ation's case  as well as in Justice Khurshid Anwar 
Bhinder’s case .” 
 
17.  Learned Attorney General, vide order dated 21.3.2011 was 
also called upon to explain the status of the appellants in view of the 
fact that the actions of 3.11.2007 taken by the then C hief of Army 
Staff were not validated by the Parliament in the Eighteenth or the 
Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments. He was also asked to seek 
instructions from Government of Pakistan on that aspect of the case. 
In compliance with Court’s order, the lear ned Attorney General filed a 
statement on behalf of Government of Pakistan, which is reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
 “It is a matter of record that the Special Committee of the 
Parliament on Constitutional Reforms had taken notice of 
the judgment dated 31.07.200 9 passed in Sindh High 
Court Bar Association (PLD 2009 SC 879), wherein the 
Parliament had been applauded for not validating the 
actions of 03.11.2007 and hope was expressed that the 
Parliament will not do so. Para 17 of the judgment at page 
957 is reprodu ced for ready reference herein below: - 
It may be noted that the chosen representative of the 
time, too, did not extend validation to the 
unconstitutional acts taken upto 3rd November, 2007 as 
is universally known. It is, however, quite heartening 
that, for  the first time, in the history of our beloved 
country, the chosen representative of people, who took 
their offices as a result of election taking place on 18th ICA 3 /2011  etc. 26 
February, 2008 have, commendably, stayed their hands 
off and have not sanctified the unconstitu tional acts, 
such as, the Declaration of Emergency, the Provisional 
Constitution Order No.1, the Oath of Office (Judges), 
Order, 2007, the Constitution (Amendment) Order, 
2007 (President's Order No.5 of 2007), the Constitution 
(Second Amendment) Order of 2 007 (President's Order 
No.6 of 2007) and many other' instruments made and 
declared by General Pervez Musharraf (Rtd.). In this, 
their restraint not extending validity to all these 
unconstitutional and illegal instruments and other steps 
taken by retired Ge neral are laudable. Evidently, this 
was done by the present representatives of people 
believing firmly that the prosperity of the country lies in 
the strong and independent democratic system which 
can alone flourish and survive with democratic steps to 
be taken in the better interest of people always apt and 
keen to choose them in such a viable system of 
governance. We are sanguine that the current 
democratic dispensation comprising of the President, 
the Prime Minister, Ministers and the Parliament shall 
continue to uphold the Constitution, its institutions and 
sacred values.  
 
2. In this regard it is important to note that in paragraph 
No.19 of the Review Judgment reported as PLD 2010 SC 483 
this Hon’ble Court was pleased to divide the judges into two 
catego ries in the following terms: - 
We have carefully examined the respective contentions 
as agitated on behalf of the parties in the light of 
relevant provisions of the Constitution, law and rules 
made thereunder. It is to be noted that there are two 
categories  of Judges i.e. the first comprising those who 
were Judges of this Court or of any of the High Courts 
on 3 -11-2007 and the second category is of those 
persons who were notified as Judges of this Court or of 
the High Courts between 4 -11-2007 and 23 -3-2009 o n 
the basis of "consultation" with Abdul Hameed Dogar, 
J., purporting to act as Chief Justice of Pakistan.  
 
3. Para-21 of the said judgment then deals with the Judges 
in the second category while Para -22 deals with the Judges in 
the first category. This di scussion has reference to Para -22(iv) 
and Para -22(iii) respectively of the main judgment (PLD 2009 
SC 879 at pages 960).  
4. In this view of the matter, the Federation acted 
accordingly. So far as the judgment itself is concerned it was 
implemented in lette r and spirit in as much as the notification 
were issued in the matter of second category of Judges in terms 
thereof while references were prepared and filed under Article 
209 of the Constitution regarding the first category of the 
Hon’ble Judges (Appellant s). 
5. In the light of the judgment dated 31.07.2009 as also the 
judgment in review the first category Judges remain to be duly 
appointed Judges.  
6. The view of the Federation that the present appellant 
Hon’ble Judge remains to be Judge under the Constitu tion till 
removed under Article 209 of the Constitution is based upon the 
reading of the said judgments.”  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 27 
18.  Dr. Abdul Basit learned counsel appearing for the appellant 
in ICA No.3 of 2011 stated that a Judge could  only be removed by 
means of Article 209  of the Constitution and not by initiating 
proceedings under Article 204 of the Constitution for alleged violation 
of Order dated 3.11.2007 passed by t his Court  in Justice (R) 
Wajihuddin Ahmad ’s case  (ibid) . He further added that when a person 
was performi ng a judicial role he need ed protection, therefore, no 
proceedings of contempt of Court c ould be initiated against him 
because if this practice would be allowed to continue it would 
tantamount to opening the  door of exploitation and black mailing. 
Learned c ounsel further contended that 14 -Member Bench vide order 
dated 05.10.2010 held that contempt proceedings should be initiated 
against the Judges who violated the order dated 3.11.2007 although 
there was no such direction in Sindh High Court Bar Association’ s case  
as well as Justice (R) Khurshid Anwar Bhinder’s case . In the former 
case, it was held that the Judges who violated the order dated 
03.11.2007 shall be dealt with under Article 209 and not under Article 
204 of the Constitution. A Judge is a person bu t with a different role to 
play. The judicial role commences  when a person is appointed as a 
Judge and during the period he is performing the judicial role , 
protection given to such person do not allow initia tion of proceedings 
against him . 
19.   Dr. Khali d Ranjha, learned counsel for appellant in ICA 
No.7 of 2011, contended that Attorney General who was the Chief Law 
Officer of the country  and also the prosecutor of appellants had made 
a statement on behalf  of Government that appellants we re still Judges 
of the High Court , therefore, such statement  ought to have some 
relevanc e, which could be that the appellants could not  be tried for the 
contempt of Court.  
20.   Sheikh Zami r Hussain , Sr. ASC  appearing on behalf of 
appellant in ICA No.8 of 2011,  contended t hat the appellants were 
Judges of the High Court which was court of record , therefore, they 
could not be proceeded against for contempt of Court. As according to 
him the only way was to proceed against them under Article 209 of the 
Constitution as it has a lready been observed in short order dated 
31.7.2009  passed in Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case  (ibid) . To ICA 3 /2011  etc. 28 
support his contention he relied upon the  cases reported as  Harish 
Chandra v. Justice S. Ali Ahmed  (AIR 1986 Patna 65), K.L. Gauba v. 
The Hon’b le the Chief Justice and Judges of the High Court of 
judicature at Lahore  (AIR 1942 FC 1), Mujeebur Rehman Shami v. 
Judge of High Court  (PLD 1973 Lahore 778). He further relied upon the 
books “Military Incorporated” [p. 92, para 2]; “Memoirs and 
Reflection s” by Dr. Justice Nasim Hasan Shah [p.129]; “A Judge 
speaks out” by Justice Ajmal Mian [p. 54]; Chief Justice Cornelius’ 
book and the Article “Viewpoint” by Justice Dorab Patel to canvass a 
plea for condoning the act of taking oath by the appellants under the 
PCO, 2007 .  
21.   Syed Ali Zafar, learned ASC contended that a Judge could 
not be removed from the office except under  Article 209(6). Rati onale 
behind it, is to protect the independence of judiciary. He further  added 
that if a Judge had violated his o ath, mere such violation did not 
amount to his removal unless such violation was determined to be 
misconduct.  
22.  Stand of the learned Attorney General relating to status of 
the appellants has already been reproduced hereinabove. Further, 
learned Bench seized with contempt proceedings has already 
concluded that there is no bar to proceed against the appellants for 
contempt of Court. Needless to observe that undoubtedly unique 
situation has arisen essentially for peculiar circumstances commenced 
from the mo nth of October,  2007  till 3.11.2007 on account of 
pendency of Constitution Petitions No. 73 of 2007 in the case of Justice 
(R) Wajihuddin’s case  (ibid) w herein qualification of General Pervez 
Musharraf  (Retd.)  to contest in uniform, the election of Preside nt of 
Pakistan, was questioned. Facts in this behalf have already been noted 
in Sindh High Court Bar Association ’s case  therefore, to refresh the 
happening of incident, on the basis of which on 3.11.2007 a 7 -Member 
Bench of this Court decided to pass a res traint order with the intention 
to end up unconstitutional era by imposing the martial law in the garb 
of emergency or emergency plus , relevant paras therefrom are 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
72. As per schedule of election, nomination papers filed by 
General  Pervez Musharraf, Makhdoom Muhammad Amin 
Faheem, Mr. Wajihuddin Ahmed and Mrs. Faryal Talpur were ICA 3 /2011  etc. 29 
scrutinized by the Chief Election Commissioner of Pakistan on 
29th September, 2007. However, the objections' raised on 
behalf of the latter three candidates against the candidature of 
General Pervez Musharraf were rejected vide order of even date.  
  
73. One of the candidates of election of the President, namely, 
Mr. Wajihuddin Ahmed, a former Judge of the Supreme Court 
filed Constitution Petition No. 73 of 200 7 in this Court with the 
following prayer: -- 
  
(1) The order of the Chief Election Commissioner dated 
29.09.2007 accepting orally the nomination papers of 
General Pervez Musharraf as a candidate for the President 
of Pakistan may kindly be set aside as unco nstitutional;  
  
(2) General Pervez Musharraf may kindly be declared 
ineligible, lacking in qualifications under Article 62 and 
other provisions of the Constitution and disqualified under 
Article 63 of the Constitution to contest the election of the 
office of the President of Pakistan;  
  
(3) After rejecting nomination papers of General Pervez 
Musharraf, the remaining electoral process for the 
election of President of Pakistan under the schedule 
announced by the Chief Election Commissioner may be 
set aside; a nd 
  
(4) As a consequence, fresh Presidential elections through 
the new electoral college to be inducted after holding 
general election be ordered.  
 
75. On 4th October, 2007, a Bench of 10 available Judges heard 
the petitions and adjourned the hearing to 5 th October, 2007 on 
which date the following order was passed on the miscellaneous 
applications filed by the petitioner seeking stay of the 
Presidential election scheduled to be held on 6th October, 
2007: -- 
  
"Having heard the learned counsel for the parti es at some 
length, it is unanimously resolved and directed that the 
election process already commenced shall continue as per 
the schedule notified by the Chief Election Commissioner 
of Pakistan but the final notification of the election of the 
returned can didate shall not be issued till the final 
decision of these petitions.  
  
2. The main petitions shall be set down for hearing on 
17.10.2007."  
  
On passing of the above order, General Pervez Musharraf 
seemed to be fully satisfied. According to the news items  
appearing in the Daily News, Islamabad dated 6 October, 2007, 
he told the Treasury MPs that he was he grateful to the judiciary 
on the "wonderful decision". Elaborating the point, he observed 
that the decision was also beneficial to him and that he left i t to 
the judiciary to decide, and expressed that they must bank upon 
the judiciary of Pakistan.  
 
78.  In the above background, Mr. Hamid Khan, Sr. ASC, 
learned counsel for the petitioners in the instant petitions, who 
was one of the counsel for Wajihuddin  Ahmed petitioner in ICA 3 /2011  etc. 30 
Constitution Petition No. 73 of 2007, stated at the Bar that on 
2nd November, 2007 a miscellaneous application (later assigned 
CMA No. 2869 of 2007) was sought to be presented by Barrister 
Aitezaz Ahsan before the eleven -member Bench during the 
course of hearing, but it was directed that the same be filed in 
office. In the said miscellaneous application, it was stated, inter 
alia that there were widespread reports in the print and 
electronic media, and some federal ministers had also s tated, 
that the decision in the "disqualification case" would lead to 
imposition of martial law or emergency or some other 
unconstitutional steps including but not limited to a fresh 
Provisional Constitution Order, which would subvert the 
proceedings in th e aforesaid case. It was prayed that the 
respondents may be directed to clarify their intent in this regard 
and may be restrained from taking any such step. The office 
brought the application on file with instruction to the Court 
Associate to bring it to t he notice of the 11 -member Bench when 
it resumed hearing of the petitions on 5 November, 2007.  
  
79.  The speculations came true on 3rd of November, 2007, 
when General Pervez Musharraf in the capacity of the Chief of 
the Army Staff issued a Proclamation of  Emergency, whereby he 
held the Constitution in abeyance and also issued PCO No. 1 of 
2007 and Oath Order, 2007. Immediately thereafter, the 
Registrar placed the file of Wajihuddin Ahmed's case before the 
Chief Justice of Pakistan for taking up CMA No. 286 9 of 2007 
filed therein. Thus, a. special Bench of 7 available Judges was 
immediately constituted and convened, whic h passed the 
following order: - 
  
"This application was filed in Court on 2nd November 
2007 praying that respondent Government may change 
composition of Bench by adopting extra - constitutional 
measures, which could mean either by placing martial law 
or bringing PCO or by imposing emergency.  
  
2. Application could not be taken up as it was not 
numbered. However, now it has been marked to Bench. 
In the meantime, in electronic and print media news 
appeared that PCO has been promulgated to enable 
Government to administer fresh oath to the Chief Justice 
as well as Judges of the Supreme Court so that 
favourable Judges could be appointed. Be that as it  may, 
we feel that Government has no ground/reason to take 
extra-constitutional steps, particularly for the reasons 
being published in the newspapers that high profile case 
is pending and is not likely to be decided in favour of the 
Government, although ma tter is still pending. Therefore, 
a special Bench has been constituted and on considering 
pressing situation and news which have been published in 
newspapers, we direct as follows:  
  
(i) Government of Pakistan, i.e. President and Prime 
Minister of Pakistan  are restrained from undertaking any 
such action, which is contrary to Independence of 
Judiciary;  
  
(ii) No judge of the Supreme Court or the High Courts 
including Chief Justice(s) shall take oath under PCO or 
any other extra -Constitutional step;  
  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 31 
(iii) C hief of Army Staff, Corps Commanders, Staff 
Officers and all concerned of the Civil arid' Military 
Authorities are hereby restrained from acting on PCO 
which has been issued or from administering fresh oath to 
Chief Justice of Pakistan or Judges of Supreme  Court and 
Chief Justice or Judges of the Provincial High Courts;  
  
(iv) They are also restrained to undertake any such 
action, which is contrary to independence of Judiciary. 
Any further appointment of the Chief Justice of Pakistan 
and Judges of the Supre me Court and Chief Justices of 
High Courts or Judges of Provinces, under new 
development shall be unlawful and without jurisdiction;  
  
(v) Put up before full court on 5th November 2007."  
  
80.  Seen in the above perspective, the actions of General 
Pervez M usharraf dated 3rd November, 2007 were the result of 
his apprehensions regarding the decision of Wajihuddin Ahmed's 
case and his resultant disqualification to contest the election of 
President. Therefore, it could not be said that the said actions 
were tak en for the welfare of the people . Clearly, the same were 
taken by him in his own interest and for illegal and unlawful 
personal gain of maneuvering  another term in office of 
President, therefore, the same were mala fide as well. The 
statement made in Procl amation of Emergency that the situation 
had been reviewed in meetings with the Prime Minister, 
Governors of all the four Provinces, and with Chairman, Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Committee, Chiefs of the Armed Forces, Vice 
Chief of Army Staff and Corps Commander s of the Pakistan 
Army, and emergency was proclaimed in pursuance of the 
deliberations and decisions of the said meetings, was incorrect. 
The Proclamation of Emergency emanated from his person, 
which was apparent from the words "I, General Pervez 
Musharraf ...." used in it.  
 
23.  There had been imposition of martial law , etc. in the 
country from time to time without any frontal resistance by any of the 
constitutional organ of the State except on 3.11.2007 when a restraint 
order was passed by this Court. With out prejudice to the cases of the 
appellants the members of the judiciary , by and large , implemented 
the said restraint order in letter and spirit, details of which have 
already been mentioned hereinabove. Inasmuch as , after restoration 
of the superior jud iciary, which had been sacked by a dictator by no 
other mechanism except show of force, as neither the dictates of 
Article 209 of the Constitution were  adhered to nor any misconduct 
was established by any forum for their removal , only for the reasons 
that Chief of Army Staff was intend ing to get himself elected as 
President in uniform , as happened in the past , during the era s of Field 
Martial Ayub Khan, General Zia -ul-Haq and General Pervez Musharraf ICA 3 /2011  etc. 32 
during his first tenure as President which commenced afte r deviating 
from the Constitutional provision s on 12.10.1999.  
24.  In the history of Nation s of the world,  there are so many 
examples where decisions had been taken to follow no other system 
but one which has been envisaged under the Constitution. Evident ly, 
the Constitution does not allow a Military Personal to divulge  into 
politics and to ta ke over the powers contrary to the commitments 
made by him to protect and preserve the Constitution. For the first 
time, as noted in the above paras , the only cause o f imposing 
emergency was the apprehension of not getti ng favourable decision 
from the Court by a person in uniform having no right to rule the 
country except as per the mandate of the Constitution of 1973. It may 
not be out  of context to note that not only  majority of Judges of the 
superior Courts declined to make  oath under PCO , 2007  but also stuck  
to it till the last. Inasmuch as , post-restoration  of the sacked judiciary , 
after passing of the judgment dated 31.7.2009  in Sindh High Court Bar 
Association's case whereby appoin tments of Judges of the superior 
Courts not made in consultation with the de jure  Chief Justice of 
Pakistan were declared unconstitutional and  immediately after passing 
of the short order , notifications of their removal were issued by th e 
democratic government, instead of making recourse to the procedure 
laid down in Article 209 of the Constitution . Besides , some of the 
Judges, who on their own realized that they had not honoured the 
order of the Supreme Court dated 3.11.2007, tendered th eir 
resignations. Interestingly , all the Judges of the Balochistan High Court 
volunteered to quit the positions  they were holding at the time of 
pronouncement of the said judgmen t.  
25.  It would also not be out of context to note that majority of 
the Judg es of the Supreme Court also faced the same situation, 
however, they did not tender the resignation but either they were 
removed because of having already reached the age of superannuation 
provided for a  Judge  of the High Court from where they were elevate d 
to the Supreme Court , in terms of Article 195 of the Constitution, or 
others , who yet had not reached the age of superannuation , were 
reverted back to the concerned High Court s. This had happened due to 
the enforcement of the judgment of this Court and n ot adhering to the 
Constitutional Provision under Article 209  of the Constitution. Likewise , ICA 3 /2011  etc. 33 
a vast majority of the Judges from all over the country, details of 
which have already been mentioned hereinbefore, after issu ance of  
contempt noti ces, opted to te nder resignation s, which were accepted 
as such they were severed from the connections with the judiciary . 
They had also not claimed/pleaded for protection under Article 209(6) 
of the Constitution , presumably, in deference to the order dated 
3.11.2007 in Justice (R) Wajiuddin Ahmed ’s case . Inasmuch as , after 
commencement of the proceedings  for contempt of court,  Justice (R) 
Syed Zahid Hussain , a Judge of Supreme Court, who all along had 
been contesting the contempt of court proceedings , during the 
pendency o f Intra-Court Appeal,  opted to tender resignation, detailed 
facts have already been mentioned. Likewise, Mr. Justice (R) Abdul 
Hameed Dogar, who was the first person to take oath under the PCO, 
2007 and unconstitutionally assumed the office of the Chief J ustice of 
Pakistan for which he was not authorized as no vacancy was available , 
initially contest ed the proceedings but during the ICA submitted the 
statement in black and white showing his remorse for taking the oath 
on 03.11.2007, for the reasons mention ed in the statement so filed on 
his behalf. One of the learned counsel had also contended that 
appellants had no option but to take the oath, which was being 
administered to them, therefore, no fault lies with them. Such 
argument being without any substanc e, cannot be discussed in detail 
except observing that the role of a person administering the oath is 
never important but the role of the persons who had accepted oath 
holding the highest post in superior judiciary having full knowledge of  
the Co nstitution  and laws could have refused to do so instead of opting 
the same and becoming an active party in the unauthorized 
constitutional deviation.  
26.  In the country like ours the powerful persons in the helm 
of affairs  had been doing so in the past , not only wi th the assistance of 
the judiciary but also with the  help  of  chosen  representative s 
getting  validation  of  unconstitutional   actions   by means  of 
legislative   interference,   as is evident from the Eighth and 
Seventeenth Constitutional Amendments. Th e Members of the 
Judicia ry are not the ordinary persons . As far as such unconstitutional 
actions of the dictator are concerned, they are supposed to know the 
consequence of the same , and being responsible to  administer justice ICA 3 /2011  etc. 34 
while adoring the superior co urts and also supposed to have all laws 
written on their sleeves. No one can claim amongst the members of 
the superior judiciary including the appellants that constitutional 
deviation by a dictator notwithstanding the judgment of the Court can 
be rectified , legitimized except with the legislative interference  by the 
Parliament,  that too , by making amendment  in the Constitution , 
because an ordinary legislati on could not serve such purpose as it has 
its own limitations to promulgate the laws in terms of Artic le 70 of the 
Constituti on; therefore,  the judgment s cited by the  learned counsel 
are not to be applied in the peculiar circumstances of the case. As far 
as the script of the  books,  cited by  the learned counsel are concerned, 
we have viewed them with highes t esteem and spirit, and without 
commenting at the same , we would make only one observation that 
constitutional deviation on 3.11.2007 had taken place as the then 
Chief of Army Staff apprehended that he would not get favourable 
decision from the Court allo wing him to contest the election of 
President in uniform and for the first time in the country restraint 
order  dated 3.11.2007 was passed . Had such like resistance been 
shown earlier, his lordships Mr. Justice Naseem Hassan Shah , Mr. 
Justice Ajmal Mian  and Dorab Petal  would  have also followed such 
order to save and  protect the constitution, as well, to allow this 
country to be governed under the instruments, which represent ed the 
nation as a whole and essentially they would have never like d to be on 
the sid e of a person , who had bent upon to mutilate the constitution 
for no other purpose except self service.  
27.   There is no dispute that in Sindh High Court Bar 
Association’s case  at para -22(iv) it has been observed that the Judges 
of the Supreme Court, if any, the Chief Justices of the High Courts, if 
any, and the Judges of any of the High Courts, if any, who stood 
appointed to the said office prior to 3.11.2007 but made oath of their 
respective offices in disobedience to the order dated 3.11.2007 passed 
by 7-Member Bench of the Supreme Court in Justice (R) W ajihuddin 
Ahmed's case  shall   be proceeded against under Article 209 of the 
Constitution. The Secretary, Ministry  of  Law and Justice Division, 
Government of Pakistan was directed to take steps in the m atter 
accordingly. However, proviso was provided in that behalf.  Complete 
text has already been provided hereinabove.  However, at  paras No. ICA 3 /2011  etc. 35 
121 and 122 of the said judgment, it was held that Judges, whether 
they were in this Court or in the High Courts, who violated the 
aforesaid order dated 3.11.2007 passed by a seven - member Bench 
of this Court in Justice (R) W ajihuddin Ahmed's case  have all rendered 
themselves liable for consequences under the Constitution for their 
disobedience of the aforesaid order  of 3.11.2007. Relevant portions 
from the said judgment have already been reproduced hereinabove.  
28.  As Article 204  of the Constitution  deal s with the cases 
where a person has violated an order passed by this Court, therefore, 
in view of the observations  made in the detailed reasons given  in 
Sindh High Court Bar Association's case  notices under Article 204 of 
the Constitution read with relevant provisions of contempt of court 
laws, were issued to all those Judges, who were appointed b etween 
3.11.2007 and 15.12.2007 and made oath in violation of Order dated 
3.11.2007 . 
29.  Now important question  is, as to whether in absence of 
any rectification, validation, indemnity provided to the deeds, actions, 
omission and commissions of the then Chief of Army Staff du ring the 
period 3.11.2007 to 15.12 .2007 (both days inclusive) by legislative 
interference  of the Parliament , which in the meanwhile had taken place 
by the Eighteenth and Nineteenth  Constitutional  Amendments , the 
appellants and other s are the Judges of the High Courts, serving or 
retired, because of controversy, which has b een raised and discussed 
herein before namely that proceedings against a Judge cannot be 
initiated for contempt of Court under Article 204 of the Constitution, 
which persuaded us to decide  this question . Undoubtedly , such 
proceedings of contempt of Court, are ordinarily treated as quasi 
criminal proceedings. However, according to the definition clause of 
the Contempt of Court Ordinance , 2003, there is another type of 
contempt namely civil co ntempt , besides the criminal contempt and 
judicial contempt . The person who is facing the proceedings is always 
at liberty to raise as many pleas  as he likes and the Court is bound to 
decide the same  by passing an order in view of the situation prevailing 
at that time.  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 36 
30.  Mr. Raza Kazim , learned ASC stated that the t rial Court (4 -
Member Bench of this Court) has  held that Judges could be tried for 
contempt of Court , where as, the Court has raised objection whether 
they are still Judges after passing of th e order dated 3.11.2007 and no 
validation having been given to the acts of that day by this Court or by 
the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Constitutional  Amendments , therefore,  
assuming that appellants had not bowed to the earlier decision in Syed 
Zafar Ali Sha h’s case , the law of contempt of Court  under Article 204 
of the Constitution may not be applied because if it was a case of 
misconduct then it should be referred to the Supreme Judicial Council. 
On the other hand , if they were not Judges the question would  be 
since when they were not Judges; whether from 3.11.2007, when they 
violated the restraint order and took oath under the PCO , 2007  or 
when the Judgment of 31.7.2009 was passed , or when the review 
judgment came , or when the Eighteenth or Nineteenth Const itutional 
Amendments were made , because surely they were the Judge s at 
some point of time. He further stated that appellants had been h auled 
up for an act, which , according to his personal standard , was wrong. 
Other Judges too said that they had taken oath  under 
misunderstanding and an act which was the result of misunderstanding  
could not be made culpable. To strengthen the view of appellants he 
stated that there was ut ter chaos  and confusion in which he opted for 
a certain course in the light of the prece dents then available to him as 
a Judge of the superior Court.  
31.  Dr. Khalid Ranjha , Sr. ASC admired  to the arguments put 
forward by Syed Raza Kazim , Sr. ASC  concerning non -validat ion of the 
actions of 3.11.2007 and added that Parliamentary Committee in 
finalizing the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments 
was cognizan t of the decision o f this Court  dated 31.7.2009  in Sindh 
High Court Bar Association’s case  and the Review Judgment dated  
13.10.2009  in Justice (R) Khurshid Anwar Bhinder’s  case  and being 
aware of those judgments,  while amending the  Constitution , the 
Parliament in its wisdom did not talk about it. He further added that 
question of validation was not before the Court at the time of rev iew. 
It was criminal proceeding  involving quest ion of facts.  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 37 
32.  Syed Ali Zafar, ASC contended that there was no need of 
validation to the actions of 03.11.2007 because this Court had already 
declared all the actions to be unconstitutional and void ab initio. He 
further submitted that making of oath under the PCO, 2007 did not 
affect validity of appointment of appellant as subsequently on 
15.12.2007, she (appellant) once again made oath under the 
Constitution.  
33.  Sh. Zam eer Hussain , learned Sr. ASC  supported to the 
arguments of Dr. Khalid R anjha, wi th further explanation that if the 
Parliament had validated the acts of General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) , 
what would be left ? It would be against the dictum of highest Court of 
the country . It would have nullified the judgment and gone back to 
esquire  zero . So they followed the judgment and treated the said 
actions as void ab initio and non existent.  However, the judgment s 
referred to hereinabove treated the appellants as Judges. The Review 
judgment , in particular , refrain ed from making any observation lest  it 
may prejudice their case s at the trial stage. If the appellants were not 
treated as Judges or did not continue to be the Judges, such 
observations would have not been made in the review judgment. This 
question could  be left open for decision by the Ben ch, which had 
already taken cognizance of the proceedings lest any finding in this 
behalf should prejudice the case and nothing would be left for the 
Bench dealing with the case or in alternative it should be referred to a 
Larger Bench because 14 -Member Be nch had expressed it s view qua 
their amenability to Article 209 of the Constitution.  
34.  As far as the objections raised by Sheikh Zamee r Hussain, 
learned counsel are concerned, these are not tenable , perhaps he ha s 
not go ne through the detailed reasons given in continuation of the 
short order in Sindh High Court Bar Association’s c ase wherein in an 
unambiguous  and categorical term , directions have been issued to 
proceed under the Constitution, against the judges  who have violated 
the order dated 3.11.200 7. As far as Article 204 of the Constitution is 
concerned it  is one of the parts of the Constitution. Detailed discussion 
in this regard has already been made  hereinabove coupled with the 
facts that after the pronouncement of the judgment s in Sindh High 
Court Bar Association’s Case  and Justice (R) Khurshid Anwar Bhinder’s 
case, a good of  number  of the Judges ha ve been removed from their ICA 3 /2011  etc. 38 
offices  by means of different notification s. Not only Sheikh Zamee r 
Hussain , ASC  but other learned counsel as well , had emphasized that 
the procedure of removal of the Judges is not under Article 204 but 
Article 209 (6) of the Constitution. We may point out here that the 
contempt proceedings which have been initiated in pursuance of the 
judgment  passed by  14-Member Bench , which decided to issue notices 
to them had no concern with their removal. We have time and again 
explained in the judgment s referred to hereinbefore that on account of 
unique circumstances, with which the judiciary of the Country was 
confronted for the first time on 3.11.2007 , instant proceedings  have 
been initiated.  
35.  Thus, in view of above background it is to be seen whether 
the appellants are still Judges so as to be liable to be dealt with under 
Article 209 of the Constitution or had ceased to be Judge s after they 
had taken oath on 03.11.2007 under the P CO, 2007 read with the 
Oath Order, 2007, which, inter alia, provided that a person holding 
office immediately before the issuance of said instruments as a 
Judge of the Supreme Court, the Federal Shariat Court or a High 
Court would cease to hold office with immediate effect , particularly 
after the passing of the Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment whereby 
no validation was  provided  to the actions of 3.11.2007 because in the 
past, the Parliament had, on eac h such occasion, granted validation to 
such actions i.e. the extra -constitutional steps of 05.07.1977 were 
validated by the Parliament through the Eighth Constitutional 
Amendment whereas the extra -constitutional steps of 12.10.1999 
were validated by the Pa rliament under the 17th Constitutional 
Amendment.  
36.  It is to be noted that much emphasis has been laid on 
behalf of the appellants that notwithstanding the fact that 
indemnity /validity  has not been granted to the unauthorized actions of 
the then Chief o f Army Staff dated 03.11.2007, they continued to be 
the Judges in view of the observations of this Court, in pursuance 
whereof they were ordered to be dealt with under Article 209 of the 
Constitution and in the order dated 5.10.2010 though they were 
ordere d to be proceeded under Article 204 of the Constitution but it 
was never held that they were no more Judges of the Supreme Court 
or the High Courts. Reliance in this behalf has also been placed on the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 39 
stand taken by the Government of Pakistan in the statem ent 
reproduced hereinabove wherein reference of paragraph No. 17 of the 
Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case has been made. The 
arguments so advanced on behalf of the appellant as well as the 
Attorney General for Pakistan required to be examined in diff erent 
context because in Sindh High Court Bar Association's case  PCO as 
well as Oath Order, 2007 had been declared unconstitutional and void 
ab-initio, whereas in Khurshid Anwar Bhinder’s case  permission was 
not accorded to some of the applicants (Judges) who wanted to seek 
the review of the main judgment for expunging the observations of 
whatsoever nature made therein against them.  
37.   It is most encouraging aspect of the case that the Federal 
Government through the Attorney General had not supported th e 
actions of dictator dated 3.11.2007 and an unambiguous and a 
categorical stand was taken by the Attorney General. Relevant para 
from Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case  is reproduced 
hereinbelow: - 
 “13. The learned Attorney General stated that the ac ts and 
instruments of 3rd November 2007 of General Pervez 
Musharraf, which were obviously extra -constitutional, were 
not accepted, rather were objected to by all the democratic 
political parties except Pakistan Muslim League (Quaid -e-
Azam), hereinafter ref erred to as "PML (Q)", which had tabled 
a resolution in the National Assembly to endorse the said 
actions and got it passed. He unequivocally declared that 
neither he was supporting General Pervez Musharraf's actions 
of 3rd November, 2007 nor he would defe nd him in the 
instant proceedings. He made the following arguments: - 
  
(1)  The present democratic government had never 
accepted extra -constitutional promulgation of Orders 
and/or any other repressive measures. The respect for 
judiciary had always been ha llmark of its ideology and 
judicial process was resorted to by their leaders even in 
the most trying circumstances. The verdict in Tikka 
Iqbal Muhammad Khan's case was affirmed in review by 
a 13 - member Bench of the Supreme Court whereby 
the acts of 3rd N ovember 2007 were validated on the 
principles of state necessity and salus populi est 
suprema lex, which even otherwise ceased to exist on 
revival of the Constitution on 15th December 2007;  
  
(2)  Notwithstanding the aforesaid position, the present 
fourtee n-member Bench may like to revisit the cases of 
Dosso, Begum Nusrat Bhutto, Mehmood Khan Achakzai, 
Zafar Ali Shah, Watan Party, Pakistan Lawyers Forum, 
and Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan, but such revisiting 
would be prospective as held in a chain of authoritie s, ICA 3 /2011  etc. 40 
including Punjab Province v. Malik Khizar Hayat Khan 
Tiwana (PLD 1956 FC 200), etc;  
  
(3)  Much water having flown under the bridge in the 
interregnum, the de facto doctrine would call for judicial 
restraint because complete annulment would create 
chaos  and confusion of great magnitude. In re: 
Reference by H.E. The Governor -General (PLD 1955 FC 
435), certain Ordinances were saved for consideration 
of their validity by the Constituent Assembly. Reliance 
was also placed on Cooley's Constitutional Limitatio ns 
8th Edition, Vol. 2, p. 137, Sabir Shah v. Federation of 
Pakistan (PLD 1994 SC 738), Managing Director, Sui 
Southern Gas Co. Ltd. v. Ghulam Abbas (PLD 2003 SC 
724), etc;  
  
Inasmuch as notice was issued to General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) at 
his availabl e address intimating him about the proceedings and factum 
of issuance of notice was also televised both on national and 
international channels but on the date so fixed no one entered 
appearance on his behalf. Meaning thereby that even the person who 
violat ed the Constitution did not come forward to defend his own 
action by appearing in the Court. As far as the chosen representatives 
are concerned, till the announcement of the judgment in Sindh High 
Court Bar Association's case  (ibid) they did not legitimize d, validated, 
indemnified the actions of 3.11.2007 as it has been observed in the 
following para of Sindh High Court Bar Association's case :- 
 “172.  The striking difference and distinction between the 
actions of 5th July 1977 and 12th October 1999 on the one 
hand, and the action of 3rd November 2007 on the other,. 
was that the former were affirmed, adopted and validated by 
the Parliament through the Eighth and Seventeenth 
Amendments of the Constitution respectively whereas the 
latter was not validated; or ratified by the Parliament. 
Reference in this behalf was made to Article 270C, which 
though was first introduced under the Legal Framework Order, 
2002, but it was later inserted into the Constitution under the 
Seventeenth Amendment. In absence of any valid ation or 
ratification by the Parliament, Abdul Hameed Dogar and other 
persons who were ostensibly styled as Chief' Justices would 
not be consultees for the purposes of Articles 177, 193 and 
197 of the Constitution. Hence, all the appointments made in 
consu ltation with such Chief Justices would be void ab initio; ” 
 
38.   It would also not be out of context to note that Ordinance s 
promulgated by the President or the Governors of the Provinces before 
3.11.2007, were given permanence by the PCO, 2007 as also th e 
Ordinance s issued by the President or the Governors between 
3.11.2007 and 15.12.2007 (both days inclusive), were likewise given ICA 3 /2011  etc. 41 
permanence through same instrument and such legislative measures 
along with PCO, 2007 were validated by Tikka Iqbal Muhammad 
Khan’s case,  but were shorn of purported permanence on account of 
declaration of PCO , 2007  and other instruments to be unconstitutional , 
as such  these Ordinances were ordered to be placed before the 
Parliament or the respective Assemblies in accordance wit h Articles 89 
and 128 of the Constitution . But to our knowledge some of these 
Ordinances were not accepted by the Parliament including the National 
Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007, which in the case of Dr. Mubashir 
Hassan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2010  SC 265)  was declared to 
be an instrument void ab initio being ultra vires and violative of 
various constitutional provisions including Article Nos. 4, 8, 25, 62(f), 
63(i)(p), 89, 175 and 227 of the Constitution.  
 Had the democratic dispensation not examin ed various 
provisions of the Eighth Constitutional Amendment and Seventeenth 
Constitutional Amendment, perhaps the question which now has been 
cropped up about the status of the appellants, to be Judges, might 
have not arisen at all. Needless to observe th at on 5.7.1977, the then 
Chief Martial Law Administrator, General Zia -ul-Haq imposed Martial 
Law and held in abeyance the Constitution of 1973. He succeeded in 
obtaining the judgment in his favour in the case of Begum Nusrat 
Bhutto v. Chief of Army Staff (PLD 1977 SC 657) but legitimacy, 
indemnity, validation so secured under the Court’s judgment had no 
Constitutional mandate, therefore, condonation of 
unconstitutional/unauthorized action was called for. Accordingly 
chosen representatives were approached fo r this purpose and Eighth 
Constitutional Amendment was made whereby Article 270A was 
inserted in pursuance whereof validation, legitimization and 
condonation was granted to the actions of 5.7.1977. For ready 
reference Article 270A is reproduced hereinbelow :- 
“270A.  (1)  The Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977, all 
President's Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law Regulations, Martial 
Law Orders, including the Referendum Order, 1984 (P. O. No. 
11 of 1984), the Revival of the Constitution of 1973 Order, 198 5 
(P. O. No. 14 of 1985), the Constitution (Second Amendment) 
Order 1985 (P. O. No. 24 of 1985), and all other laws, made 
between the fifth day of July, 1977, and the date on which this 
Article comes into force are hereby affirmed, adopted and 
declared, no twithstanding any judgment of any court, to have 
been validly made by competent authority and, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Constitution, shall not be called in 
question in any court on any ground whatsoever:  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 42 
Provided that a President's Order , Martial Law Regulation or 
Martial Law Order made after the thirtieth day of September, 
1985, shall be confined only to making such provisions as 
facilitate, or are incidental to, the revocation of the Proclamation 
of the fifth day of July, 1977.  
 
(2)  All order made, proceedings taken and acts done by any 
authority or by any person, which were made, taken or done, or 
purported to have been made, taken or done, between the fifth 
day of July, 1977, and the date on which this Article comes into 
force, in exe rcise of the powers derived from any Proclamation, 
President's Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law Regulations, Martial 
Law Orders, enactments, notifications, rules, orders or by -laws, 
or in execution of or in compliance with any order made or 
sentence passed by any authority in the exercise or purported 
exercise of powers as aforesaid, shall, notwithstanding any 
judgment of any court, be deemed to be and always to have 
been validly made, taken or done and shall not be called in 
question in any court on any gro und whatsoever.  
 
(3)  All President's Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law 
Regulations, Martial Law Orders, enactments, notifications, 
rules, orders or by -laws in force immediately before the date on 
which this Article comes into force shall continue in force until 
altered, repealed or amended by competent authority.  
 
Explanation.  In this clause, Competent authority means -  
(a)  in respect of President's Orders, Ordinances, Martial Law 
Regulations, Martial Law Orders and enactments, the 
Legislature; and  
(b)  in respect of notifications, rules orders and by -laws, the 
authority in which the power to made, alter, repeal or amend 
the same vests under the law.  
 
(4)  No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie in 
any court against any authority or any p erson, for or on account 
of or in respect of any order made, proceedings taken or act 
done whether in the exercise or purported exercise of the 
powers referred to in clause (2) or in execution of or in 
compliance with orders made or sentences passed in exe rcise or 
purported exercise of such powers.  
 
(5)  For the purposes of clauses (1), (2) and (4), all orders 
made, proceedings taken, acts done or purporting to be made, 
taken or done by any authority or person shall be deemed to 
have been made, taken or do ne in good faith and for the 
purpose intended to be served thereby.  
 
(6)  The laws referred to in clause (1) may be amended by the 
appropriate Legislature in the manner provided for amendment 
of such laws.  
Explanation.  In this Article, "President's Orders"  includes 
"President and Chief Martial Law Administrator's Orders" and 
"Chief Martial Law Administrator's Orders.”  
 39.  It may be noted that the Supreme Court or the High 
Courts have no lawful jurisdiction to validate , condone or legitimize 
any unconstitu tional dispensation as it has been held in Sindh High ICA 3 /2011  etc. 43 
Court Bar Association's case  (ibid) that the assumption of power by an 
authority not mentioned in the Constitution would be unconstitutional, 
illegal and void ab initio and not liable to be recognized b y any court, 
including the Supreme Court. It is also pertinent to mention here that 
the unconstitutional actions of General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) i.e. 
proclaiming Emergency w.e.f. 12.10.1999 and holding the Constitution 
in abeyance, issuance of PCO, 199 9 and Oath Order, 2000, were 
validated by this Court in the case of Syed Zafar Ali Shah v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2000 SC 869) but even then he approached the 
Parliament for getting the validation of the same, which was granted 
by means of Seventeent h Constitutional Amendment whereby Article 
270AA was inserted in the Constitution, which reads as under: - 
"270-AA (1)  The Proclamation of Emergency of the fourteenth 
day of October, 1999, all President's Orders, Ordinances, Chief 
Executive's Orders, includ ing the Provisional Constitution Order 
No. 1 of 1999, the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 (No. 1 of 
2000), Chief Executive's Order No. 12 of 2002, the amendments 
made in the Constitution through the Legal Framework Order, 
2002 (Chief Executive's Order No. 24 of 2002), the Legal 
Framework (Amendment) Order , 2002 (Chief Executive's Order 
No. 29 of 2002), the Legal Framework (Second Amendment) 
Order, 2002 (Chief Executive's Order No. 32 of 2002) and all 
other laws made between the twelfth day of October, one 
thousand nine hundred and ninety -nine and the date on which 
this Article comes into force (both days inclusive), having been 
duly made or accordingly affirmed, adopted and declared to 
have been validly made by the competent authority and 
notwithstandin g anything contained in the Constitution shall not 
be called in question in any court or forum on any ground 
whatsoever.  
 
(2) All orders made, proceedings taken, appointments made, 
including secondments and deputations, and acts done by any 
authority, or b y any person, which were made, taken or done, 
or purported to have been made, taken or done, between the 
twelfth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and ninety -
nine, and the date on which this Article comes into force (both 
days inclusive), in exerci se of the powers derived from any 
Proclamation, President's Orders, Ordinances, Chief Executive's 
Orders, enactments, including amendments in the Constitution, 
notifications, rules, orders, bye -laws or in execution of or in 
compliance with any orders made or sentences passed by any 
authority in the exercise or purported exercise of powers as 
aforesaid, shall, notwithstanding any judgment of any court, be 
deemed to be and always to have been validly made, taken or 
done and shall not be called in question in any court or forum on 
any ground whatsoever.  
 
(3) All Proclamations, President's Orders, Ordinances, Chief 
Executive's Orders, laws, regulations, enactments, including 
amendments in the Constitution, notification, rules, orders or 
bye-laws in force immedia tely before the date on which this ICA 3 /2011  etc. 44 
Article comes into force shall continue in force, until altered, 
repealed or amended by the competent authority.  
 
Explanation:  In this clause," competent authority" means: -  
 
(a) in respect of President's Orders, Ordinan ces, Chief 
Executive's Orders and enactments, including amendments in 
the Constitution, the appropriate Legislature; and  
(b) in respect of notifications, rules, orders and bye -laws, the 
authority in which the power to make, alter, repeal or amend 
the same vests under the law.  
 
(4) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings, including 
writ petitions, shall lie in any court or forum against any 
authority or any persons, for or on account of or in respect of 
any order made, proceedings taken or act done w hether in the 
exercise or purported exercise of the powers referred to in 
clause (2) or in execution of or in compliance with orders made 
or sentences passed in exercise or purported exercise of such 
powers.  
 
(5) For the purposes of clauses (1), (2) and (4 ), all orders 
made, proceedings taken , appointments made, including 
secondments and deputations, acts done or purporting to be 
made, taken or done by any authority or person shall be 
deemed to have been made, taken or done in good faith and for 
the purpos e intended to be served thereby.”  
 
40.  It is noteworthy that for the first time in the history of the 
country it has categorically been pronounced by this Court that 
superior Courts had no jurisdiction to legitimize unconstitutional acts, 
actions, omissio ns and commissions of any functionary who had acted 
contrary to the constitutional provision s. Reason behind it has its 
germane in clause (1) of Article 243 of the Constitution, according to 
which the Federal Government shall have control and command on th e 
Armed Forces. Clause (1A) of Article 243 provides  that without to the 
generality of the provision of clause (1) the supreme command of the 
Armed Forces shall vest in the President, whereas, as per clause (3) of 
the said Article, the President , in consult ation with the Prime Minister , 
enjoys authority for the appointment of (i) the Chairman of Joint 
Chiefs Staff Committee (ii) the Chief of Army Staff (iii) the Chief of 
Navel Staff and (iv) the Chief of Air Staff. Similarly, Article 244 of the 
Constitution speaks  that every member of the Armed Forces shall 
make oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule under the 
Constitution, according to which a member of Armed Forces solemnly 
swears that he will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan and 
uphold th e Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan which 
embodies the will of the people, that he will not engage himself in any ICA 3 /2011  etc. 45 
political activities whatsoever and that he will honestly and faithfully 
serve Pakistan in the Pakistan Army or Navy or Air For ce, as required 
by and under the law. Upholding the Constitution, as per the oath of 
the members of the Armed Forces, casts a duty upon them that they 
will not engage themselves in any political activities , whatsoever it 
may be. Likewise, under Article 245 (1) of the Constitution, the Armed 
Forces of Pakistan are bound to remain under the direction of Federal 
Government to defend Pakistan against external aggression or threat 
of war, and, subject to law, act in aid of civil power when called upon 
to do so. T herefore, non adherence to the constitutional provisions 
prima facie tends to establish denying the oath to uphold the 
Constitution. This subject has already been discussed in detail in Sindh 
High Court Bar Association's case (Ibid). Relevant para therefrom  is 
reproduced hereinbelow: - 
 “56.   Each member of the Armed Forces, as per his oath 
under the Third Schedule to the Constitution in pursuance of 
Article 244, is bound to bear true faith and allegiance to 
Pakistan and uphold the Constitution which embodie s the will of 
the people. He is also sworn not to engage himself in any 
political activities whatsoever. He also solemnly affirms and 
declares that he will honestly and faithfully serve Pakistan in the 
Pakistan Army (or Navy or Air Force) as required by an d under 
the law. The learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently 
contended that General Pervez Musharraf, by his actions of 3rd 
November, 2007, not only violated his oath as a member of the 
Armed Forces, 'but also overthrew the solemn pledge he made 
as President of Pakistan of performing his functions and 
discharging his duties honestly, to the best of his ability, 
faithfully in accordance with the Constitution and the law. We 
agree with the contention of the learned counsel that General 
Pervez Musharraf  failed to abide by his oath to preserve, protect 
and defend the Constitution. The Constitution was framed to 
continue to be in force at all times. By Article 6, an in -built 
mechanism was provided to safeguard the Constitution from its 
abrogation or subver sion by anyone, that is to say, it could 
neither be cancelled by anyone nor could it be overthrown or 
undermined by anyone in any manner or mode whatsoever. 
Thus, unless and until the Constitution is altered or amended in 
accordance with the procedure laid  down in Articles 238 and 
239, or it is repealed on the pattern of the Interim Constitution 
under the provisions of Article 266, which too, is possible by 
recourse to the provisions of Articles 238 and 239, its operation 
and enforceability cannot be interr upted even for a single day, 
nay a single moment except as specifically provided in the 
Constitution itself. The Constitution has not contemplated any 
situation where it can be held in abeyance at the will or whims 
of the Chief of Army Staff and to be revi ved after he has 
achieved his objectives. Let it be stated in unequivocal terms 
that the validity accorded in the past did not give a licence to 
any holder of the office of Chief of Army Staff of repeating such 
acts at his will. It is hereby firmly laid do wn that the holding in 
abeyance of the Constitution or any other act having the effect ICA 3 /2011  etc. 46 
of discontinuing the operation and the enforceability of the 
Constitution for a single moment in a manner not authorized 
under the Constitution is nothing but an overthr owing of the 
Constitution, so to say, the subversion of the Constitution and 
thus constitutes the offence of high treason.  
 
41.   In the past, whenever by Martial Law, or to avoid this 
expression a phrase “Emergency” has been used, was imposed and the 
Constitution was abrogated in the case of Martial Law of 1958 or held 
in abeyance in the case of Martial Law of 1977 and imposition of 
Emergency Plus on 5.7.1977 as well as the Emergency of 1999, not 
only the Courts but also the Parliament had granted legitima cy, 
validity or indemnity  to unconstitutional and unauthorized omission 
and commission of the d ictator, with due respect, without   realizing 
that Armed Forces are under the control of Federation and they ha ve 
taken the oath to show allegiance to Pakistan  and uphold the 
Constitution and they can only come forward to act in aid of the 
civilian government whenever they are called for and no sooner the 
circumstances, on the basis of which the civilian administration was 
compelled to call for its aid, are over , they have to go back to their 
barracks and not to continue ruling the country as it had happened in 
the Martial Law imposed by General Muhammad Ayub Khan in 1958, 
who ruled the country till the month of March, 1969 when instead of 
restoring the order of civilian government, he handed over the power 
to the then Commander -in-Chief of Army, General Muhammad Yahya 
Khan who continued till the time when this nation had to face the 
debacle of East Pakistan. However, his all actions were declared 
unconstitutional  being accomplished by a usurper in the case of Asma 
Jilani v. Government of Punjab  (PLD  1972 SC 139). Subsequent 
thereto , again in 1977 Martial Law was imposed and the Constitution 
was held in abeyance till its revival by Eighth Constitutional 
Amendment, wherein Article 270A was inserted, which has been 
reproduced hereinabove. Unfortunately on 12.10.1999, Martial Law by 
the name of Emergency was imposed and in Zafar Ali Shah’s case  the 
dictator once again succeeded in getting legitimacy from the Supreme 
Court as well as by Parliament. It is important to note that the Judges 
who had then made oath under the PCO read with Oath Order, 1999 
were provided constitutional protection by means of Article 270C which 
reads as under: - ICA 3 /2011  etc. 47 
270C. (1)  Notwithstanding anything  contained in the 
Constitution, all persons appointed as Judges of the Supreme 
Court, High Courts and Federal Shariat Court who have taken 
oath under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007 (1 of 2000), 
or the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000, or not ha ving been 
given or taken oath under the said orders have ceased to 
continue to hold the office of a Judge shall be deemed to have 
been appointed or ceased to continue to continue to hold such 
office, as the case may be, under the Constitution and such 
appointment or cessation of office shall have effect accordingly.  
(2) Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Constitution 
or nay other law for the time being in force, -- 
(i) a judge including the Chief Justice, of the Supreme Court, 
a High Court of Federal  Shariat Court who had, not been 
given or taken oath under the Oath of Office (Judges) 
Order, 2007 had ceased to hold office on and with effect 
from the 3rd day of November, 2007; and  
(ii) a judge including the Chief justice of the Supreme Court, 
a High C ourt and Federal Shariat Court appointed and/or 
continued as such Judge or Chief Justice by virtue of the 
Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007, shall, on revival of 
the Constitution, take oath as set out in the Third 
Schedule and shall be deemed to have bee n appointed, 
and/or shall continue to hold office, under the 
Constitution.  
 
42.  On 3.11.2007 when  again in the name of Emergency Plus 
the Constitution was held in abeyance and while proclaiming 
emergency the PCO, 2007 and Oath Order, 2007 was issued by t he 
Chief of Army Staff, General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) in exercise of 
authority contrary to any provision of the Constitution, the appellants 
who were initially appointed under the Constitution of 1973 and had 
also made oath to discharge their duties and  perform their functions 
honestly to the best of their abilities and faithfully in accordance with 
the Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan and had also 
committed themselves to preserve, protect and defend the 
Constitution of Pakistan, accepted ben eficially the directions of the 
then Chief of Army Staff to cease to hold their offices and agreed to 
continue as a Judge under the proclamation of emergency and the 
PCO, 2007 read with the Oath Order, 2007, accordingly they sworn 
oath of their offices. On  the cast of repetition it is again stated that 
this is for the first time in 60/62 years history  when  the Supreme 
Court resisted the imposition of emergency by passing a restraint 
order dated 3.11.2007 but without prejudice to the case of appellants 
wheth er they were aware of the same or not, fact remains that they 
continued as Judge under PCO, 2007 although on the revival of the 
Constitution on 15.12.2007 they were again given the oath under the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 48 
Constitution when after making  certain amendments the dictat or 
restored the Constitution. However, as far as actions of the dictator 
are concerned, they were indemnified, validated and legitimized by 
this Courts in the Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan’s case,  for which no 
jurisdiction vests in them because by doing so, on  every third day a 
powerful General of Military shall impose the Martial Law (Emergency 
Plus) on its whims and wishes with capricious designs and shall restor e 
the Constitution by amending the same as per their requirements, as 
happened between 3.11.2007 t o 15.12.2007 when so called 
amendments were made by the then Chief of Army Staff and there 
would be no supremacy of the Constitution or rule of law . Although 
this time again the Judges who had made oath under the PCO, 2007, 
notwithstanding passing of the o rder by the 7 -Member Bench on 
3.11.2007, granted validity to the unauthorized and unconstitutional 
actions of General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) but no sooner the 
democratic Constitutional Order was restored after the General 
Election of 18.2.2008 the Judici ary, which was unconstitutionally 
sacked by the then Chief of Army Staff , was restored w.e.f. 22.3.2009. 
The challenge was thrown to the actions of 3.11.2007 by the Sindh 
High Court Bar Association and Nadeem Ahmad Advocate, when the 
Court examined the val idity of such actions and while revisiting the 
judgment passed in Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan’s case  it was 
declared that the said judgment was per incuriam  and ultimately vide 
short order dated 31.7.2009 the petitions were accepted followed by 
the detailed reasons, relevant paras therefrom have already been 
reproduced hereinabove. In the said reported case, as it has been 
observed earlier, no one c ame forward to defend the actions of 
3.11.2007 including the Government or its own architect i.e. General 
Pervez  Musharraf (Retd.). Detailed historical background of 
Constitutional deviations etc. find mentioned in the said judgment.  
43.  It  is  a  matter   of  great  satisfaction  and  
encouragement for  all  the  right  men,  who  believe   in  the  
constitutional ism  and  are  of  the  affirmed  commitment  that  in  
our  beloved  country  there  should  not  be  any  rule  except   one 
under   the  Constitution,    that  is  why  the  Parliament  had  not 
granted  legitimacy  or  validity  to  the  actions   of 3.11. 2007. In  
view of the  past  history  and  on  plain  reading  of  the  constitutional   ICA 3 /2011  etc. 49 
provisions  relating  to  the  Armed  Forces  i.e.  Article 243, 244 and 
245, discussed hereinbefore it is abundantly clear that Chief of Army 
Staff, who has been appoin ted by the President in consultation with 
the Prime Minister has no authority to ho ld the Constitution in 
abeyance, therefore, condonation has  to be sought by adopting a 
legislative intervention, as per past practice, from the parliament. In 
absence of suc h validation, indemnification or legitimization, 
unconstitutional actions taken by a dictator would continue to charge 
not only to the person who ha d imposed Martial Law (Emergency) but 
also to others as well who had accepted new order imposed in the 
count ry beneficially. There is no cavil with the proposition that 
unconstitutional actions of General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) taken on 
3.11.2007 were declared unconstitutional on 31.7.2008 but still their 
consequences continue to exist because by no legislativ e intervention 
through Parliament, the legitimacy, indemnity or validity had been 
granted by the Parliament. It is to be seen that at the time of such 
unconstitutional Martial  Law in the name of Emergency on  3.11.2007 , 
the Parliament (National Assembly + S enate) was duly functioning 
until 15.11.2007 when the National Assembly completed its tenure but 
no legitimacy, validity or indemnity was obtained from the said 
parliament. However, after dissolution of National Assembly, elections 
were held on 18.2.2008 a nd new National Assembly commenced its 
functions from 3rd week of March, 2008 onward. Meanwhile, 
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments were made by 
the parliament in pursuance whereof legislative actions of the Eighth 
Constitutional Amendment  and Seventeenth Constitutional 
Amendments were also considered and all those legislative 
instruments, which found to be contrary to the Constitution, were 
weeded out of the Constitution. Interestingly the question of granting 
validity, indemnity and legit imacy in respect of Seventeenth 
Constitutional Amendment was also thoroughly examined and the 
Parliament unanimously indemnified, legitimized and validated the 
oath made by the Judges,  under the PCO and Oath Order, 2000 by 
inserting sub Article 3 of the Ar ticle 270AA, which reads as under: - 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution or 
clause (1), or judgment of any court including the Supreme 
Court or a High Court, -  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 50 
(a) Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and Federal 
Shariat Court wh o were holding the office of a Judge or 
were appointed as such, and had taken oath under the 
Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 (1 of 2000), shall be 
deemed to have continued to hold the office as a Judge or 
appointed as such, as the case may be, under th e 
Constitution, and such continuance or appointment, shall 
have effect accordingly.  
(b) Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and Federal 
Shariat Court who not having been given or taken oath 
under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000, (I of 
2000), a nd ceased to hold the office of a Judge shall, for 
the purposes of pensionary benefits only, be deemed to 
have continued to hold office under the Constitution till 
their date of superannuation.”  
 
The above provision in fact has replaced Article 270C insert ed by the 
Seventeenth Constitutional Amendment , legitimizing, validating and 
condoning the oath taken by the then Judge s under the PCO and Oath 
Order, 2000. Inasmuch as pensionary benefits were also extended to 
the Judges who had declined to take oath in p ursuance of Emergency 
and PCO, 2000 read with Oath Order, 2000. A perusal whereof clearly 
indicates that by legislative intervention through Parliament, the 
Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and Federal Shariat Court 
who were holding the office of a  Judge or were appointed as such, and 
had taken oath under the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2000 were 
deemed to have continued to hold the office as a Judge or appointed 
as such, as the case would  be, under the Constitution, and such 
continuance or appoi ntment, would  have effect accordingly. However, 
Judges of the Supreme Court, High Courts and Federal Shariat Court 
who were not given or taken oath under the Oath Order, 2000, and 
ceased to hold the office of a Judge were, for the purposes of 
pensionary be nefits only, were deemed to have continued to hold 
office under the Constitution till their date of superannuation.  
 
44.  It is a matter of record that all the times when there was a 
constitutional deviation in the past by means of legislative intervention  
through Parliament, condonation, legitimacy and validation has been 
granted to all the actions including the actions of Judges holding the 
office immediately at the time of making oath and the dictators, 
instead of proceeding against for deviation on the allegations of 
abrogating or subverting or suspending or holding in abeyance the 
Constitution.  Inasmuch   as,  at  one  stage  i.e.  during  the  regime of ICA 3 /2011  etc. 51 
General Zia -ul-Haq he was allowed to continue as President in uniform 
on the basis of Referendum. Ar ticle 41 was amended and vide clause 
(7) the result of Referendum was incorporated therein for the purpose 
of allowing him to continue in the office.  Clause (7) of Article 41 
inserted by means of P.O.No.14 of 1985, reads as under: - 
“(7) Notwithstanding any thing contained in this Article or Article 
43, or any other Article of the Constitution or any other law, 
General Mohammad Zia -ul-Haq, in consequence of the result of 
the referendum held on the nineteenth day of December 1984, 
shall become the President of  Pakistan on the day of the first 
meeting of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) in joint sitting 
summoned after the elections to the Houses of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) and shall hold office for a term of five years from 
that day; and Article 44 and other pro visions of the Constitution 
shall apply accordingly. ”  
 
The said clause as substituted by item (2) to the Schedule annexed 
with the Legal Framework Order, 2002 (Chief Executive's Order No. 24 
of 2002), is reproduced hereinbelow :-  
  “(7) The Chief Executiv e of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan -  
(a) shall relinquish the office of Chief Executive on 
such day as he may determine in accordance with the judgment 
of the Supreme Court of Pakistan of the 12th May, 2000; and  
(b) having received the democratic mandat e to serve 
the nation as President of Pakistan for a period of five years 
shall, on relinquishing the office of the Chief Executive, 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Article or Article 43 
or any other provision of the Constitution or any other la w for 
the time being in force, assume the office of President of 
Pakistan forthwith and shall hold office for a term of five years 
under the Constitution, and Article 44 and other provisions of 
the Constitution shall apply accordingly.”  
 
Later, by means of  Seventeenth Constitutional Amendment proviso 
was added to the clause (7) and clauses (8) and (9) were inserted to 
Article 41. After said amendments it read as under: - 
(7)  The Chief Executive of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan - 
 
(a) shall relinquish the  office of Chief Executive on such day 
as he may determine in accordance with the judgment of the 
Supreme Court of Pakistan of the 12th May, 2000; and  
 
(b)  having received the democratic mandate to serve the 
nation as President of Pakistan for a period of  five years shall, 
on relinquishing the office of the Chief Executive, 
notwithstanding anything contained in this Article or Article 43 
or any other provision of the Constitution or any other law for 
the time being in force, assume the office of President of 
Pakistan forthwith and shall hold office for a term of five years ICA 3 /2011  etc. 52 
under the Constitution, and Article 44 and other provisions of 
the Constitution shall apply accordingly.  
Provided that paragraph (d) of clause (1) of Article 63 
shall become operative on  and from the 31st day of December, 
2004.  
 
(8)  Without prejudice to the provisions of clause (7), any 
member or members of a House of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) 
or of a Provincial Assembly, individually or jointly, may, not later 
than thirty days from t he commencement of the Constitution 
(Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 2003, move a resolution for 
vote of confidence for further affirmation of the President in 
office by majority of the members present and voting, by 
division or any other method as prescribed in the rules made by 
the Federal Government under clause (9), of the electoral 
college consisting of members of both Houses of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) and the Provincial Assemblies, in a special session 
of each House of Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) an d of each 
Provincial Assembly summoned for the purpose, and the vote of 
confidence having been passed, the President, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Constitution or judgment of any court, 
shall be deemed to be elected to hold office for a term o f five 
years under the Constitution, and the same shall not be called in 
question in any court or forum on any ground whatsoever.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution or 
any other law for the time being in force, the proceedings for 
the vote of confidence referred to in clause (8) shall be 
regulated and conducted by the Chief Election Commissioner in 
accordance with such procedure and the votes shall be counted 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the rules framed by the 
Federal Gove rnment:  
 
Provided that clauses (8) and (9) shall be valid only for 
the forthcoming vote of confidence for the current term of the 
President in office.  
 
However, by means of Eighteenth  Constitution al Amendment the 
clauses (7), (8) and (9) were omitted.   
The qualification of General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) to contest the 
election of the P resident to be held in 2007 was  again challenged in 
Wajihuddin Ahmad’s case  and during pendency of the same under 
premature apprehension, instead of allowing the Court to p ronounce 
the judgment, Martial Law in the name of Emergency Plus was 
declared on 3.11.2007, resultantly most of the Judges of the superior 
Judiciary were not allowed to continue to function. However, under the 
so called proclamation of Emergency and PCO, 2 007 read with Oath 
Order, 2007 some of the Judges including the appellants, who both 
expressly and impliedly agreed that under the new dispensation i.e. 
proclamation of emergency and PCO, 2007 they ceased to hold their 
offices under the Constitution, as su ch, made fresh oat h under the 
PCO, foregoing their  earlier appointments under the Constitution of ICA 3 /2011  etc. 53 
1973. The effect of ceasing to hold office shall be discussed later. 
Again turning towards the question of seeking indemnification by the 
dictators, as it has  referred hereinbefore, time to time it had become a 
persisting practice. We regret to observe that the Parliament instead of 
adhering to constitutional provisions like Article 6 etc. with a view to 
ensure that in future no one should deviate from the cons titutional 
provisions, should uphold the Constitution being member of Armed 
Forces as per command of Article 244 of the Constitution and refrain in 
engaging themselves in any political activities whatsoever and serve 
honestly and faithfully in Pakistan Arm y, Navy or Air force etc. were 
rewarded/  compensated/indemnified as few examples have been 
quoted hereinbefore. Undoubtedly general public/masses being the 
subject of the Constitution are always interested in their welfare. At 
times they express no grievan ce when Military takes over, except 
when political forces mobilize them, but as far as chosen 
representatives are concerned, they were not oblivious of their duties 
as they had also taken oath to preserve, protect and defend the 
Constitution. But in the pa st practice is other way around out. 
However, the dictator, who held the Constitution in abeyance on 
3.11.2007 for the purpose of achieving the object of contesting the 
election in uniform, succeeded in his nefarious designs as he got 
elected in uniform as  President of Pakistan. Unfortunately, the chosen 
representatives exercised their right of vote in his favour and elected 
him as President of Pakistan in uniform, notwithstanding that petition 
was pending before the Court in the case  of Wajihuddin Ahmad’s  case 
in which his qualification to contest the election in uniform was under 
examination. Interestingly, challenge was thrown to his candidatures 
at the touchstone of Article 41, which was also amended by the 
dictator previously .  
45.   No sooner the Judg es of the superior Courts were sacked 
and only those Judges were allowed to continue in the office who had 
agreed to make oath under the PCO, 2007, those Judges of the 
Supreme Court constituted a Bench who in view of alleged amendment 
in the Constitution m ade by the General Pervez Musharraf (Retd.) 
declared him to be the President of Pakistan. On having obtained this 
verdict he made oath in uniform and continued to be the President of 
Pakistan for a further period of five years, till he resigned from the sa id ICA 3 /2011  etc. 54 
office. This is a painful constitutional history. One can imagine that 
how a person who was interested to grab the constitutional powers, 
not only deleted some of the provisions of the Constitution to achieve 
his object but also destroyed the whole Inst itution of Judiciary, which 
is one of the most important pillar of the State under the scheme of 
trichotomy of powers.  
46.   It is also significant to note that the Courts as well as the 
Parliament unfortunately had been privy to the deviations of the 
Constitution, mostly relying on the law of State necessity and the 
maxim of Salus Populi Est Saprema Lex,   in the cases of State v. 
Dosso  (PLD 1958 SC 533), Begum Nusrat Bhutto v. Chief of Army Staff  
(PLD 1997 SC 657), Zafar Ali Shah v. Pervez Musharraf, Chie f 
Executive of Pakistan  (PLD 2000 SC 869) and Tikka Iqbal Muhammad 
Khan v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2008 SC 25 and 178) but the 
judgment delivered by the superior Courts, referred hereinabove, had 
never been considered as good law and after the pronounc ement of 
the judgment in Sindh High Court Bar Association's case  (ibid) as well 
as by passing Eighteenth and Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments, 
stood nullified as in both these constitutional amendments all those 
insertions in the Constitution, which we re found to be not sustainable 
at the touchstone of the Constitution have been separated as a result 
whereof no legitimacy, validation or indemnity has been granted to the 
actions of the then Chief Army Staff during the period from 3.11.2007 
to 15.12.2007.  Consequently the Judges who had taken the oath 
under PCO and Oath Order, 2007 continued to cease to hold their 
offices.  
47.  It has been vehemently contended by the learned counsel 
appearing for the appellants that in the Sindh High Court Bar 
Association 's case  proclamation of Emergency, PCO and Oath Order, 
2007 was declared to be unconstitutional, ultra vires, illegal and of no 
legal effect. Reference in this behalf has been made to paragraphs 
No.21 & 22 of the said judgment time and again to emphasis th at in 
respect of appellants directions have already been made that they 
should be proceeded against under Article 209 of the Constitution and 
in the judgment in Khurshid Anwar Bhinder’s case  this Court has not 
varied the directions of proceeding against th e Judges who have 
violated the order dated 3.11.2007 to proceed under Article 209 of the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 55 
Constitution. In view of the judgment of this Court in the Sindh High 
Court Bar Association's case  (ibid) whereby all these actions were 
declared illegal, the Parliame nt while making Eighteenth and 
Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments, in deference to the Court’s 
order had not taken up this issue, might be leaving it to the Court to 
deal with the affairs of such Judges. Reference had to be made to the 
stand taken by the  Federal Government in respect of the status of the 
appellants in response to the directions of this Court, which has been 
reproduced hereinabove, that they are the Judges who are liable to be 
dealt with under Article 209 of the Constitution as it was obse rved in 
the short order dated 31.7.2008. However, in the detailed  judgment 
delivered on 30.9.2009  observations were made for initiating action 
against the Judges who violated the order dated 3.11.2007 passed by 
7-Member Bench of this Court. Subsequently vi de order dated 
5.10.2009 they were also ordered to be proceeded under the 
Constitution, which has already been reproduced hereinabove, in 
pursuance whereof notices under Article 204 of the Constitution were 
issued. As a result of the judgment in the Sindh High Court Bar 
Association’s case  whereby it was held that Mr. Justice (R) Abdul 
Hameed Dogar had never been the Chief Justice of Pakistan, therefore, 
all appointments of the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts made in consultation with him dur ing the period when he 
unconstitutionally held the said office from 3.11.2007 to 21.3.2009 
(both days inclusive) were declared to be unconstitutional, void ab -
initio and of no legal effect, as such those Judges ceased to hold the 
office forthwith. The pers ons (the Judges of Supreme Court and the 
High Courts), who resigned from their offices were never proceeded 
under Article 209 of the Constitution because they were not the Judges 
as per the mandate of the Constitution. Similarly a good number of the 
Judges , whose details have already been mentioned , tendered their 
resignations either immediately after passing of the order dated 
31.7.2008 or subsequently when the notices were issued to them for 
violating the order dated 3.11.2007 including  Justice (R)  Syed Z ahid 
Hussain, who initially opted to contest the violation of order dated 
3.11.2007 and were appellants before this Court.  
48.  It is important to note that the situation prevailing at the 
time of pronouncement of the judgment in the Sindh High Court Bar ICA 3 /2011  etc. 56 
Association’s case  and in  Khurshid Anwar Bhinder’s case  was further 
changed during pendency of the contempt proceedings against the 
appellants and others , when the Parliament had not granted validation 
to proclamation of Emergency, PCO, 2007 and Oath Order , 2007 as is 
evident from the amended provision of the Constitution under Article 
270AA (3) reproduced hereinabove.  
49.   After having taken oath under the PCO,  2007  which never 
got validation from the Parliament, now they cannot take advantage of 
omissio ns and commissions done by them in accordance with the well 
known  principle enshrined in maxim  nullus commodum capere potest 
de injuria sua propria , which means that  “no man can take advantage 
of his own wrong”. In the case of Mian Muhammad Saeed v. The 
Province of West Pakistan  (PLD 1964 SC 572), applying the said 
principle, it was held that the petitioners in trying to undo the 
transactions of sale and to get back their property were in fact 
attempting to take advantage of their own fraud. In the case of  Union 
of India v. Major General Madan Lal Yadav  (AIR 1996 SC 1340) = 
[(1996) 4 SCC 127], it was held as under: -  
“It is obvious that the respondent had avoided trial to see that 
the trial would not get commenced. Under the scheme of the Act 
and the Rules , presence of the accused is a pre -condition for 
commencement of trial. In his absence and until his presence is 
secured, it becomes difficult, nay impossible, to proceed with 
the trial of the respondent -accused. In this behalf, the maxim 
nullus commodum c apere potest de injuria sua propria -meaning 
no man can take advantage of his own wrong -squarely stands in 
the way of avoidance by the respondent and he is estopped to 
plead bar of limitation contained in Section 123(2). In Broom’s 
Legal Maximum [10th Edn.]  at page 191 it is stated “it is a 
maxim of law, recognized and established, that no man shall 
take advantage of his own wrong; and this maxim, which is 
based on elementary principles, is fully recognized in Courts of 
law and of equity, and, indeed, admits  of illustration from every 
branch of legal procedure. The reasonableness of the rule being 
manifest, we proceed at once to show its application by 
reference to decided cases. It was noted therein that a man 
shall not take advantage of his own wrong to gai n the 
favourable interpretation of the law. In support thereof, the 
author has placed reliance on another maxim frustra legis 
auxilium quoerit qui in legem committit. He relies on Perry v. 
Fitzhowe [8 Q.B. 757]. At page 192, it is stated that if a man be 
bound to appear on a certain day, and before that day the 
obligee put him in prison, the bond is void. At page 193, it is 
stated that "it is moreover a sound principle that he who 
prevents a thing from being done shall not avail himself of the 
non-performan ce he has occasioned". At page 195, it is further 
stated that "a wrong doer ought not to be permitted to make a 
profit out of his own wrong". At page 199 it is observed that 
"the rule applies to the extent of undoing the advantage gained ICA 3 /2011  etc. 57 
where that can be done and not to the extent of taking away a 
right previously possessed".  
……………………… The respondent having escaped from lawful 
military custody and prevented the trial from being proceeded 
with in accordance with law, the maxim nullus commodum 
capere potest de injuria sua propria squarely applies to the case 
and he having done the wrong, cannot take advantage of his 
own wrong  and plead bar of limitation to frustrate the lawful 
trial by a competent GCM. Therefore, even on the narrow 
interpretation, we hold tha t continuation of trial from March 2, 
1987 which commenced on February 25, 1987 is not a bar and 
it is a valid trial.”  
 
Above principle was applied by the Indian Supreme Court in another 
case Eureka Firbes Limited v. Allahabad Bank  decided on 3 May, 2010 
wherein it has been held that the maxim Nullus commodum capere 
potest de injuria sua propria  has a clear mandate of law that a person 
who by manipulation of a process frustrates the legal rights of others 
should not be permitted to take advantage of his wr ong or 
manipulations. The said principle has also been allowed  in Mian Allah 
Bakhsh v. Fazal Karim  (PLD 1969 Quetta 13), Khairpur Textile Mills 
Ltd. v. Central Board of Revenue  (PLD 1976 Kar. 164), Muhammad 
Zargham Eshaq Khan v. University of Engineering a nd Technology, 
Lahore  (PLD 1988 Lahore 191), Zahira Habibullah H. Sheikh v. State of 
Gujarat  [(2004) 4 SCC 158], State of Behar v. Kalyanpur Cements Ltd  
[(2010)3 SCC 274], , Giles v . California , [554 U.S. 353 (2008)],  
Puttick V. Attorney -General and Anothe r Reported at:   [(1980) Fam. 
1], Loyal Protective Ins. Co. V. Shoemaker  (Oklahoma Supreme Court 
Decisions) [1936 Ok 491, 63 P.2d 960, 178 Okla. 612], Findon v. 
Parker  (11 M. & W. 680), Daly v. Thompson  (10 M. & W. 309) and 
Supreme Court  of New South Wales ’ decision in Richard Shorten v. 
David Hurst Constructions  [(2008) NSWSC 546].  
50.    We have considered the stance taken on behalf of some of 
the appellants that by taking oath under the PCO read with the Oath 
Order, 2007 their appointment under the Cons titution was not 
affected, particularly when they had taken oath under the Constitution 
on its revival on 15 .12.2007. No doubt, earlier they were appointed in 
terms of the Constitution and made oath under the Constitution. But 
on 03.11.2007, they made oath  under the PCO wherein it was , inter 
alia, provided that a ll persons who immediately before the 
commencement of the PCO were in office as Judges of the Supreme ICA 3 /2011  etc. 58 
Court, the Federal Shariat Court or a High Court, shall be governed 
by, and be subject to, the O ath Order, and such further Orders as 
may be passed from time to time whereas the Oath Order, inter 
alia, provided that (a) a person holding office immediately before 
the latter Order as a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Federal 
Shariat Court or a High Cou rt shall cease to hold office with 
immediate effect ; (b) a person who is given, and does make oath 
in the form set out in the Schedule, before the expiration of such 
time from such commencement as the President may determine, or 
within such further time as  may be allowed by the President, shall 
be deemed to continue to hold the office of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court, the Federal Shariat Court or a High Court, as the case may 
be; (c) a Judge of a Superior Court appointed after the 
commencement of the said Or der shall, before entering upon office, 
make oath in the form set out in the Schedule; and (d) the Judges 
of the superior Courts including Chief Justices shall cease to hold office 
on and from 3rd November 2007 and only such Judges shall continue 
to hold o ffice who made oath under PCO No. 1 of 2007 read with Oath 
Order, 2007 . Thus, all the Judges including the appellants, who opted 
to make oath under the said dispensation accepted that they ceased to 
hold office the moment the said instruments were promulga ted, i.e. 
03.11.2007. Admittedly, under PCO, 2007 appointment was not under 
the Constitution. They deviated not only from their appointment s, but 
also from their oath. Mere making of fresh oath under the Constitution 
on its revival would make no difference . Notably, there is a remarked 
distinction between the oath under the Constitution, and the oath 
under the PCO/Oath Order. In the former case, one takes oath to 
perform one’s functions in accordance with the provisions of the 
Constitution, whereas in the l atter, one commits oneself to abide by 
the provisions of the PCO/Oath Order and the orders passed from time 
to time by the person issuing the said instruments. A Constitutional 
document is not an ordinary legislative instrument, rather it is the 
supreme la w of the land, being an accord among the people. It is an 
instrument for running the affairs of the country. It governs the rights 
and obligations of the citizens. Even a child born today is a subject of 
the Constitution . Thus, appellants in presence of oa th made under the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 59 
Constitution accepted oath under PCO, 2007 and in this way violated 
their oath under the Constitution in letter and spirit.   
51.   A bare perusal of the Article 270AA (ibid) shows that the 
actions of 03.11.2007 including the appointments of the appellants 
have not been validated, affirmed or condoned by the Parliament in 
the Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment. The validation or 
condonation of the said actions given in Tikka Iqbal Muhammad Khan’s 
case was undone by this Court in Sindh High  Court Bar Association's  
case wherein not a single act or action of General Pervez Musharraf 
(Retd.) was validated or condoned. Everything done by General Pervez 
Musharraf (Retd.) during the period of the purported Proclamation of 
Emergency from 03.11.2007  to 15 .12.2007 was declared to be 
unconstitutional and illegal. Even the actions pursuant to his actions of 
03.11.2007 were accorded the same treatment. It may be 
advantageous to reproduce hereinbelow Para 176 of the judgment in 
Sindh High Court Bar Associ ation's case, w herein it was held as 
under: - 
“176.  It has already been held that Abdul Hameed Dogar, J, and 
other Judges who made oath, or were appointed, in violation of 
the order dated 3rd November, 2007 passed by a seven - 
member Bench of this Court in  Wajihuddin Ahmed's case were 
not even de facto Judges, inter alia, on the ground that the 
actions taken by General Pervez Musharraf from 3rd November, 
2007 to 15th December, 2007, including the appointments 
and/or oaths of such Judges, were mala fide as t he same were 
taken by him for his own benefit, and did not fall within the 
scope of his authority under the Constitution and the law and in 
any case, they were not taken in the interest of the State, or for 
the welfare of the people.”  
 
52.   Now it is wel l settled that as far as the superior Courts are 
concerned, they have no jurisdiction or authority to legitimize, validate 
any action which is based on extra constitutional steps, may be for any 
reason because under the constitutional dispensation no such 
expediency is permissible nor it should be applied in future. However, 
we have no cavil with the proposition that as far as Parliament is 
concerned, it enjoys jurisdiction to legitimize any such action. In this 
behalf an ordinary legislation i.e. Act of Pa rliament promulgated in 
respect of matters, which have been mentioned in the Federal 
Legislative list, while exercising jurisdiction under Article 70 of the 
Constitution can be amended or repealed by the Act of Assembly of ICA 3 /2011  etc. 60 
that Province. Whereas, by amendi ng the constitutional provisions 
under sub Article 6 of Article 239 of the Constitution, there is no 
limitation whatever on the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) to amend the 
provisions of the Constitution. As far as insertion of any constitutional 
provision is  concerned, it is also deemed to be amending already 
existing provision of the Constitution. After the regime of General Zia -
ul-Haq, Parliament inserted Article 270A, wherein Presidential Orders 
etc. were affirmed. Whereas by means of Seventeenth and Eight eenth 
Constitutional Amendments, Article 270AA and 270C were 
inserted/amended allowing the Judges who made oath under the PCO 
and Oath Order, 1999 read with Oath Order, 2000 to continue in the 
office of the Judges, implication whereof has already been disc ussed 
hereinabove, therefore, avoiding repetition it is held that in pursuance 
of the above said amendments in the Constitution, no protection or 
validation has been granted to the appellants who had made oath 
under the PCO, 2007 read with Oath Order, 2007 . This situation had 
arisen after passing of Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment. As it has 
been pointed out hereinabove that not only the appellants are the 
Judge who presently ha ve no constitutional protection to continue in 
the office but there are so m any others, detail of which has already 
been mentioned, who were removed from the office without being 
proceeded against under Article 209 of the Constitution.  
53.   Syed Ali Zafar, learned counsel contended that 
proceedings for contempt of Court cannot b e issued against the Judges 
of the High Courts in view of the principle that against the Judges writ 
cannot be issued. Reliance in this behalf was made to Malik Feroze 
Khan Noon v. The State  (PLD 1958 SC 333), Jamal Shah v. Election 
Commission  (PLD 1966 SC  1) and Mujeebur Rehman Shami’s case 
(supra). He further submitted that in State of Rajasthan v. Prakash 
Chand  (AIR 1998 SC 1344), it was held that a Judge of the superior 
court had immunity from contempt and the reason was that one needs 
to maintain indep endence of the judiciary. Reference was also made to 
Hyat Mahomed v. Shaikh Mannu  (AIR 1927 Calcutta 290), Ramadhin 
v. Emperor  (AIR 1927 Oudh 59), and Harish Chandra’s case  (supra).  
54.   The facts and circumstances which have been noted 
hereinabove  have to be examined in juxtaposition with the facts and ICA 3 /2011  etc. 61 
circumstances of the judgments relied upon by Sheikh Zameer 
Hussain , Sr. ASC  as well as Syed Ali Zafar , ASC . Detail ed study of 
these judgments indicates that there is no comparison between the 
facts of the se cases and the facts of the instant case. In none of tho se 
judgments any of the Judges intended  to be proceeded against for 
contempt for deviation from the Constitutional Provisions, whereas, in 
the instant case, the appellants instead of showing allegia nce to 
Pakistan and to preserve and protect the Constitution in terms of the 
oath, opted to be obedient to one man rule, essentially without any 
constitutional authority. If such practice is followed or allowed to be 
followed, there will be no end to the C onstitutional deviations by the 
mighty persons; like one who has a gun in his hand and sitting on 
horse’s back, capable of driving the herd of sheep according to his 
command, not considering anyone as human beings or persons having 
rights under the Constit ution. And no sooner the mischievous object of 
self service is achieved by show of force, allegedly the situation would 
be reversed as to the position prevailing prior to such deviation. Then 
it would not be the rule of law but the rule of Martial Law.  
55.   In view of above elaborated discussion notwithstanding the 
observations of the learned 4 -Member Bench of this Court about 
initiating proceedings of contempt of Court against the Judges of the 
Superior Courts, it is added that contempt proceedings have b een 
initiated against the appellants and others in view of the peculiar 
circumstances  essentially for  supporting the unconstitutional actions, 
deeds, omissions and commissions committed by the then Chief of 
Army Staff , prima facie instead of obeying to the  judicial order of the 
Supreme Court dated 3.11.2007  as it has been held in the Sindh High 
Court Bar Association’s case . And as validation, legitimacy has not 
been granted to the unconstitutional acts of 3.11.2007 by the 
Parliament including protection to the appellants to deviate from the 
constitution al appointment and oath, therefore, it is held that from the 
date of passing of Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment dated  
20.4.2009  they are  no more Judges of the High Courts under the 
Constit ution, thus no im munity is available to them either.   
56.   The plea of Sheikh Zamir Hussain, learned Sr. ASC that 
the actions of the appellants be condoned, would tantamount to once ICA 3 /2011  etc. 62 
again reverting back to the doctrine of necessity , which has already 
been buried vide judg ment in Sindh High Court Bar Association’s case  
and if such  concession  is extended to them, other beneficiaries,  who 
are responsible directly or indirectly for violation o f the Constitution, 
shall also be benefited, therefore, the plea is declined.  
57.  The proposition of Mr. Ali Zafar, learned counsel that writ 
cannot be issued by Judges against other Judges need not be 
discussed  in view of the conclusion drawn hereinabove, that 
appellants had already been declared not to be the Judges of the High 
Courts and secondly, there is difference between issuing the writ by 
the Judges against each others and to issue the Contempt proceedings 
for willful flouting or disregarding the order dated 03.11.2007 in 
respect whereof 14 -Member Bench in the case of Sindh High Court Bar 
Association (ibid)  has held as follows: - 
“131. On a perusal of the aforesaid excerpts from the print and 
the electronic media, we are left with no manner of doubt that 
the order dated 3rd November, 2007 passed by a seven - 
member Bench of this Co urt in Wajhuddin Ahmed's case was 
widely covered both in the electronic and print media. The fact 
that the said order came fully in the knowledge of all Judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts by means of the coverage in 
the electronic and print media is i n line with the law laid down in 
the case of Pakistan Lawyers Forum v. Federation of Pakistan 
(PLD 2004 Lah. 130) wherein the following parameters for the 
purpose of taking judicial notice of press reports, quoted with 
approval by this Court in the case of watan Party (supra) 
were laid down:  
  
(i) Where direct evidence is not available;  
  
(ii) Where it is sought to be proved that a person has 
notice of the contents of the newspaper report;        
  
(iii) Where it is sought to be shown that a person is an 
author or otherwise responsible for the statement or 
article published in a newspaper, which is to be used 
against him;  
  
(iv) In cases of defamation; and  
  
(v) If the issue/occurrence is rather old and 
eyewitnesses are either wanting or less reliable.  
  
Even CMA No. 2874 of 2007 was moved by the Federation in 
Wajihuddin Ahmed's case on 6th November, 2007 seeking 
clarification regarding the order dated 3rd November, 2007 
passed by a seven -member Bench of this Court in the said 
case stating, inter alia, therein  that certain news items had 
appeared in the newspapers that after issuance of 
Proclamation of Emergency, PCO No. 1 of 2007 and Oath 
Order, 2007, "some of the former Judges, reportedly seven ICA 3 /2011  etc. 63 
in number including the then Chief Justice" had passed some 
order  restraining, inter alia, the Judges of the Supreme Court 
and High Courts, including Chief Justices from making oath 
under PCO or any other extra -constitutional step. Thus, all 
the Judges knew that a restraint order had been passed by 
the Supreme Court and  also that Abdul Hameed Dogar, J, 
and some other Judges had made oath in violation of the 
said order. In fact, all and sundry in the length and breadth 
of the country knew about it. All such Judges, therefore, 
willfully violated the order dated 3rd Novembe r, 2007 passed 
by a seven - member Bench of this Court in Wajihuddin 
Ahmed's case.”  
 
58.  Now turning towards the plea of the learned counsel for 
the parties relating to non -availability of the detailed reasons, which 
ought to have been followed after the short order dated  02.02.2011  
passed b y the Bench seized with the matter. There is no cavil with the 
proposition  that the detailed reasons have not been issued by the 
Bench, h owever, it is now well settled that in absence of the detailed 
reasons, short orde r has to be considered as an order of the Court . In   
Benazir Bhutto v. President  (PLD 1998 SC 388), it was held that the 
short order, when speaking, i.e. when it contained specific directions, 
had to be acted upon without  waiting for detailed  reason s. A s hort 
order duly recorded, signed and pronounced in court would be fully 
operative. Also refer State v. Asif Adil  (1997 SCMR 209), Ghulam 
Hyder Lakho, High Court of Sindh Karachi  v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2000 SC 179), Dr. Agha Ijaz Ali Pathan  v. State  (2010 SCMR 
322),  Wafi Associates (Pvt.) Limited  v. Farooq Hamid  (2010 SCMR 
1125), Wisram Das v. SGS Pakistan (Pvt.) Ltd.  (2010 SCMR 1234) and 
Basar  v. Zulfiqar Ali  (2010 SCMR 1972). Accordingly, we have not 
been persuaded to agree with learned counsel for  the appellants.  
Although answer to the arguments of the learned counsel is available 
in the judgment s cited above but independently it would also be seen 
that appellants who now have been declared to be no more Judges of 
the High Courts, have been summone d for facing the trial, which could 
not be completed till the final decision of these appeals. Essentially , if 
their appeals succeed no prejudice is likely to be caused to them,  
notwithstanding the fact that the reasons have not been recorded, but 
if their appeals fail and they are arrayed before the Bench of this Court 
for proceedings of contempt of Court, the reasons already recorded 
would cause  prejudice their cases. Under the scheme of the contempt 
of Court Ordinance , 2003 , there are three types of cont empt of Court  ICA 3 /2011  etc. 64 
namely , Civil Contempt, Criminal Contempt and Judicial Contempt . 
Prima  facie to establish any kind of these contempt proceedings, 
factual aspect of the case have to be gone into thoroughly. The law 
makers wisely had not emphasized for definit e conclusion on factual 
aspects before issuing notice of contempt in terms of section 3 of the 
Contempt of Court  Ordinance, 2003 . It is always prima facie  opinion  of 
the Court , which  is to be formulated to ascertain as to whether  or not  
the contempt has be en committed . It is to be noted that to formulate 
a prima facie opinion, the Court is not required to consider all the facts 
in depth rather it has to satisfy itself whether there exist s an arguable 
case. Reference of section 17 which relates to the procee dings may 
not be out of context. According to its sub section (3) if after giving 
the alleged contemner  an opportunity of preliminary hearing the Court 
is prima facie satisfied that the  interest of justice so requires,  it shall 
fix a date f or framing of ch arge in open Court and proceed to decide 
the matter either on that date , or on a subsequent date or dates , on 
the basis of affidavit s or after recording evidence. A perusal of order 
dated  02.02.2011 suggests that hearing of arguments continued for a 
period  spread ing over 4 months  and on the basis of the same the 
order was passed, whereby the appellants  and others were directed to 
face trial because  for a fair trial without any prejudice i.e. pre -
determination  of facts and circumstances  are not called for.   
59.  Dr. Abdul Basit, learned counsel raised question that under 
the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments  the 
Contempt of Court Ordinance 2003 has not been protected. This 
argument is not available to him for the reasons that this Court has 
already held in In re: SUO MOTU CASE NO.1 OF 2007  (PLD 2007 SC 
688) that the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 (No.V of 2003) was 
accorded permanence by means of Article 270AA incorporated in the 
Constitution by the Seventeenth Constitutional Amendment.  It is to be 
further added that in Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment all laws 
including President’s Orders, Acts, Ordinances, etc. made between 
12.10.99 and 31.12.2003 to be in force until altered, repealed or 
amended by the competent authority  including  the Contempt of Court 
Ordinance, 2003 ha ve been protect ed. 
 ICA 3 /2011  etc. 65 
60.   Now turning towards the next point agitated by Dr. Abdul 
Basit, learned Sr. ASC that the order dated 03.11.2007 was not 
communicated to them in accordance with the law and the settled 
procedur e. In this behalf reliance was placed on Sadiq Leghari’s case  
(PLD 2002 SC 1033) . It was also argued that before the passing of 
the order dated 3 .11.2007 , the premises of the Supreme Court were 
taken over by the Army.  Perhaps it was not possible to communi cate 
the order to the appellants and others, thus no proceedings of 
contempt of Court in such situation can continue against them .  
61.  Mr. Raza Kazim submitted that the order of 03.11.2007, of 
which he was totally supportive, was divisible into various p arts. There 
were human dimensions. Implications of the order were that it has 
been applied in various cases, and may be done in future as well. 
There may be many reasons. Classification should be made in the 
ideals. It is important not to classify into one  group as enemies in 
haste, as betrayers, they were not only Judges, but also human beings 
with certain feelings, just as the Sitting Judges had certain feelings, 
connected to their functions that they did not stand by them when 
they ought to have. There w as bitterness. In the moment of glory of 
this court, though they were seven, but 18 million people stood with 
them whereas the appellants were less clear, less strong, the weaker, 
the confused and might have erred. But certainly the said Judges were 
not en emies of the other Judges and did not have different kind of 
conscience.  Whatever this Court decides, they would be bowing before 
it because it was an institution. They were people whom one should 
not cut off and it was burden of the Sitting Judges to sep arate the 
human beings from the institution.  
62.   Mr. Raza Kazim, further argued that for the first time a 
classification was made on the issue of contempt, one violating the 
letter of the law, and the other for violating the spirit of the law. In the 
case of the appellant, the question would arise whether he violated the 
letter or spirit of the order or both?  As far as the question of violation 
of the letter of the order was concerned, it was a question of fact, but 
the violation of the spirit was a mix ed question of law and fact. There 
was no evidence, not a single witness examined. There were only 
inferences. An accuser had to prove the accusation and not the ICA 3 /2011  etc. 66 
accused. It is also to be established whether in fact there has been 
violation and appellant v iolated the order in letter and spirit.  
63.  Dr. Khalid Ranjha, Sr. ASC further submitted that the 
appellant  had shown allegiance to the order s passed by this Court and 
he would have the first to abide by the order if it was brought to his 
notice as per p roper procedure. Before holding appellants guilty or 
issuing notices, the Courts was required to apprise itself whether the 
order dated  03.11.2007 was in fact conveyed to the Chief Justice . It 
was a first of its kind in history, therefore, it ought to be h andled with 
care for the interest of future generations even though it was said 
selfishly.  
64.  We have considered above respective pleas of the learned 
counsel. In our opinion these aspects of the case along with others are 
require d to be decided on the basis of evidence, which will be 
produced before the Bench seized with the contempt cases, therefore, 
need not be discussed at this stage, lest it may cause prejudice to 
either of the party.   
   
65.   As a result of above discussion appeals are disposed of  as 
follows: - 
(1) The appellants and others constitutionally are not holder s 
of the office  as Judges of the High Courts in absence of 
validation, rectification  and legitimization  of 
unconstitutional act s, deeds, omissions and commissions 
of the then Chief of Army Staff, General Pervez Musharraf 
(Retd.) whereby he imposed the martial law in the name of 
Emergency on 3.11.2007,  which continued upto 
15.12.2007 and the appellants because of making oath 
under PCO, 2007 read with Oath Order, 2007 ceased to 
hold th e office because the PCO and the Oath Order, 2007 
have been declared unconstitutional in Sindh High Court 
Bar Association’s case  and by legislative interference in 
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Constitutional Amendments no 
validation has been provided to such unconstitutional 
actions, omissions and commission s.  
(2) The appellants, however , shall cease to hold office of the 
Judges of the High Court w.e.f. the date of passing of ICA 3 /2011  etc. 67 
Eighteenth Constitutional Amendment. The Secretary Law, 
Government of Pakistan is he reby directed to issue 
necessary notifications that they ceased to hold the office 
w.e.f. the said date.  
(3) As far as appellants and others are concerned, they shall 
be entitled for the service and pensionary benefits upto 
20.4.2010  when  Eighteenth Consti tutional Amendment  
was passed. However, if ultimately they are found to be 
guilty for the contempt of court by this Court , their case s 
for affecting the recovery of pensiona ry benefits in future 
shall be dealt with accordingly.  
(4) As appellants and others  are not Judges  of the High 
Courts , therefore, they cannot claim immunity  for holding 
their trial for contempt of Court under Article 204 of the 
Constitution read with relevant laws.   
 
66.  Subject to above observa tions impugned judgment dated 
2.2.2011 i s maintained and the cases for contempt of Court against 
the appellants shall be placed before respective Bench for further 
proceedings.  
 
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
 
Javed Iqbal, J.       Mian Shakirullah Jan, J.  
 
 
Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, J.           S armad Jalal Osmany,J.  
 
   Amir Hani Muslim, J.  
 
Announced in open Court at Islamabad,  
On 18th May, 2011.  
 
Chief Justice  
Approved For Reporting  