IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN   
(Original  Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, HCJ  
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam   
Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel   
 
 
SUO MOTO CASE NO.1 OF 2020   
[SUO MOTO action regarding 
combating the pandemic of Coron a 
Virus (COVID -19)] 
 
  AND 
C.M.Appeal.167/2020 IN C.M.A.NILL/2020 IN S.M.C.1/2020  
C.M.Appeal.6/2021 IN C.M.A.NILL/2021 IN S.M.C.1/2020  
[Application for impleadment as party ] 
 
Samira Mahamadi  vs.  Federation of Pakistan & others .  
 
 
  
IN ATTENDANCE  
  
For the Federation:  Mr. Sohail Mehmood, Addl. AGP  
Mr. Abdul Samad, SO Food Security  
  
For NDMA:  
 Lt. Gen. Akhtar Nawaz, Chairman NDMA  
Mr. Adrees Mehsood, Member, NDMA  
  
For M/o NHSR&C  
 Mr. Aamir Ashraf Khawaja, Secretary  
Health  
Rana Safdar, DG Health  
Mr. Ghulam Mustafa  Jakhrani,  Dy. Dir. 
(Legal) 
  
For ICT:  
 Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi, A dvocate 
General, Islamabad  
Mr. Babar Sahib Din, Addl. DC Islamabad  
  
For PIAC:  Air Marshal Arshad Malik, CEO  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
  
For DRAP:  Dr. Asim Rau f, CEO  
Dr. Fakhar Uddin Aam ir, Director,  MDMC  
Dr. Ghazenfar Ali, Addl. Dir.  
Mr. Shoaib Ali Khan, AD Legal Affairs  
  
For Govt. of Punjab :  
 Mr. Ahmed Awais , Advocate General  
(via video link)  
Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl. A.G. Punjab  
Ms. Imrana Baloch, AOR  
  
For Govt. of Sindh :  Mr. Sibtain Mehmood , Addl.  AG  Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 2
 Mr. Tariq Ali Khan, Secretary Energy  
Mr. Kazim Hussain Jatoi, Sec y. Health  
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi, Focal Person to 
Chief Secretary Sindh  
(all via video link from Karachi Branch ) 
  
For Govt. of KPK  Mr. Shumail Butt, AG KPK  
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Addl. AG,  
Mr. Younis Rahim, Secretary Relief & 
Rehabilitation  
Mr. Ikramullah, Home Secretary  
Syed Imtiaz Hussain, Secretary Health  
  
For Govt. of Balochistan  Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir, Advocate 
General  
(via video link from Quetta Branch)  
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl. A.G.  
Mr. Noor ul Haq Baloch, Secretary Health  
  
For Govt. of GB :  Nemo 
  
For CAA:  Mr. Khaqan Murtaza, DG  
Mr. Nadir Shafi Dar, DDG Regulatory  
Malik Mazhar, DHR  
Ms. Nasira Jabeen, Senior Legal Officer  
Ms. Amna Warsi, Legal Consultant  
Rana M. Bilal Anwar, Law Officer  
 Riffat Ullah, Director Flight Standards  
  
For Air Blue  Mr. M. Ikhlaw Awan, ASC/LA  
  
For Serene Air  Mr. Muhammad Safdar Khan, CEO  
  
For the Appellant  (s) 
(in C.M.Appeal 
No.16 7/2020)  In person.  
  
For the Appellant (s)  
(in C.M.Appeal 
No.06/2021)  In person.  
  
Date of Hearing:  05.05.2021 
   O R D E R  
GULZAR AHMED, CJ. —  
  C.M.A.6875/202 0: The Drug Regulatory Authority of 
Pakistan ( DRAP ) has filed its report by way of this app lication . A 
Notification dated 30.04.2021 has also been filed in Court today, showing 
that some exemptions have been granted from operation of the Rules for Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 3
importing of medical devices as mentioned therein. The CEO , DRAP 
informs the Court that despite iss uance of the said Notification , the 
import ers will have to obtain license  to import medical device mentioned 
in the said Notification .  
2.  As regard the availability of Oxygen , it is stated  that Pakistan 
Steel Mills Karachi has sufficient capacity of prod ucing Oxygen to be 
used for patients needing the same . The learned Additional Attorney 
General for Pakistan informs that the Government is working on such 
aspect of the matter and approximately , an amount of Rs.1 Billion is 
required to be expended to make operational the Oxygen Plant of the 
Pakistan Steel Mills. He further informs that the Government is 
examining the feasibility of the said Plant and will shortly take ste ps to 
make it operational in order to ensure smooth supply of the Oxygen to 
hospitals a nd there should be no  shortage,  obstruction or impediment in 
the supply  of Oxygen . He also informs that the Government has already 
constituted a Committee of specialized people who are considering these 
aspects of the matter.  
3.  As there is spike of COVI D-19 in the country, the CEO , 
DRAP states that there is no shortage of any medical device or medicine 
used for treatment of COVID -19 patients and sufficient stock of the 
necessary me dicines is available to meet the present demand of the 
hospitals and other  medical institutions where treatment of COVID -19 
patients is being carried out . The CEO , DRAP further informs that 
Actemra injections are being imported from Japan and almost two weeks’ 
stock of such injections is available and before exhausting this stoc k, 
new supply of Actemra will arrive in Pakistan , so there will be no 
shortage of this injection  too in Pakistan. The CEO , DRAP is required to 
submit further report regarding development of COVID -19 activities in Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 4
the country and availability of all necessa ry medical devices, medicines , 
etc., necessary for the treatment of patients a ffected with COVID -19. 
Such report shall be made available before the ne xt date of hearing.  
4.  Learned Advocate General Khyber Pakhtunkhwa informs 
that the price of Oxygen is not being regulated and particularly , in the 
Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa , exorbitant prices of Oxygen cylinder s 
are being charged . The CEO , DRAP states that the very production of 
Oxygen and its supply is handled by the Ministry of Industries & 
Productio n and it is the Secretary of Ministry concerned who is required 
to regulate the prices of Oxygen . Accordingly, the Secretary of Ministry of 
Industries & Production shall ensure that proper price mechanism of 
Oxygen gas and Oxygen cylinder  shall be announc ed and notified  within 
a period of one week and concise statement in this regard be also filed 
within a period of two weeks.  
CMA 5057/2020  
5.  This report has been filed by the National Disaster 
Management Authority ( NDMA ), which apparently is not satisfa ctory as 
the issue regarding Al -Hafeez Crystoplast (Pvt.) Ltd. is not clear and at 
the first place , from the papers filed with the report, it transpires that in 
purported importing of the equipment/ machinery , the Embassy of 
Pakistan at Beijing has been inv olved and we do not see any reason as to 
how Embassy  of Pakistan  at Beijing can be a party in importing the 
equipment/machinery for a private company. The documents further 
show that even the Aeroplan e was chartered and in this regard NDMA 
and Embassy of Pakistan at Beijing are also involved , in that, the 
Aeroplane owner has been paid the charges in cash to the tune of 
Rs.10,725,000/ - (Ten Million Seven Hundred Twenty Five Thousand 
only), and it is not mentioned that in what currency the said amount has Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 5
been paid, the receipt is attached in the noted report as Annexure G/8. 
Further, we have noted that the payment of price of the 
equipment/machinery imported from China has also been paid in cash 
and the same has been acknowledged by some official s (attached w ith the 
report as Annexure E -3 and E -4). The terms of payment of purported 
Purchase Contract (attached with the report as Annexure E /1 & E -2) 
shows that 100% advance payment T/T or cash in Pakistan. It is not 
shown that who has paid and who has received th e payment. Further we 
noted that custom duties and taxes etc. have also been paid in cash. It 
appears that such report of NDMA is vague, which needs to be further 
examined. The Chairman , NDMA appear personally on the next date of 
hearing and inform the Cou rt about the status of the above transaction 
and a detailed report be filed in this regard before the next date of 
hearing.  
6.  The Chairman , NDMA , present in Court , states that he has 
recently been appointed as Chairman and he intends to visit the 
quaran tine centers  and hospitals , including the quarantine centre Haji 
Camp Islamabad, and submit a report about the  latest position regarding 
the steps taken by the NDMA in dealing with pandemic of COVID -19. 
Such report be made available before the ne xt date of  hearing.  
CMA 6713/2020  
7.  Pakistan International Airline Corporation ( PIAC) has filed 
this report showing action taken against the delinquent officials of the 
PIAC, including the list of pilots, who have been dismissed on account of 
holding fake academic  documents and list of cases pending in Courts , 
where stay orders have been obtained. The Chairman , PIAC is present in 
Court and states that to have these cases decided by the respective 
Courts, he has approached the office of the Attorney General for Paki stan Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 6
to assist PIAC in having all these cases, filed by the employees in 
different Courts, decided , particularly in which injunctive orders are 
operating and the same be vacated. The report filed is taken on record. 
Let the Chairman , PIAC take  necessary  steps for removing surplus and 
non-required staff to ensure that the airline is brought to a level to make 
it a viable commercial airline.  
CMA 6729/2020  
 
8.  This report has been filed by the Director General , Civil 
Aviation Authority (the Authority ) in whi ch comprehensive details have 
been given regarding the employees’ misconduct s and crimes  while 
performing their duties in the Authority. The prosecution against such 
employees have already commenced and it is stated by the learned 
counsel that Challans  have been filed in their respective Trial Courts. It 
is also stated that witnesses  named in the  Challan s shall be produced 
and the Authority shall ensure that all these cases are decided by the 
respective Courts expeditiously. We may note that normally the criminal 
cases  are not seriously prosec uted by the Government departments ; 
therefore, mostly the delinquent employees get acquitted for the reason 
that no effective evidence is brought on record by the department 
concerned. Learned counsel for the Authority contends that they shall 
vigorously pursue all these matters and shall ensure production of  best 
possible and quality evidence before the concerned Courts. The learned 
counsel further gives details of the action taken by the Authority on 
departmental side against the officials, including the pilots, who have 
obtained fake licenses , and informed about the details of the cases in 
which injunctive orders have been passed. In this regard, the DG of the 
Authority may approach the office of the Attorney General f or Pakistan to 
ensure that the cases before the Courts, particularly where injunctive Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 7
orders have been passed, shall be properly pursued and dealt with to  
bring them  at a logical conclusion. Further report shall be submitted by 
the DG before the ne xt date of hearing.  
CMA 5648//2020  
9.  This report has been filed by the Secretary Ministry of 
Ministry of National Health Services, Regulations and Coordination . 
Learned Additional Attorney General requests for some time to file the 
latest report  giving up to dat e information. Needful be done before the 
next date of hearing.  
CMA 4789//2020  
10.  This report has been filed by the Deputy Military Estates 
Officers, H eadquarter Military Lands and Cantonment , Ministry of 
Defence, in which it is stated that the disinfect ion in the Cantonment 
areas is being conducted on regular basis, fines are being imposed on 
violation of COVID -19 SOPs, i.e., masks, gloves, hand sanitizer and anti -
bacterial soaps, and payment of salaries and other benefits to the 
sanitary staff, the medi cal and paramedical sta ff are being regularly  
made . As per the report, all essential PPEs have been provided to the 
doctors and paramedic staff of the hospitals and dispensaries under the 
ML & C Department. Such report is taken on record.  
CMA on behalf of  Government of Punjab.  
11.  Learned Additional Advocate General Punjab states that 
latest report has been pre pared but could not be filed, therefore, requests 
for time to file the same. Let the same be filed in office.  
CMA 4688/2020  
12.  This report has b een filed on behalf of Government of Sindh, 
however, such report in no manner is found by us to be satisfactory. 
Huge amount has been shown to have been allocated for education, Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 8
health, water supply and sanitation , infrastructure  development but we 
note th at these funds apparently are not applied in these sectors. We 
also note that the Government of Sindh has spent an enormous and 
staggering amount of US $2600 Million on Sindh Education Sector 
Reforms  Project  (SERP -II) Project  during  the period 2013 -2017.  Despite 
spending such huge amount in the education sector in the province of 
Sindh, apparently, nothing has changed in the standards of education in 
the Province, as the literacy rate in the Provin ce continues to be at 
dismal state .  
13.  We also noted that  the Advocate General Sindh has not 
appeared personally today in such an important case relating to the 
Government of Sindh. Learned Additional Advocate General is not aware 
of the reason for non -appearance of the Advocate General. Let a written 
reply be f iled by the Advocate General for perusal of the Court. Such 
reply be submitted within a period of 15 days.  
CMA 5114/202 1 
14.  This report has been filed by the Secretary Health 
Department, Secretary Home Department & Secretary Relief and 
Rehabilitation Dep artment, Peshawar, giving details regarding Pandemic 
of COVID -19 in the Province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the measures 
they have adopted to address the same. It is stated by the learned 
Advocate General Khyber Pakhtunkhwa that all efforts are being made b y 
the Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa for availability of beds, medical 
devices and medicines and as per his statement, there is no shortage of 
any of the medical equipment and medicines required for the treatment 
of COVID -19  patients. Learned Advocate G eneral informs that COVID -19 
Pandemic situation ha d risen up  to 40% positive rat e of total test 
conducted, but now the situation is under control as the COVID -19 Suo Moto Case No.1 of 2020   
 9
positive rate ha ve dropped considerably. Be that as it may, the 
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkh wa is required to remain attentive and 
vigilant to the issue. In this regard, further report be filed before the next 
date of hearing.  
CMA on behalf of Government of Balochistan.  
15.  Learned Advocate General Balochistan states that report has 
been prepar ed but it is not in detail, therefore, sometime  is requested to 
submit a detailed report. Let the same be filed before the next date of 
hearing.  
16.  The matter be listed for hearing after one month.  
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
 
 
ISLAMABAD  
5th May, 2021  
Not approved for reporting.  
Mudassar /
 Judge  
 