IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, CJ  
   Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
   Mr. Justice Sardar Tariq Masood  
   Mr. Justice Mazhar Alam Khan Miankhel  
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
  
   
Suo Moto Case No. 01 of  2020  
(SUO MOTO ACTION REGARDING COMBATING THE PANDEMIC OF CORONA VIRUS (COVID -19) 
 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood, DAG  
Dr. Tanveer Qureshi,  
Secretary M/o National Health  
Asif Suhail, Director (Lit)  
(All from M/o National Health)  
 
Syed Mansoor H. Gardezi, Dir. Legal 
Advisor, Pakistan Bait -ul-Mal.  
Lt. Gen. Muhammad Afzal,  
Chairman, NDMA.  
   
For ICT  : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi,  
A.G., Islamabad  
Azhar Hus sain Shah, DSP Legal.  
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, Acting A.G., Punjab  
Cap (R) M. Usman, Secy. Primary &  
Secondary Health Deptt. Punjab.  
(both via video link from Lahore)  
Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl. A.G. Punjab  
M. Nabeel Ahmed Awan,  
Secy. Special ized, Health Care &  
Medical Education Deptt.  
Saifullah Gondal,  
Dy. Secretary, Zakat & Usher.  
Muhammad Aslam Ramay, 
Administrator Zakat & Usher.  
Alamgir Ahmed Khan,  
(all via video link from Lahore)  
 
   
For Govt. of Sindh  
 : Mr. Salman Talibudin, A.G, S indh 
Muhammad Usman Chachar,  
Addl. Chief Secy. Home.  
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi,  
(Focal Person to Chief Secy. Sindh)  
Zahid Abbasi, Secy. Health  Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 2
Qazi Shahid Pervez, SMBR  
Iftikhar Shalwani, Commissioner Kci.  
Haroon Ahmed Khan  
Addl. Chief Secretary, Zakat & Us hr 
(All via Video link from Karachi Branch)  
  
   
For Govt. of KPK  
 : Mr. Shumail Butt, A.G. KP  
Mr. Atif Ali Khan, Addl. AG.  
Syed Imtaiz Hussain Shah,  
Secy. Health, KP  
M. Abid Majeed,  
Secy. Relief Rehabilitation, KP  
Dr. Maqsood Ali, Chief Executive, 
HCC. 
Muhammad Idrees Marwat, Secretary 
Social Welfare Department  
Dr. Khalid Masood, Hospital Director 
(LRH).  
Khyal Muhammad Mohmand, Legal 
Officer (LRH)  
(All via Video link from Peshawar Branch)  
   
For Govt. of 
Balochistan  : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir,  
A.G, Balochistan.  
Baloch Aziz, Secy. Religious Affairs.  
(Via Video link from Quetta Branch)  
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl.A.G.  
Mr. M. Fareed Dogar,  
AAG Balochistan. (At Islamabad)  
   
For Govt. of GB  : Mr. Muhammad Iqbal, AG, G.B.  
  Syed Iqbal Hashmi, ASC for P MA. 
 
In C.M.A. 
No.3099/2020   Samuel Payara,  
Chairman, Implementation of Minority  
Rights Forum  
 
   
Date of Hearing  : 19.05.2020.  
   
   
 
 
ORDER  
 
  Gulzar Ahmed, CJ.-  We have heard the learned  Attorney 
General for Pakistan, Lieutenant General Muhammad Afzal, Chairman, 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)  and also the Advocate 
General , Sindh.  Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 3
2.  At the very outset , learned Attorney General for Pakistan has 
emphatically  stated about the presence of Coronavirus (Covid -19) in 
Pakistan and has con tended that this virus has spread in the Country , 
infecting considerable portion of its population, which  is the matter of 
grave concern for the Government of Pakistan. He has further contended 
that worst is yet to come and the Government of Pakistan is expecting 
severe spike in spreading of this virus in the month of June , 2020 . He 
has further  contended that the resources available  with the Government 
of Pakistan are not enough to meet the emerging scenario  and there is 
every likelihood  that the health sec tor will be overwhelmed . He has 
explained that Pakistan ’s economy was already facing challenges when 
the incumbent  Government took charge of the Country, in that , not much 
money was available  in the coffers and while the Government was making 
effort to rec over from the econom ic crises, this Coronavirus (Covid -19) 
emerged and all resources of the Government meant for health sector , 
were exhausted in dealing with this virus and even the resources , meant 
for other development activities , were also utilized to meet the challenge s 
emerging from this virus. He has contended that Government has taken 
all necessary steps to secure the life of the people of Pakistan . He has , 
however, contended that the emerging challenges owing to Coronavirus 
(Covid -19) are real.   
3.  We are fully cognizant  that the menace of Coronavirus (Covid -
19) is very much present in Pakistan and it has also caused large number 
of fatalities and considerable number of people  have been infected  and 
their numbers are increasing day-by-day. It is ob vious that this 
Coronavirus (Covid -19) has come as an additional burden on the 
Government of Pakistan and the manner in which this virus has started 
spreading in Pakistan, has set the alarm bell  ringing . This virus being Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 4
new, there w as no readiness of the Government to deal with the same , 
nor the necessary medical equipments were available to face the growing 
number of infected cases. Yes, the Government of Pakistan did t ake 
immediate steps to face this virus and mitigate its effect s on the people of 
Pakist an, and in this regard , colossal  amount of money was diverted and 
used. We admit that Pakistan has a struggling economy and Coronavirus 
(Covid -19) made it more stagger ing. However, we not e that the people of 
Pakistan ha ve a fundamental right , namely, right  to life , under which 
Government of Pakistan is required to provide  to the people  of Pakistan 
safe and healthy living conditions.  
4.  A request has been made by the learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan so also the learned Advocate General, Sindh that a t eam of 
doctors may be constituted and its opinion sought on the Coronavirus 
(Covid -19). For the time being, this Court does not consider it essential to 
undertake this exercise, for that, this matter is already in the hands of 
the Government functionaries and if necessary , they can obtain the 
opinion from the doctors and to conduct themselves in accordance with 
the Constitution and the law.  
5.  We have heard the Chairman, NDMA , who has given elaborate 
briefing about the activities of NDMA and use of allocat ed funds by it. He 
has stated before us that Coronavirus (Covid -19), being a new virus , 
requir ed special gears, tools and equipments for protection, treatment 
and control  of the same , and such gears, tools and equipments being not 
readily available in the scale , as were required to deal with the 
Coronavirus (Covid -19), the Government of Pakistan allocated funds to 
immediately procure the  same . Such  gears, tools and equipments were 
procured from abroad and distributed harmoniously among all regions of 
Pakist an. He has further stated that the gears, tools and equipments  Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 5
meant for facing and treating of this virus , were not being manufactured 
in Pakistan but now its manufacturing has started and no more imports 
are being  made, rather all demands are being satisfied from local 
productions. About the ventilators, he has stated that orders have been 
placed for importing  of 1187 Ventilators from abroad , out of which 300 
have been received and distributed among all the four Provinces, ICT and 
G.B. As soon as the rema ining are received , they will also be distributed 
accordingly. He has further stated  that the very manufacturing of 
Ventilators in Pakistan has been started and soon they will be available 
in the market. He stated that the Ventilators manufactured in Pakis tan 
shall be of international standard s and capable of being exported abroad. 
Thus, Pakistan will be self -sufficient in all manners to face the 
Coronavirus (Covid -19). He has further stated that although initially the 
Pakistan Army through its company, DES TO has made investment in 
manufacturing of Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) and testing kits 
but the private sector is also free to manufactur e PPEs, testing kits,  
Ventilators and in this respect there is no impediment.  
6.  Having said about the meetin g of challenges of Coronavirus 
(Covid -19), the Chairman, NDMA further stated that yet another big 
challenge is serious ly emerging in Pakistan that of Locust  attack to its 
agriculture field s and the NDMA has activated its elf to deal with and 
overcome this c hallenge . In this regard , not only it has imported from 
abroad , a special aero-plane for spraying the pesticides  but local 
manufacturing of the components, which are required for use in the 
aeroplanes , has also started, to ultimately manufacture the aeropl anes 
locally. He has stated that all arrangements have been made to fight the 
Locust, which has already  arrived  in the region , practically , all over 
Pakistan and more lethal swarms of  Locust is near to arrive . The NDMA Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 6
is prepar ed to immediate ly get rid of  it and save the agricultural fields of 
the Country.  
7.  We are sanguine that the Chairman, NDMA will be able to 
cope with both the menace s, i.e., Coronavirus (Covid -19) and Locust 
attack. We wish him success in these endeavours.  
8.  The Government of Pa kistan, as stated by the learned 
Attorney General, is doing everything to mitigate  the miseries of the 
people though it is short of funds and for that purpose, seeking aid from 
abroad. Let a further report in this regard be submitted by the NDMA so 
also th e National Health Services and Research Center (NHSRC). Further 
the report  be also submitted by the Federal Government as well as by the 
Provincial Governments, ICT and G.B.  
9.  We have read Clauses (1) and (4) of Article 149 of the 
Constitution of the Is lamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 , which are as 
follows :-  
   “149. Directions to Provinces in certain cases.  
 
(1)  The executive authority of every Province shall be so 
exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the 
executive authority of the Federation, and the executive 
authority of the Federation shall extend to the giving of such 
directions to a Province as may appear to the Federal 
Government to be necessary for that purpose . 
(2) ……………………………  
(3) …………………………..  
(4)  The executive authority of  the Federation shall also 
extend to the giving of directions to a Province as to the 
manner in which the executive authority thereof is to be 
exercised for the purpose of preventing any grave menace to 
the peace or tranquility or economic life of Pakistan  or any 
part thereof.”  
 
 Reading of the above provisions of the Constitution , clearly show 
that the Executive Authority of all the Provinces are mandatorily required 
to be exercised  so as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of the 
Executive Authority o f the Federation and the Executive Authority of the Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 7
Federation shall extend to giving of such directions to Provinces , as may 
appear to the Federal Government  to be necessary and further  that the 
Executive Authority of the Federation shall also extend to g iving of 
directions to Provinces as to the manner in which the Executive Authority 
of the Provinces is to be exercised for the purpose of preventing any grave 
menace to the p eace or tranquility or economic life of Pakistan or any 
part thereof. Obviously , the Coronavirus (Covid -19) is a grave menace to 
the p eace, tranquility  and economic life of Pakistan , and thus, the 
Executive Authority of the Federation shall stand extended to giving  of 
the direction s to the Provinces to prevent the menace.  
10.  At this stage, Mr. Samuel Payara, Chairman, Implementation 
of Minority Rights Forum, has appeared and referred to C.M.A No.  3099 
of 2020 in which it is alleged that sanitary staff in the Province of Sindh, 
particularly of Hyderabad Development Authority (H.D.A.)  have not been 
provided protective gears, nor have they been paid their salaries for about 
nine months and sanitary staff employed by the contractors are in worst 
condition. He further states that pension to the retired sanitary staff is 
not being paid. Simi lar is said about the Governments of Punjab, KP, 
I.C.T. and G.B.  
11.  Learned Attorney General and the learned Advocates General 
of all the four Provinces, I.C.T. so also G.B. have given assurance that 
grievance of the sanitary staff will be specifically and seriously redressed 
by the relevant Government officials , in that, all sort of protective gears 
shall be provided to them within a week ’s time positively. Further, 
salaries of all the sanitary staff shall be paid by all the 
Governments /Local Government s including, HDA. The pension of the 
sanitary staff shall also be paid.  The salaries and pensions shall be 
released and paid in full within two days. The conditions of sanitary staff, Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020  
 8
employed by the contractors, shall also be examined . The sanitary, bein g 
a core work of the Government, we fail to understand as to how this work 
is being done by awarding contracts. Apparently, such contracts are mere 
sham  contracts and this Court on the next date of hearing will examine 
this issue.  
12.    All Government de partments are directed to file before the 
Court copies of the contracts with the contractors employing sanitary  
employees. All their dues shall also be paid by the contractors positively 
within two days and if not done so by the contractors, the same be do ne 
by the respective governments . Let a compliance report in this regard be 
also submitted to the Court. Adjourned to 08.06.2020.   
 
 
 
 
    Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 
 
Judge    Judge  
 
 
 
Judge    Judge  
 
Islamabad, the  
19th May, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Ghulam  Raza /- 