IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Manzoor Ahmad Malik  
Mr. Justice Syed Mansoor Ali Shah  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
Criminal Appeal No. 37-L of 2016  
(On appeal from the judgment dated  
07.10.2013 pass ed by the Lahore High 
Court, Lahore in Criminal Appeal No.1511 
of 2009 ). 
 
Muhammad Pervaiz  …Appellant(s)  
VERSUS  
The State, etc.  …Respondent(s)  
  
For the Appellant(s)  : Mr. Nawab Ali Mayo , ASC  
   
For the Respondent   : Mr. Mehmud ul Islam , AoR 
(with caveat) 
 
For the Complainant  : Nemo  
   
For the State  : Mr. Mazhar Sher Awan, 
Additional Prosecutor General  
   
Date of Hearing  : 06.05.2019  
 
JUDGMENT  
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J.-  Muhammad 
Pervaiz, appellant i s in receipt of a guilty verdict; he was indicted 
for committing qatl-e-amd of Kausar Bibi , no other than his better 
half; it is affirmed by the learned High Court  vide impugned 
judgment dated 7.10.2013 vires whereof are being challenged 
through leave of the Court.  
2.   Prosecution case is struct ured on the statement of 
deceased’s brother, Muhammad Arshad, PW ; according to him, the 
marriage was on the rocks as the bride failed to bring dowry to the 
expectation of her in laws . Upon a message by the deceased, 
Muhammad Arshad, PW  along with Mehmood, PW visited the 
former to take her back , however , upon threats by the appellant 
they preferred to stay overnight when in midst thereof  they were 
attracted by the hue and cry to see the deceased being 
strangulated by the appellant with the assistance of Khal id co -Criminal Appeal No.37 -L of 2016 .       2 
 
accused; they attempted to rescue the deceased without success . 
Upon indictment , the accused claimed trial  to confront prosecution   
evidenc e; they blamed  dacoits to have murdered the deceased 
during the fateful night . While acquitting the c o-accused , the 
learned trial Judge convicted the appellant under clause (b) of 
Section 302 of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced him to 
death with a direction to pay Rs.100,000/ - as compensation or to 
undergo six month S.I. in the event of default, a view affir med by 
the learned High Court albeit with alteration of death penalty i nto 
imprisonment for life with benefit of Section 382 -B of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure.  
3.   Learned counsel for the appellant contends that  the 
appellant could not have been convict ed merely upon his failure to 
satisfactorily explain  as to what befell upon his life  during the 
fateful night. He adds that presence of witnesses is extremely 
doubtful  and even otherwise cannot sustain the charge after they 
had been disbelieved qua identic ally placed co -accused; the bottom 
line is that  it would be unsafe to maintain conviction . Contrarily, 
the learned Law Officer vehemently  defends appellant’s conviction 
on the ground that plea advanced by him being preposterous was 
rightly rejected which i n retrospect established his presence at the 
spot, thus there was no space to entertain any hypothesis of his 
innocence.   
4.  Homicidal death is not in dispute ; appellant’s plea that 
dacoits intruded the household  and strangulate the deceased has 
not found  favour with the Courts below . The appellant has also not 
denied his presence, however these factors by themselves  cannot 
hypothesize presumption of appellant’s guilt  in the absence of 
positive proof . Silence or implausible explanation cannot equate  
with f ailure  within the contemplation of Article 121 of Qanoon -e-
Shahadat Order , 1984 , thus does not absolve the prosecution to 
drive home the charge  by itself on the strength of positive proof . It 
would be grievously unsafe to convict suspect s on presumptions  or 
upon failure to establish their innocence.  Possibilities are infinite  
and do not necessarily include the guilt alone.  Criminal Appeal No.37 -L of 2016 .       3 
 
  A criminal case is to be essentially decided on the basis of 
evidence adduced by the prosecution .  Once the  witnesses  had 
visited the  deceased to take her back , apparently there was no 
occasion for them to hold in abeyance  the purpose of their d etour 
and in case they were present  and in the next room , there was no 
compulsion for the appellant to do away with the deceased  at the 
risk of retaliation or a certain prosecution . The script is far from 
being plausible  and it is so viewed by the learned High Court itself 
in the following words “Presence of PWs may be suspicious at the 
time of occurrence  . . . . ” . It is astonishing that despite above 
observation, the High Court preferred to maintain the conviction.  
Suspicions are after all suspicions and cannot substitute the legal 
proof  nor a suspect can be condemned on the basis of moral 
satisfaction in the absence of evidentiary certainty. Yet  another 
circumstance to cast away the conviction is rejection of 
prosecution evidence  qua Khalid co -accused . Role assigned to the 
acquitted co -accused is inexorably intertwined with appellant’s 
alleged participation in the crime  and thus even strongest 
corroboration, otherwise hopelessly lacking can not rescue the 
charge . It would be unsafe to maintain the conviction , therefore by 
extending the benefit of doubt , Criminal Appeal No.37 -L/2016 is 
allowed, impugned judgment is set aside. The appellant shall be 
released forthwith, if not required in any other case.  
  
     
 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
 
Lahore , the 
06th of May, 2019  
Ghulam Raza /* JUDGE  
 
 
 
 
 