IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa , CJ 
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Justice Naeem Akhtar Afghan  
 
Civil Petition No.  304/22 and CMA No . 891 /2022  
(Against the order dated 11.01.2022 of the Islamabad High 
Court, Islamabad passed in FAO No. 111/2021)  
 
The Monal Group of Companies, Islamabad.   … Petitioner  
     Versus  
Capital Development Authority through its  
Chairman and others.       … Respondent s 
 
AND  
 
Civil Petition No. 305 of 2022 and CMA No. 892 of  2022  
 
The Monal Group of Companies, Islamabad.   … Petitioner  
     Versus  
Capital Development Authority through its  
Chairman and others.       … Respondent s 
 
AND 
 
Civil Misc. Application Nos. 887 and 888/22 in CP NIL/22  
 
Federation of Pakistan though Secretary, M/o  
Defence, Govt. of Pakistan and others.    … Applicants  
     Versus  
M/s The Monal Group of Companies,  
Islamabad and others.       … Respondent s 
 
AND 
 
Constitution Petition No. 3 of 2024  
 
Islamabad Wildlife Management Board through  
its Chairpers on, Islamabad.      … Petitioner s 
     Versus  
Capital Development Authority through its  
Chairman and others.       … Respondent s 
 
For the Petitioner s:  Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC    
     (in CP.304/22)  
      
     Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC  
     a/w Mr. Luqman Ali Afzal, owner of the  
     petitioner  Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 2
(in CP.30 5/22) 
       
Mr. Umar Ijaz Gilani, ASC  
     (in Const.P.3/24)     
     
For CDA:     Hafiz  Arfat Ahmed Ch., ASC  
     Mr. Muhammad Ali Randhawa, Chairman  
     CDA 
     Mr. Naeem Dar, DG Law     
     Mr. Irfan Azeem, Dy . DG (Environment ) 
     Mr. Kamran, Director, Law  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
For MCI:     Mrs. Misbah Gulnar Sharif, ASC  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR   
  
For M/o Defence:    Malik Javed Iqbal Wa ins, Addl. AG  
     Brig. (R), Falak Naz, Legal Advisor  
     Col. Faran Tariq, Dy. Director Military Forms  
     Lt. Col. Irfan  Asghar , Asstt. Director (legal)  
     Zafar Mehmood, MEO  
 
For WWF Pakistan:   Mr. Muhammad Naqi Khan, DG/CEO  
     (via video link from Lahore)  
 
For Survey of Pakistan:   Mr. Muhammad Aqib, Dy. Director  
 
On Court’s Notice:    Mr. Nabeel Rehman, ASC  
     (For Capital View Restaurant)  
 
     Mr. Sikandar Bashir Mohmand, ASC  
     (For Margalla Motel)  
 
     Mr. Tariq Mehmood Sajid Awan, ASC  
     (For Trendy Amusement)  
      
     Mr. Khurram Mehmood Qureshi, ASC  
     (For Lok Virsa)  
 
     Mr. Rizwan Shabbir Kiyani, ASC  
     (For Jumper Castle in Lake View Park)  
 
     Mr. Maqbool Ahmed Chaudhry, Manager  
     Admn (For Islamabad Club)  
 
     Mr. Taimoor Aslam Khan, ASC  
     (For Des Pardis)  
  
For M/o C limate Change:  Ms. Parveen Ejaz, Dy. D irector.  
 
Date of Hearing:    11.06.2024 
 
 
 
 
 Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 3
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ . Learned counsel Hafiz Arfat Ahmad representing the 
Capital Development Authority (‘ CDA’) states that pursuant to order dated 
21 March 2024, CDA  has filed CMAs No. 3088, 3 089 and 3090 of 2024. We 
have examined them wherein all those carrying out commercial and other 
activities in Islamabad are mentioned, which is not what we had sought. 
On the last date of hearing learned senior counsel Mr. Muhammad 
Makhdoom Ali Khan  had stated that the owner of the petitioner Monal 
Group of Companies, namely, Mr. Luqman Ali Afzal has been singled out , 
however, others too are running resta urants in the area. Therefore, to 
ascertain this we had sought  details about such restaurants, but CDA 
misunderstood or misconstrued the order and file d the said CMAs . 
Resultantly, notices were unnecessarily issued to all those mentioned by 
CDA. This case pertains to the preservation , conservation  and permissible 
use of the Margalla Hills National Park  (‘the National Park ’). Accordingly, 
all the said notices are discharged , except not ices issued to the restaurants.  
2. Learned counsel Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi  along with Mr. Luqman 
Ali Afzal states that his client is the petitioner (in CPLA Nos. 304 and 305 of 
2022) and may be permitted to vacate the premises (Monal Restaurant) 
within three months. Learned Mr. Nabeel Rehman represents La Montana 
and Gloria Jeans restaurants and states that they will also vacate their 
premises in three months. Learned counsel further submits that CDA may 
give them preference in the leasing/allotting/licensing of premises /land  for 
the running of restaurants where it is permissible , as their businesses will 
be affected. The Chairman CDA pr esent in Court states that he will 
designate an officer to consider the request and if there are premises/land 
available for this  purpose , and if the law permits, preference will be given to 
those who are voluntarily vacating restaurants from within the Na tional 
Park.  
3. We appreciate those who have voluntarily agreed to remove their 
restaurants as it will help preserve and conserve the National Park. 
Accordingly, three  months’ time is granted to all the restaurants on and 
around the Pir Sohawa Road in the  National Park to vacate them . Small 
kiosks situated on or around the Pir Sohawa Road in the National Park may 
continue to be operated provided they are licensed by the Islamabad 
Wildlife Management Board (‘ the Wildlife Management Board ’) and strictly Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 4
abide by their terms of license, which must include collecting of all garbage 
generated  by each and their respective customers and disposing it outside 
the precincts of the National Park and , if they are permitted to have a stove  
then they must also have a  fire extinguisher.  
4. Any lease, license, allotment or permission granted by CDA,  or by the 
Remount , Veterinary and Farms Directorate (‘ the Directorate ’) or any other 
department/ authority to operate restaurants in the National Park was 
contrary to the pr ovisions of the Islamabad Wildlife (Protection, 
Preservation, Conservation and Management ) Ordinance, 1979 . Therefore , 
the same are declared to be of no legal effect and set aside. The petitioner in 
CPLA s No. 304 and 305 of 2022 is stated to have deposited  in court 
rent/ fee to which only the Wildlife Management Board could be entitled for 
the preservation, conservation and proper utilization of the National Park , 
therefore, the same shall be paid to/withdrawn by the Wildlife Management 
Board.  
5. The Direct orate is a component of the Pakistan Army, which operates 
under the  Ministry of Defense of the Federal Government. The Directorate 
has no separate legal existence yet it acted as if it was a legal entity, 
executed the said ‘Lease Agreement’ dated 30 Septem ber 2019, which was 
countersigned by its Director -General, Maj. General Muhammad Samrez 
Malik. Vide order s dated 11 and 21 March 2024 the original record was 
directed to be produced by the senior most officer  of the Directorate. The 
representative of the Directorate did not abide by the said orders, therefore, 
was given another opportunity to produce the original file of the Directorate  
by the end of the day, but still this was not done. Such intransigence will 
be attended to in t he detailed reasons. The Legal Advisor to the Ministry of 
Defense, namely Brigadier (retired) Falak Naz, rather than advocating that 
the direction of the Court should be complied with made  completely 
uncalled for excuses for the Directorate. It is not unde rstandable why the 
Federal Government has deemed it necessary to appoint a retired Brigadier, 
who has demonstrated little understanding of the law , to advise it on the 
law. The original record  of the Directorate may have disclosed who was 
instrumental in ordering the execution of the said ‘Lease Agreement’ . The 
conduct of the Directorate and the Legal Advisor makes us question where 
their loyalty lay . Civil Petition No. 304 of 20 22 etc.  
 
 5
6. For the proper management of the National Park, CDA shall assist 
the Wildlife Management Board whenever required. If an officer of CDA well 
conversant with conservation and environment is not already a member of 
the Wildlife Management Board, it would be appropriate that one is 
appointed as a member of the Wildlife Management Board. Moreover, since 
the World Wildlife Foundation Pakistan (‘ WWF ’) came forward to facilitate 
the preservation and protection of the National Park the Government may 
also consider nominating it on the Wildlife Management  Board.  
7. The impugned decision of the Islamabad  High Court is sustained, 
subject to what is stated above and any clarification/amplification  and 
direction  that may be given in the detailed reasons to follow. Resultantly, all 
the petitions and CMAs are disposed of.  
  
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge 
Islamabad  
11.06.2024 
Rizwan , Hassan K.W.   
 