IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
           (Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT:  
MR. JUSTICE IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ 
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SHAKIRULLAH JAN  
MR. JUSTICE JAWWAD S. KHAWAJA  
MR. JUSTICE ANWAR ZAHEER JAMALI  
MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
MR. JUSTICE TARIQ PARVEZ  
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR  
MR. JUSTICE AMIR HANI MUSLIM   
 
 INTRA COURT APPEAL N O. 1 OF 2012  
   [Against the order dated 02.02.2012 passed by this  
    Court  in Criminal Original No. 06/2012]  
 
Syed Yousaf Raza Gillani,  
Prime Ministe r of Pakistan .     …    Appellant  
VERSUS  
Assistant Registrar,  
Supreme Court of Pakistan & another .   … Respondents  
For the appellant:   Mr. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC   
Assisted by Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, Advocate  
Mr. M.S. Khattak, AOR  
Respondents:     Not represe nted.  
Dates of hearing:   09th & 10th February, 2012    
O R D E R 
 
 Jawwad S. Khawaja, J.  This Intra -Court Appeal has been filed under Section 19(1)(iii) of 
the Contempt of Court Ordinance, 2003 (the “Ordinance”). The appellant, Mr. Yousaf Raza 
Gillani, is the Prime Minister of Pakistan. He assails an order passed by a bench comprising seven 
learned Judges of this Court (the “ trial Bench”), on 02.02.2012, whereby it was decided that a 
charge  be framed against the appellant  for having committed contempt of th e Court . Prior to the 
passing of the impugned order, the learned trial Bench, vide order dated 16.01.2012, issued a 
notice under Section 17(1) of the Ordinance to the appellant “ to show cause as to why the 
proceedings of contempt of Court may not be initia ted against him for not complying with the 
direction of this Court given in paragraph 178 of the judgment in the case of Dr. Mobashir 
Hassan (PLD 2010 SC 265)” . The appellant did not submit a written reply to the show cause ICA #.01/2012  2 
notice. The learned trial Bench granted a preliminary hearing to the appellant in accordance with 
Section 17(3) of the Ordinance , and heard him in person and also through his counsel Mr. Aitzaz 
Ahsan, Sr. ASC. The Bench was prima facie  satisfied and held  “that it is in the interest of ju stice 
that [it] shall proceed further in the matter”  and adjour ned the case to 13.02.2012 for framing of 
charge.  Aggrieved, the appellant filed this appeal , which was dismissed by means of a short order 
dated 10.02.2012 which, in relevant part reads as un der:- 
“We have concluded, for the reasons to be recorded later, that the impugned order has 
been passed strictly in accordance with the provisions of section 17(1) and (3) of the 
Ordinance 2003 following the settled principles of the criminal administratio n of justice, 
therefore, no interference is called for. Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.”  
       
2. We now record our reasons in support of our short order. To facilitate understanding of 
these reasons, we have divided this opinion into three parts. The first part contains a brief narrative 
of events  that  have led to the initiation of contempt proceedings against the appellant. This 
narrative will provide context for the second and third parts wherein arguments advanced on 
behalf of the appellant have  been addressed and key constitutional principles have been 
highlighted.  
 
I. Brief Historical Narrative  
3. The roots of this controversy lie in events which occurred in the year 2007.  That year a 
number of Constitution Petitions were filed before this Co urt under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution, challenging the constitutionality of the National Reconciliation Ordinance, 2007 (the 
“NRO”). The NRO had been issued on 05.10.2007 by the then President General Parvez 
Musharraf purportedly in exercise of powe rs under Article 89 of the Constitution.  The NRO had 
attempted to create a mechanism that enabled  selected individuals to escape the pale of 
accountability. Certain unconstitutional measures were then taken by General Musharraf to accord 
permanence to the  NRO and to some other Ordinances. This Court declared these measures 
unconstitutional, illegal, mala fide,  and void ab initio. The Parliament also discredited the NRO by 
choosing  not to validate the same as permanent legislation or to adopt any alternativ e or modified 
legislation as a substitute for it. 
4. While hearing the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan  & others v. Federation of Pakistan & 
others  (PLD 2010 SC 265)  it was noted in paragraph 177 that, amongst other things, the Attorney ICA #.01/2012  3 
General at the time, nam ely Malik Muhammad Qayyum initiated and exchanged communications 
with Swiss authorities regarding proceedings relating to laundered monies pending before Swiss 
Courts. A report filed in Court by the National Accountability Bureau had put the figure of such  
monies at US $ 60,000,000 (US Dollars sixty million only). The communication aforesaid, was 
itself  held to be devoid of legal sanction since the Attorney General did not have the necessary 
authorization to initiate or engage in communications regarding th is matter, with the Swiss 
authorities. Through these communications, he managed to withdraw  Pakistan’s request for 
mutual legal assistance and revoked its status of a civil party in the pending proceedings in 
Switzerland. As a consequence of this exchange,  the proceedings relating to the aforesaid 
laundered monies were abandoned. In view  of the directions given by the  Court in para in 178 ibid 
“the Federal Government and other concerned authorities [were] ordered to take immediate steps 
to seek revival of t he said requests, claims and status”  in respect of the allegedly laundered 
monies lying in foreign countries including Switzerland.  
5. After the judgment of this Court dated 16.12.2009 (the “NRO Judgment ”) passed in the 
case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan  supra , the Federal Government sought review of the same through 
Civil Review Petition No.129 of 2010.  This Review Petition was dismissed on 25.11.2011.  
Therefore, the NRO Judgment is final and binding, including its directives instructing the Federal 
Government  and other concerned authorities to take immediate steps as ordered. The necessity of 
initiating contempt proceedings against the appellant arose for the purpose of ensuring compliance 
with the orders and directives of the Court. It is neither necessary no r appropriate for this appellate 
Bench to dilate upon the many  orders and proceedings of the Court made in furtherance of this 
objective between the date of the NRO Judgment in December 2007 and the issuance of a show 
cause notice to the appellant on 16.01 .2012. Such orders and proceedings can more appropriately 
be examined in the contempt proceedings before the  learned  trial Bench. This brief factual 
narration brings us to the second part of this opinion.  
 
II The Appellant’s Case  
6. The appellant’s case be fore us is not that the orders and directives of this Court contained 
in the NRO Judgment have been complied with. On the c ontrary, the grounds and tenor  of this 
appeal show  that the said orders/directives have still not been implemented. It has been conte nded ICA #.01/2012  4 
on behalf of the appellant that firstly, as Chief Executive and head of the Government,  he has not 
committed any “wilful disobedience” of the NRO Judgment and therefore, contempt proceedings 
against him are not justified , secondly, that a full hearing  was not afforded to the appellant by the  
learned  trial Bench and thirdly, that the impugned order is a non -speaking order as it does not cite 
any reasons in support of its conclusions. On the basis of  these submissions,  learned counsel for 
the appellant a rgued that the impugned order is liable to be set aside.      
7. We can now elaborate on these contentions and comment on their respective  merits. The 
present appeal places  great emphasis on the avowed want of mens rea and the absence of a ‘guilty 
intent’ on the part of the appellant. The argument is that the disobedience of the orders of the 
Court, if at all there was any, was not ‘wilful’. This appears to be the salient feature of the pres ent 
appeal. Since the contempt proceedings are pending before the  learned  trial Bench, we will only 
make tentative observations  so as not to prejudice the outcome of the matter . In his appeal, the 
appellant acknowledges his awareness of the contents of para 178 of the NRO Judgment  and the 
steps enumerated therein which the Government was legally obliged to undertake . These steps , 
which have been enumerated in paragraph 34 of this appeal,  admittedly  have not been taken. The 
appellant has asserted that despite his admitted inaction, his “ intention was not to disobey ” the 
orders of the Court and that there exists some “valid justification with respect to his own 
conduct” . The appellant defends his inaction by contending  that since he was “required to go by 
the Rules of Business, 1973” , he accepted the views presented by the concerned Government 
functionaries and that he “ had no reason whatsoever to believe otherwise than what had been 
maintained in the summaries” . Such explanations , which have been put up by the appellant do not 
detract from , rather confirm  the fact that the di rectives in the NRO Judgment have not, as yet, been 
complied with.  
8. Section 17(3) of the Ordinance  requires that “[i]f, after giving the alleged contemner an 
opportunity of a preliminary hearing, the court is prima facie  satisfied that the interest of ju stice 
so requires, it shall fix a date for framing a charge in open court and proceed to decide the 
matter …” It is settled law “that to formulate a ‘prima facie’ opinion, the Court is not required to 
consider all the facts in depth, rather it has to satisf y itself whether there exists an arguable case” . 
Justice Hasnat Ahmad Khan v. Federation of Pakistan , (PLD 2011 SC 680 , para 58 ). Here, it may 
be noted that under section 3 of the Ordinance a person can be proceeded against for contempt of ICA #.01/2012  5 
Court if he disobeys or even disregards  any Order of a Court , which he is legally bound to obey. In 
view of this statutory provision, the  admitted position of the appellant , in our opinion,  constitutes a 
sufficient basis for the ‘prima facie’  satisfaction expressed by the  learned t rial Bench , to proceed 
further in the matter by framing a charge.  
9.  Want of guilty intent and the wilfulness (or otherwise) of disobedience of Court directives 
and other averments in this appeal raise questions of fact that warrant a detailed enquiry based on 
evidence . Furthermore, by virtue of being distinct elements of the defence set up by the appellant,  
both elements need to be assessed on the  facts and on the basis of such evidence as is adduced 
before the competent forum . For this purpose , the competent forum  is the  learned  trial Bench. 
These factual defences  have not and could not have been addressed and answered in a preliminary 
hearing. By not discussing and adjudicating upon such defences at this preliminary juncture, the 
learned trial Bench acted as per directions of  law. The trial Bench may have prejudiced the 
outcome of the case by g iving a conclusive verdict  on the merits of the appellant’s defences since 
such would have been issued without having evaluated the necessary evidence . It goes without 
saying that the appellant will have the right to  rely on his arguments and  produce evidence  in 
support thereof, before the  learned  trial Bench .  
10.  We have already stressed  that the judicial exercise of receiving evidence or considering 
factual pleas on the basis of such evidence , is not to be undertaken at the preliminary hearing. 
Learned counsel for the  appellant appears to be under  a misconception on this point, which may 
have blurred his appreciation of the nature of a preliminary heari ng under Section 17(1) of the 
Ordinance. The case of  Justice Hasnat  supra has already established that w here non -compliance 
of a Court directive is not disputed, the Court is, prima facie , justified in the satisfaction that the 
matter should proceed to trial. A show cause notice under Section 17 of the Ordinance can, of 
course, be discharged where the alleged contemnor shows that the Court order has, in fact, already 
been complied with. The notice may, at the discretion of the Court, also be discharged if t he 
alleged contemnor agrees to comply with the Court order even after the issuance of a show cause 
notice. However, where neither of these situations exists and a factual plea is raised requiring 
evidence, the proper course for the Court is to frame a char ge and allow the alleged contemnor to 
prove the pleas which he has raised in his defence, whether by way of complete exoneration from 
the charge or in mitigation of sentence if the charge is proved.  ICA #.01/2012  6 
11.  The appellant’s contention that the learned t rial Bench denied him a ‘full hearing’ is also 
premised on a misconceived understanding of the nature of a preliminary hearing. The appellant 
has been granted a reasonable opportunity to make his submissions. What comprises reasonable 
opportunity is a question t hat must depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. From what 
has been stated above, it  is clear to  us that sufficient hearing was, in fact, afforded to the appellant 
to justify the prima facie determination made by the learned trial Bench, before  it issued a show 
cause notice to the appellant.  
12. Learned counsel for the appellant has referred to case law in support of his submission s. 
The cited cases, however, mostly pertain to appeals against judgments/orders which had been 
issued after a final adjudication in judicial proceedings. The present appeal, however, has been 
brought against an order issued in a preliminary  proceeding . The distinction between a 
preliminary hearing as opposed to final proceedings is well recognized. Precedent , therefore,  
which enunciates rules for full hearing as  a pre-condition for final orders, is  inapplicable to the 
facts of the present case.  
13. A great deal of emphasis was placed by learned counsel for the  appellant on the case titled 
Imran Ullah v. The Crown  (1954 FC 123) and reference was made to an extract from the 
judgment of Cornelius, J. read superficially and taken out of context. The learned Judge had 
observed  at page 140 that  “[the Courts ] should do nothing that might have the effect of 
terminating an Advoca te’s arguments unless they have first satisfied themselves, by a direct 
question, that he cannot usefully add to what he has already said”. First of all, it may be noted 
that the cited judgment resulted from a challenge to a final judgment rendered by a Be nch of  the 
Lahore High Court after the final hearing of a Criminal Appeal. Th is obvious distinguishing factor 
is sufficient to show that the cited  precedent  has no application in this case as the order impugned 
before us has been passed a t a preliminary he aring. Secondly, it would be useful to state that 
discussion  and adjudication of all arguments at a preliminary hearing is not to be seen as a 
mindless exercise or as an end in itself. There is no warrant for a mechanical insistence on such 
discussion/adju dication.  The distinguished  British  jurist, Prof. H.L.A. Hart wisely comments that 
“neither in interpreting statutes nor precedents are judges confined to the alternatives of blind, 
arbitrary choice, or ‘mechanical deduction’ from rules with predetermined meaning. ”  In fact, the  
ratio of Imran Ullah’s  case  supra reinforces our decision to dismiss this appeal. In the said  case ICA #.01/2012  7 
after consider ing the arguments advanced , the Court decided not to set aside t he judgment assailed 
before it. A.S.M. Akram, J. observ ed at page 127 that though he “was minded to remit the case 
but as we have carefully listened to the elaborate arguments on the merits by either side, it would 
now be of no purpose to adopt that course” . Considering that we have heard learned counsel for 
the appellant at great length even though the matter involves only a prima facie  finding in a 
preliminary hearing, we do not find any justification for setting aside the impugned order and 
remitting the case to the learned trial Bench for recording its deci sion on each and every argument  
and defence advanced on behalf of the appellant , during the preliminary hearing.  
14. Learned counsel for the appellant while referring to  the case of Justice Hasnat  supra  
contended that a full hearing and reasons were given  by this Court while hearing the said case and 
also that the hearing before the  trial Bench in the said case had continued for a period of close to 
four months at the stage of preliminary hearing. The dictum of Cornelius, J. in Imran Ullah ’s case 
supra, sufficiently addresses the appellants contention regarding the inadequate duration of the 
preliminary proceedings:  The learned Judge said at page 135 of the judgment that “it is impossible 
to read into the word ‘hearing ’ anything in the nature of an obl igation as to [the] pattern of an 
argument or the form which it is to follow, and any suggestion that observance of any kind of 
ritual is involved would be, in my opinion obnoxious to the true me aning .” The significant aspect 
of the case  of Justice Hasnat  supra , which appears to have been overlooked  is that the case 
concerned only a question of law , not one which required any recording or consideration of 
evidence . The issue was  whether contempt proceedings could be initiated against a serving Judge 
of a Hi gh Court. It is clear that this question raised a jurisdictional issue. If, as a matter of 
constitutional law, a contempt notice to a serving Judge in the extraordinary circumstances of the 
cited case, was not permitted then the notice issued to the Judge involved would have had to be 
discharged after the preliminary hearing  and without the necessity of receiving evidence . No such 
question of law arises in the present case .    
15. The case of Justice Hasnat  supra  also examined the scheme of the Ordinance an d clearly 
enumerated the requirements contained there in. It was held  in para 58 , as reproduced above, that 
“to formulate a prima facie opinion, the Court is not required to consider all the facts in depth 
rather it has to satisfy itself whether there exist s an arguable case”.  The argument that the trial 
Bench ought to have determined the factual issue (arising in that case) of whether the appellant ICA #.01/2012  8 
had intimation of an order dated 3.11.2007  was repelled by the observation  that “these aspects of 
the case alo ngwith others are required to be decided on the basis of evidence which will be 
produced before the Bench seized with the contempt cases.”   
16. The aforesaid dictum fortifies our view that the course adopted by the learned  trial Bench 
in the present case was in line with precedent.  We are, therefore, unable to agree with learned 
counsel that “all pleas and defences of the [appellant] to the allegations contained in the show 
cause notice [had] to be thoroughly gone into, considered and decided judiciously” .  
 
III. The Constitutional Imperative  
17. A number of constitutional imperatives, which we shall presently allude to, also justify the 
course followed  by the learned trial Bench. We may confine  this part of our reasoning by 
adverting to a somewhat odd ques tion posed by the appellant. He  has, in his grounds of appeal, 
asked the Court to “ show greater restraint  and forbearance with respect to  a duly elected Prime 
Minister.... when the very stability of the democratic system obtained by the people of Pakistan 
after so much sacrifice, may depend on the outcome of this case.”  This averment, coming as it is 
from the Chief Executive of the country appears to be based, firstly on a claim to some special 
privilege  that accords the appellant preferential treatment by shelter ing him from receiving equal 
treatment in accordance with the law and the constitution  and thereby allowing him to disregard 
the orders of the Court  because of his office . And, secondly, it calls upon the Court to formulate its 
opinion, not  in accor dance with the mandate  of law as applicable on the facts of this appeal,  but in 
fear and anticipation of a possible outcome  that may flow out of a decision , which may be arrived 
at by the learned trial Bench on the basis of the law and the Constitution . In other words, the 
appellant is urging this Court to resurrect and adopt a form of the doctrine of necessity , which in 
the past had blighted Constitutional rule in Pakistan. The validity of this averment, and both 
arguments adduced in support of it, must be  examined, like other questions of public law, in the 
light of the Constitution.  
 
A - Special Privilege  
18.  It is clear to us that the appellant ’s claim to a ‘special privilege’ on account of his 
executive office, which seeks for him “greater restraint” a mounting to an exception from contempt 
proceedings, does not find any basis in our Constitution. For this, we need only refer to the ICA #.01/2012  9 
Preamble, Article 5 and Article 25, the relevant parts of which are worth examining . The 
Preamble, whose importance as an a id to the proper interpretation of our constitution has already 
been explained in Munir Hussain Bhatti v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 407) , states  a 
number of principles  upon which the Constitution has been founded and in line with which it 
must, t herefore, be interpreted. Amongst these is mentioned the principle of “ equality,  ... as 
enunciated by Islam ” which, it is ordained , “shall be fully observed. ” A number of articles of the 
Constitution have been framed to give effect to the principle of equa lity enshrined thus in the 
preamble. Amongst these is Article 5  which states that “ obedience to the Constitution and law is 
the inviolable obligation of every  citizen wherever he may be ...” It should be noticed that the 
Constitution mentions no exemptions  from the obligation it imposes . The exceptionalism 
therefore, which is being claimed by the appellant has no constitutional basis .   
19. In a similar vein, Article 25(1) states in the clearest terms that “[a]ll citizens are equal 
before law  and are entitl ed to equal protection of law.”  It may be noted here that, in his appeal, 
the Prime Minister has not relied upon the limited and functional immunity from court processes , 
which is offered to certain official acts under Article 248 of the Constitution. The article states: 
“the Prime Minister…shall not be answerable to any court for the exercise of powers and 
performance of functions of [his] office[.]or for any act done or purported to be done in the 
exercise of those powers and performance of those function s…” Discussion of this exception is 
therefore not merited here and may be left for an appropriate case. The cumulative effect of these 
provisions is quite powerful and hard to miss.  It becomes clear that  our law does not accord 
individual immunity to the a ppellant from complying with the law . Therefore, even though we 
have no doubt that the appellant is a duly elected Prime Minister of the country and deserves 
respect, this Court cannot be expected to show any restraint and forbearance on account of his 
position. This constitutional directive only echoes t he perennial wisdom which underpins 
governance of the State in accordance with the mandate of the Constitution .  
20. It is worth repeating here a hadith  of the Holy Prophet ( peace be upon him ), which has 
become a part of the collective consciousness of the people of Pakistan. It expresses the spirit of 
equality enunciated by Islam which the Constitution refers to. A woman from a powerful Arabian 
tribe was found to have committed theft. The Holy Prophet ( peace be upon him ) was urged 
through some intermediaries to exercise restraint in her case because of her position in society. ICA #.01/2012  10 
The hadith  gives a description of the Prophet’s reaction to this suggestion. It was, to say the least, 
stern. He rejected this plea a nd, instead, issued a warning which all functionaries of the State  
would do well to pay heed to. He said:  
أﯾﮭﺎ اﻟﻨﺎس إﻧﻤﺎ أھﻠﻚ اﻟﺬﯾﻦ ﻗﺒﻠﻜﻢ أﻧﮭﻢ ﻛﺎﻧﻮا إذا ﺳﺮق ﻓﯿﮭﻢ اﻟﺸﺮﯾﻒ ﺗﺮﻛﻮه وإذا ﺳﺮق ﻓﯿﮭﻢ اﻟﻀﻌﯿﻒ أﻗﺎﻣﻮا ﻋﻠﯿﮫ اﻟﺤﺪ   
Translation: O people, those before you w ere ruined because when someone of high rank among 
them (sharif) committed theft, they would spare him, but when a weak person from amongst them 
(zaeef) committed theft, they would inflict the prescribed punishment upon him .” (Sahih Bukhari).  
Similarly deference shown by a Qazi by rising from his seat when Hazrat Umar appeared before 
him as a defendant was strongly disapproved by Hazrat Umar  on the ground it militated against 
the principle of equality under the law.  
21. We need only give effect to this sim ple principle  to repel the appellant’s claim to a special 
privilege .  In fact, the position which needs to be adopted, and which emerges from a close 
examinati on of the  Constitution, is quite the opposite: the higher the constitutional office, the 
greater the onus of responsibility on  the holder of such office. One reason for this is that a  holder 
of Constitutional  office is under this higher responsibility because he, unlike ordinary citizens, 
makes an oath to discharge his duties “ in accordance with the C onstitution… and the law. ” The 
Prime Minister’s oath also requires that he “ will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution. ” 
Therefore, more stringent legal standards apply to him as compared to others who have not taken a 
similar oath. In other words,  the Court has  greater  reason to be particularly concerned about the 
possibility of contempt having been committed by the appellant.  
22. We can now proceed to elaborate further the bases for holding this constitutional position.  
 
B - Fiduciary Duties of Constitutional Office -bearers . 
23.     It has been observed  by this Court that the functionaries of the State are fiduciaries of the 
people and ultimately responsible to the people who are also their pay masters. In a recently 
decided case, we have held th at “holders of public office have to remain conscious that in terms of 
the Constitution ‘it is the will of the People of Pakistan’ which has established the Constitutional  
Order under which they hold office. As such they are, first and foremost fiduciaries  and trustees 
for the People of Pakistan. And, when performing the functions of their Office, they can have no 
interest other than the interests of the honourable People of Pakistan in whose name they hold ICA #.01/2012  11 
office and from whose pockets they draw their sala ries and perquisites ”. Muhammad Yasin v. 
Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2012 SC 132 , page 163 ).     
24. The implications of a fiduciary relationship  are well -defined in our jurisprudence . 
Amongst other things, it implies that constitutional functionaries, bei ng fiduciaries, must 
scrupulously  and with complete loyalty,  ensure compliance with the will of the people of Pakistan  
who have, via the Constitution, placed them in office . And since this will finds expression in the 
form of the Constitution, which is sta ted to be its ‘embodiment’, the functionaries of the state must 
ensure adherence to the Constitution and the law. This principle acquires added poignancy when 
the possibility exists that the State , starved of hard foreign currency and a grossly adverse bal ance 
of payments may benefit from pursuing the course ordered in the NRO Judgement. This 
jurisprudential background allows us to fully appreciate why Article 190 of the Constitution 
requires that “ all executive and judicial authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in aid of the 
Supreme Court”.  In this context it will become evident that the Government and the Court share 
the common objective to serve the people strictly in accordance with their will , as expressed in the 
Constitutional Order established by them . This is also the essence of our Constitution al and 
democratic dispensation  that is  based on the rule of law . We may at this point add that there is no 
conflict in the respective roles assigned to the Executive and the Judicature and nor is there any 
room for institutional or individual egos  to create one . All that is required is the humility to 
recognize that these institutions and their functionaries are in the service of a common master, the  
people.   
25. To further understand the nature of the  abov e referred role and the  fiduciary relationship 
between the people of Pakistan and bearers of state offices, it is useful to refer to a speech  made by 
Prime Minister Liaqat Ali Khan, in 1949, on the floor of the Constituent Assembly. He said: 
“…the people h ave been recognized as the recipients of all authority and it is in them that the 
power to wield it has been vested. ” Mr. Sirish Chandra Chatapadhaya, another member of the 
Constituent Assembly echoed the same opinion but with even greater humility when he  said that 
“the citizens of our country are our masters. We are their servants.”  It is these sentiments which 
have informed our Constitution and must also inform the official acts of State organs and their 
functionaries.    
  ICA #01/2012                                                                                                                                                                         12  
26. These statements of the founding fathers of Pakistan are, in fact, modern articulations of what 
is actually a timeless and prophetic principle of governance, encapsulated in the well -known saying: 
“ﺳﯿﺪ اﻟﻘﻮم ﺧﺎدﻣﮭﻢ”.  (The leader of a people is their se rvant ). Our constitution manifests the embodiment 
of this very principle when it obliges the highest executive functionary to carry out the commandmen ts 
expressed by the people in the form of the constitution and the law. Deviations by fiduciaries from 
these commandments must remain of the gravest concern to citizens and courts alike.  
27. Justice Louis Brandeis,  writing  in the American context, succinctly explained another  
important reason why government officials, no matter how high, must be subjected to t he same rules of 
conduct as ordinary citizens. He said: “ Our government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher. For 
good or for ill, it teaches the whole people by its example... If the government becomes a lawbreake r… 
it invites every man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy. ” {Olmstead v. United States , 277 
U.S. 438 (1928),} quoted recently by Khosa, J.  in Crl. M.A 486 of 2010 in Criminal Appeal No. 22 of 
2002 etc, on 10.01.2012 Similar expression can be found in the sage advice of Sheikh Saad i who said : 
 
 
 
 
Translation:  If the ruler plunders but five eggs,  his minions will plunder a thousand roosters.  
28. In a government of laws, t he government is expected to play the role of an exemplar for 
promoting the rule of law. The case of Sindh High C ourt Bar Association v. Federation of Pakistan  
(PLD 2009 SC 879) drew attention to the same issue by holding the unconstitutional acts of a militar y 
dictator invalid. More than two and a half years down, it is worth posing the same question to all S tate 
functionaries and to all thinking people posed in the said case: ‘has the absence of the rule of law 
within the upper echelons and formal structures of the State generated, in a significant way, the 
lawlessness which so permeates our society today?’  Then and  today, the causal connection strongly 
suggests itself. This is all the more reason why courts must not (as a matter of constitutional prin ciple) 
exercise any special restraint in matters such as the present one.  
29. Since there is now a prima facie case t o be made that the obligation to obey the directions of 
this Court may have been violated by the highest constitutional functionary of the executive branch of 
government, legal scrutiny is clearly warranted. Therefore, the learned trial Bench has only done  the 
needful by letting matters proceed to the stage of framing of charge.  ICA #.01/2012  13 
 
C - Consequentialism or the rule of law?  
30.  We must now address the concern of learned counsel for the appellant that “ the very 
stability of the democratic system ... may depend on the outcome of this case.”  In part, the concern 
is fully justified. Give n that the instant case concerns concepts like the supremacy of the 
Constitution and the primacy of the rule of law,  the outcome of this case is  indeed important. 
However, the  Court has in previous cases already repelled arguments based on notions of 
conse quentialism. In the NRO case, it was held: “…the Court cannot and should not base its 
decisions on expediency or on consideration of the consequences which may follow as a result of 
enforcing the Constitution” . As a court of law, we cannot base our judgmen ts on the anticipated 
consequences of our decisions; else we will be reverting to the malignant doctrine of necessity 
which has already been buried because of the valiant struggle of the people of Pakistan.  At page 
481 of the NRO Judgment , it was observed thus “political stability and the rule of law will flow as 
a natural consequence of giving sanctity and respect to the Constitution, both in letter and in 
spirit. The Court can only strengthen the rule of law by upholding the Constitution, which is, in 
fact, the supreme law.  
31. It is the strict adherence to this principle, which has fostered the revival of democracy in 
Pakistan, and upon which its survival still depends. If the appellant apprehends instability as a 
consequence  of this case, such apprehens ion can easily be allayed by ensuring that the 
Constitution  is adhered to. It is precisely this exercise which is being undertaken by the learned 
trial Bench. The appellant may also draw comfort from the fact that institutions and systems 
provided in the C onstitution ensure political stability. What happens to an individual can be of 
little consequence as long as State institutions continue function ing in accordance with the 
Constitution. The anachronistic notion of “après moi, le déluge”  has no room in a C onstitutional 
order based on institutions rather than individuals . 
 
D. Constitutionalism and the law  of Contempt.  
 
32. It appears from the submissions of learned counsel for the appellant that he may have 
overlooked some significant aspects of  the nature o f the broader scheme within which each state 
organ and its respective office bearers are to operate. It cannot be disputed that all state organs  and 
the holders of high public office derive their legitimacy from the Constitution.  ICA #.01/2012  14 
33. The Prime Minister’s mandate is circumscribed by Art 90 of the Constitution, which 
permits him to exercise, in conjunction with various other constitutional functionaries, “ the 
executive authority of the Federation”. This exercise of authority is however, “[s]ubject to the 
Constitution” as expressly stated in the proviso to Art 90 (1).  In the same light, Judges  are 
required to make  an oath to the effect that they will discharge their duties “in accordance with the 
Constitution…and the law”.  In fact, this part of the oath is co mmon to the oath of every single 
functionary for whom the Third Schedule prescribes an oath; one of these oaths which puts the 
point m ost clearly requires that such functionary will “uphold the Constitution of the Islamic 
Republic of Pakistan which embodie s the will of the people .” (Oath of Members of the Armed 
Forces, Third Schedule, Constitution)  
34. It is thus clear that our Constitutional Order is founded on the fundamental instruction that 
each organ must give effect to and act in accordance with the C onstitution. Insofar as an act of any 
one of the organs of the state travels beyond the limits laid down in the Constitution, the said 
organ can be said to have strayed from  representing “ the will of the people of Pakistan .” 
Conversely, in so far as all or gans of the State  remain within the limits prescribed by the 
Constitution, they have a legitimate claim to being enforcers and exponents of the will of the 
people . Our Constitution conceives of an Order wherein the various organs of State  are co -equals, 
each manifesting  the will of the people and giving effect to such through adjudication, executive 
action or legislation.  It is important that the primacy of the Constitution over the Government as 
also over the judicature be fully understood.  
35. As noted a bove, the  Constitution expressly states that “all executive and judicial 
authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.”  Therefore, all members of 
the executive, for example, are constitutionally obliged to implement the decisions o f the Supreme 
Court.  The severity of its violation is fully recognized by the Constitution in Article 204. The 
Ordinance which has been promulgated pursuant to the said Article expressly includes within the 
ambit of contempt of Court anyone who “disobeys or disregards any order, direction or process 
of a Court which he is legally bound to obey…” . The people have expressly intended the broad 
reach of these provisions precisely to avoid the usurpation of the Constitution and to maintain the 
balance envisione d by the Constitutional Order. Courts invoke these sections only because such 
are the express instru ctions of the Constitution . The instant case, wherein this Court has taken ICA #.01/2012  15 
cognizance prima facie , of contempt by the appellant, is no different. The Court,  by doing so  has 
only fulfilled its mandate to uphold the Constitution.  
36. We have set out above the constitutional position  because we found it necessary to dispel 
the appellant’s claim to a special privilege as a matter of law, and also, to reiterate th at a fear of 
anticipated consequences must not influence our decision . We have also consciously avoided any 
comment on the specific pleas raised by the appellant in his defence. It will be for the learned tri al 
Bench  to receive evidence and thereafter to d ecide on the merits of such pleas. It is for this reason 
we have deliberately refrained from commenting on the documents placed on the file of this 
appeal including the summary dated 22.9.2010 (which was repeatedly referred to, by learned 
counsel) prepared  by the Minister for Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs , because 
consideration of such documents lies within the domain of the learned trial Bench.   
37.  These are our reasons for the short order dated 10.2.2012 . 
 
 
 
                                          Chief Justice  
 
 
 
                    Judge          Judge         Judge  
 
 
 
                        Judge                        Judge                        Judge  
 
 
 
                             Judge  
 
 
 
APPROVED FOR REPORTING .  