IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
Civil Petition No. 3213 -L of 2019   
(Against order dated 2.10.2019 
[assed by the Lahore High Court 
Multan Bench Multan in W.P. 
No.10300/2019)  
 
 
Muhammad Islam  
 
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State through Advocate General Punjab,  
Lahore, etc.  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Asaf Faish -ud-Din Verdeg, ASC  
along with M. Islam  
 
For the Respondent(s) : N.R. 
  
Date of hearing:  14.04.2020. 
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J .- Apprehending arrest, 
Muhammad Islam, petitioner, seeks admission to bail; he is amongst 
array of the accused in  a NAB reference ; a dismissed constable of 
Special Branch , he is blamed to have lured, alongside co-accused,  
members of the public to invest in his Multan based travel agency, 
styled as “Bin Islam Travels & Tours ” ; lucrative profits, offered by the 
accused , attracted no less than 61 investors in the business, 
subsequently turned  out as farce ; he attempted to pacify  the 
disappointed clientele  by issuing bank cheques, bounced upon 
presentation .  
 In the backdrop of petitioner ’s failure  before a learned Division 
Bench  of the Lahore High Court at Multan, his learned counsel 
contends that he was being hounded on trump up charges , 
manipulated by his adversary Zaheer Babar , a Police Inspector , 
currently serving as Station House Officer ; that without prejudice to Civil Petition No. 3213 -L  of 2019  
 2
petitioner’ s position, the accusation does not fall within the remit of 
NAB’s jurisdiction as the group of alleged affectees does not constitute 
“public at large ”, leaving the  issue to be more aptly dealt with in regu lar 
criminal/civil jurisdiction ; projecting the agency as a non -governmental 
organization, the learned counsel concluded that the petitioner merely 
drew commission paid by various airlines and as such cannot be held 
responsible for betrayal of offered windfall  to the investors . 
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Principles, applicable to grant of an ticipatory bail in a 
cognizable/non -bailable offence are by now well entrenched ; these do 
not admit denials or parallel  stories to ward off evidence/material prima 
facie constituting the offence  nor the witnesses can be stripped off their 
credentials  at the investigative stage so as to divert the usual course of 
law; a claimant must point out circumstances , reasonably suggesting 
abuse of process of law  with strappings of mala fide , lurking behind the 
intended arrest ; statements of 61 persons  with diverse and different 
backgrounds, clamouring  foul play  cannot be summarily brushed aside 
to accommodate  petitioner ’s plea ; same goes for a detailed and 
comprehensive investigative process , carried out pursuant to call up 
notice , followed by an inqui ry, findings whereof, are prima facie pointed 
upon petitioner ’s culpability  for an offence wherein grant of bail is 
narrowly jacketed . Petition fails. Leave refused.   
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad , the 
14th April, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 