IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry,  CJ 
Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
Mr. Justice M ohammad Ather Saeed  
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
SUO MOTO CASE NO.16 OF 2011 E TC. 
(Implementation proceedings of  Judgment of 
this Court reported as PLD 2011 SC 997)  
 
For the petitioners:   Mr. Ghulam Qadir Jatoi, AOR  
(in Crl.O.P.96/12)  
Nemo (in Crl.O.P 29/13 ) 
For Federation:    Mr. Muneer A. Malik,  
     Attorney General for Pakist an 
Mr. Ashiq Raza, DAG  assisted by  
Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, Advocate   
 
For Govt. of Sindh:   Mr. Khalid Javed Khan , AG.  
Mr. Shahadat Awan, PG,  
Mr. M. Sarwar Khan, Addl. A.G.  
Mr. Adnan Karim, Asst. A.G  
Mr. Muhammad  Ejaz Chaudhry, CS,  
Mr. Muhammad Shoaib Siddiqui , 
 Commissioner , Karachi  
 
For Sindh Police:   Mr. Shahid Nadeem Baloch, IGP  
     Mr. Ghulam Qadir, Addl. IGP, Karachi  
     Mr. Sultan Khawaja, DIG, CIA  
     Mr. Tahir Naveed, DIG East.  
     Dr. Amir Shaikh, DIG South.  
     Mr. Arif Haneef, DIG West . 
     Mr. Shahid Ha yat, DIG Special Branch.  
Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIGP Legal  
 
For DG Rangers:    Mr. Shahid Anwar Bajwa, ASC  
Maj. General Rizwan Akhter, DG   
Major Ashfaq  Ahmed, DA JAG,  
 SMC No.16/2011 etc.  2
For Board of Revenue:   Mr. Yawer Farooqui, ASC  
Syed Zulfiqar Ali Shah Member.  
 
For F rontier  
Constab ulary:   Mr. Inayatullah Farooqui, DO, FC  
 
For Customs Deptt:   Mr. Muhammad Yayha,  
Chief Collector , Enforcement . 
     Mr. Nasir Ma sroor , Chief Collector.  
     Mr. Khawar Fareed Ma nika,  
DG Afghan Transit.  
 
Date of hearing:    30.8.2013.  
ORDER  
IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY, CJ .- In 
continuation of our order dated 29th August, 2013, the Chief 
Collector of Customs stated that the message of th is Court has 
been conveyed to Mr. Ramzan Bhatti, Former Member 
Customs, who due to shorta ge of time could not attend the 
proceedings. The Chief Collector explained , that he has 
prepared a report wherein he has highlighted the difficulties 
being faced by his department in prevent ing  the smuggling of 
arms, ammunition and other contraband items in the country 
and one of the reason is the non-availability of resources 
financ ial and manpower etc. However, it has been emphasized 
to him that he should , at present,  focus on the smuggling of 
illicit arms and ammunition through both the ports i.e. Bin 
Qasim and Karachi where from  allegedly arms, ammunition 
and contraband items are being smuggl ed by making mis -SMC No.16/2011 etc.  3
declaration or with the connivance and assistance of the 
preventi on staff or appraisers and f or this purpose generally  
launches are also used but  there is no check. It is to be noted 
that not only in the Karachi City but in the entire country there 
is an uncontrol led flow of smuggled arms  and ammunition , 
which is definitely being used by the unscrupulous elements 
for criminal activities. We are mindful of the fact that on 
account of practical difficulties , it may not be possible only for 
the Customs Department to control smuggl ing. The illegal  
trafficking  of such arms and ammunition through ports or by 
means of ship s or launches etc can be controlle d by the 
Customs, Co ast Guards and Maritime Security Agenc y. He has 
not come out with a concrete reply in respect of the directions 
issued to him on the last date of hearing as to the number of 
containers , through which  items were brought through  
Karachi and into Pakistan  by mis -declaration .  Reportedly , a 
colossal loss of Customs Duty and other revenues is caused by 
the importers , who manage to evade the duty by adopting 
illegal means, therefore, he was directed to place before us a 
report for the period commencing from 1st June, 2013 to 30th 
August, 2013 , showing the number of ships, vessels and 
launches , which arrived as per their record  and the Custom SMC No.16/2011 etc.  4
and the other revenue calculated upon goods  carried . However, 
he is directed to do so during the cours e of the day and submit 
this report  to the Registrar of this Court  so we can go through 
the same. In the meanwhile, the Chief Collector Customs, DG 
Coast Guards as well as DG , Maritime  Security Agency  may 
hold a joint meeting and submit their  report in thi s behalf.  
2.  DG Rangers on our directions, explained that there 
are so many ways and means through which arms and  
ammunition are smuggled into the country. However,  he also 
explained that in Karachi, it is also necessary that there should 
be a verificat ion of arms and ammunition dealers because 
without their facilitation or assistance, it is not possible to 
control the flow of arms and ammunition. However, we 
observe that in this behalf let the Provincial Government as 
well as the Federal Government take  necessary steps. He stated 
that in the past with the connivance of the then Minister of 
Shipping, a shipload of arms and ammunition was brought into 
Karachi and the whereabouts of such arms and ammunition has 
never been ascertained. He has further stated that to maintain 
the record of persons holding  licenses for keeping arms and 
ammunition they must be registered with the NADRA so after 
the commission of a crime, there should be no difficulty to SMC No.16/2011 etc.  5
identify the person involved in a case. In this behalf it i s to be 
noted that learned High Court of Sindh has already passed a 
judgment, as it is pointed out by the learned Advocate General 
and on the basis of the same, NADRA has already been brought 
on board for the purpose of registration of  persons, who had 
obtained the license. We are of the opinion that such directions 
must be implemented and carried out throughout Karachi as 
early as possible.  
3.  In order to further ascertain the correct position 
about the smuggling of arms and ammunition as well as 
evasio n of the duty on different items at the Ports of Karachi  
and Bin Qasim, we are of the opinion that there must be a strict 
check and full duty should be recovered because on account of 
evasion of custom duty, black money is also generated, which 
allegedly f lows inside the country particularly in the city of 
Karachi and is used by the accused persons in order to promote 
their criminal activities throughout in the country. Therefore, in 
this behalf , we appoint Mr. Ramzan Bhatti, as a one Man 
Commission with th e observation that he should ascertain :-  
(a) As to whether arms  or  ammunition are brought or 
smuggled through the sea and what  are the possible 
measures and ways to be adopted  to stop it.  
 SMC No.16/2011 etc.  6
(b) Who can be held responsible for the smuggling of the 
arms  and ammun ition in the country through ships, 
vessels  as well as launches and what are the reasons 
for not preventing the smuggling of the same.  
  
(c) As to whether the Customs officials posted at the Ports 
of Bin Qasim and Karachi mange  to recover hundred 
percent custo m duty and the revenue s or there are 
certain mechanism s on the basis of which these duties 
are evaded, which cause loss to the public exchequer 
and ultimately such b lack money is used for illegal 
activities and promoting crimes in the country . 
 
(d) To enqu ire into the allegation that a shipload of arms 
and ammunition was brought into Karachi with the 
connivance of the then Minister for Shipping, as stated 
by the DG Rangers and to propose what action should 
be taken against the persons responsible.  
 
   He m ay submit his report within seven days. The 
Chairman, FBR is directed to provide him all logistic facilities 
and also settle with him the fee of the Commission according to 
his stature .  
4.  It is important to note that control of the smuggling 
of arms and  ammunition is one of the most important aspects  to 
control the law and order situation in Karachi as well as other 
parts of the country. Therefore, in this context , while delivering 
the judgment  reported as Watan Party v. Federation of Pakistan  SMC No.16/2011 etc.  7
(PLD 2011  SC 997 ),  following observation relating to the 
Karachi were made :  
“Further observe that Karachi is full of arms and 
ammunition of prohibited and non -prohibited bores 
including licensed  and illicit, therefore, Karachi has to be 
cleansed from all kinds of  weapons by adhering to the 
laws available on the subject, and if need be, by 
promulgating new legislation. All licensed arms genuinely 
required for security concerns and personal safety may be 
retained but these must also be registered with NADRA. 
All oth er licenses, where such need cannot be shown, or 
where multiple licenses have been issued to the same 
individual (as distinct from security firms) if not justified, 
or which are used for unnecessary display at ceremonies 
or elsewhere for aerial firing shou ld be cancelled after 
summary and expeditious proceedings in accordance with 
law.”    
 
5.  We feel that despite lapse of a period of  about two 
years no progress in this behalf has been made  so far . However, 
the learned Advocate General has pointed out that  on 1st 
March , 2013 the Sindh Arms Act , 2013  has been promulgated 
and necessary step s shall be taken.  
6.  The learned Attorney General, who had sought time 
to make statement, appeared and stated that in pursuance of 
written statement , which has been filed by him in the Court, the 
Federal Government with the cooperation of the Provincial 
Government has assure d the protection of the life, property and 
liberty of the citizens in Karachi and all possible support shall SMC No.16/2011 etc.  8
be extended to the Provincial Government un der the provisions 
of Article 148(3) of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan, 1973 and to achieve the objects a meeting of the 
Federal Cabinet has already been scheduled in Karachi on 3rd of 
September, 2013 and all important decisions requi red to 
maintain law and order and to provide protection to the 
citizens of Pakistan and ensure the enforcement of their 
fundamental rights under the Constitution  would be taken , 
therefore, since important decisions are likely to be taken by the 
Federal Gov ernment, the matter may be postponed.  
7.  In this behalf, Mr. Khalid Javed Khan, learned 
Advocate General has also placed on record a statement  (CMA 
No.535 -K of 2013) , concluding para there from  is reproduced 
herein before  
“The Provincial Government once again unreservedly 
expresses its resolve and commitment to its constitutional 
obligation to protect the lives, liberty and property of the 
citizens as guaranteed under Articles 9, 14, 15, 18 and 24 of 
the Constitution of Pakistan, 1973. The Provincial 
Gove rnment would also appreciate any assistance that may 
be rendered by the Federal Government at the request of 
Provincial Government in terms of Article 148(3) of the 
Constitution”.  
 
 After having gone through the report submitted by the 
learned Advocate Gen eral, we are of the opinion that as now 
both the Governments i.e. Federal and Provincial are on board, SMC No.16/2011 etc.  9
and ha ve decided to provide protection  to and secure the life , 
property and liberty of the citizens, therefore, we have opted to 
exercise judicial self restrain and adjourn this case. However, it 
is clarified that we expect the Governments both Federal and 
Provincial to implement the directions already given in the 
judgment handed down in the case of  Watan Party v. Federation 
of Pakistan  (PLD 2011 SC 997 ), 
8.  In the meanwhile, the learned Attorney General and 
the Advocate General shall inform the Court about the steps 
which have been taken by both the Governments in order to 
fulfill their commitment, as has been noted hereinabove.  
9.  Before parting wit h the  order , we may observe that 
the Provincial Government shall under take the completion of 
surveillance system  i.e. CCTV Cameras etc as early as possible 
and, if need be, they may seek the assistance and the help from 
the experts of other concerned dep artments so that the system 
is completed , installed and activated before the next date of 
hearing.   
10.  On behalf of Frontier Constabulary, a report has also 
been submitted wherein details have been mentioned for 
operational assistance being provided by the FC to Sindh SMC No.16/2011 etc.  10
Police. The same be placed on record for further consideration 
on the next date of hearing.   
11.  To be fixed on 18.9.2013.  
 
         Chief Justice  
 
    Judge  
 
    Judge  
  
   Judge  
 
 
    Judge  
Karachi, the  
30th August, 2013         
M. Safd ar Mahmood/*         