IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
Present : 
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan  
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Justice Athar Minallah  
Justice Syed Hasan Azhar Rizvi  
  
 
Intra Court Appeals No. 2 , 3 and 4  of 2023  
In 
Constitution Petition No. 21 of 2022  
AND 
CMA No. 9264/2023 in ICA No. 02 of 2023  
 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan through Secretary M /o 
Law and Justice, Govt. of Pakistan, Islamabad.  
(in ICA No. 2 /2023)   
 
Zuhair Ahmed Siddiqui.  
(in ICA No. 3/2023 )   
 
Muhammad  Zahid Imran and another.  
(in ICA No. 4/2023)       … Appellants/Applicant  
 
Versus  
 
Imran Ahmed Khan Niazi and others.  
(in ICA Nos. 2 and 3/2023)  
 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary, Law and  
Justice Division, Islamabad and another.  
(in ICA No. 4/2023)        … Respondents  
 
 
For the Appellant :   Mr. M. Makhdoom Ali Khan, Sr. ASC.  
(in ICA No. 2/23)    Mr. Saad Mumtaz Hashmi, ASC.  
     Mr. Anis M. Shahzad, AOR.  
 
For the Appellant :   Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC.  
(in ICA No. 3/23)  
 
For the Appellants :  Nemo.  
 (in ICA No. 4/23) 
 
For Respondent No. 1:   Nemo.  
(In ICA Nos. 2 & 3/23)  
 
For Respondent No. 3:   Nemo.  
(In ICA No. 4/23) 
 
For the Federation :  Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan,  
Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
     Ch. Aamir Rehman,  
     Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan.  
 Intra Court Appeal No. 2/2023 etc.  
 
 2
For the NAB:    Ch. Mumtaz Yousaf,  
     Additional Prosecutor -General, NAB.  
     Mr. Nasir Mehmood Mughal,  
     Deputy Prosecutor -General, NAB.  
 
For Islamabad Capital  
Territory:     Mr. Ayyaz Shaukat,  
     Advocate -General, I slamabad.  
 
For Govt. of Sindh:   Mr. Hassan Akbar,  
     Advocate -General, Sindh.  
 
For Govt. of KP:    Mr. Shah Faisal,  
     Advocate -General, KP.  
 
For Govt. of Punjab:   Mr. Waseem Mumtaz Malik,  
     Additional Advocate -General, Punjab.  
 
For Govt. of Balochistan:  Mr. M. Ayaz Swati,  
     Additional Advo cate-General, Balochistan.  
 
Dates of Hearing:    14.05.2024 . 
 
ORDER  
 
Notices were issued on the last date of hearing . We enquired from the 
learned Additional Prosecutor General, National Accountability Bureau 
(‘NAB’) whether he is supporting the appeals or opposing them and he 
stated that NAB is supporting the appeals. Notices had also been issued to 
the Advocate -Generals of the provinces and the Islamabad Capital Territory 
and, except the Advocate -Gener al of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, all are 
supporting the appeals.  The Attorney -General for Pakistan also supports 
the appeals.   
 
2. The respondent No. 1 in Intra Court Appeals No. 2 and 3 of 2023 and 
respondent No. 3 in Intra Court Appeal No. 4 of 2023, namely , Mr. Imran 
Ahmed Khan Niazi (‘ Mr. Niazi ’) is presently confined in Central Jail, 
Rawalpindi  and was sent the certified copy of the order dated 31 October 
2023 of this Court and the paper -books of the appeals. Our order had 
permitted Mr. Niazi to be repres ented by counsel but he has written saying 
that he wants to represent himself . Therefore, the Federal Government and 
the Government of the Punjab are directed to make arrangements to ensure 
that Mr. Niazi is able to hear Court Proceedings and is able to ad dress this 
Court with regard to the appeals through video -link on the next date of 
hearing.  
 Intra Court Appeal No. 2/2023 etc.  
 
 3
3. We note that in the Constitution Petition No. 21 of 2022, filed by Mr. 
Niazi, he was represented by seven counsel,  including learned senior 
counsel Khawaja Haris Ahmed . Therefore, it would be appropriate to issue 
notice to the learned Khawaja Haris Ahmed to assist this Court  as he had 
already conducted the case wherefrom these appeals arise.  In case learned 
senior counsel expects to be paid for services he sh ould submit his bill, and 
this Court will attend to the same. It is clarified that this does not mean 
that Mr. Niazi will not be allowed to address this Court to rebut the 
submissions of the learned counsel representing the appellants.  
 
4. Learned senior counsel Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan has formulated the 
following contentions , which are adopted by learned senior counsel Mr. 
Farooq H. Naek, the learned A ttorney -General for Pakistan and the learned 
Advocate -Generals of the three provinces and of Islamabad Capi tal 
Territory, except that of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, who supports the majority 
judgment, as under : 
 
i) The majority judgment is a nullity in law as it was passed by a Bench 
of this Court which was not constituted in accordance with sections 2 , 3 
and 4 of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023 (‘ the Act ’) 
and resultantly it is coram non judice . The Act was enacted on 21 April 
2023 and challenge to most of its provisions, including sections 2 , 3 and 4 , 
was rejected by this Court in the reported decision in the case of Raja Amer 
Khan v Federation of Pakistan  (PLJ 2024 Supreme Court 114).  Attention to 
this aspect was specifically brought to the Court by filing a separate 
application (CMA No. 7066 of 2023) but the order  dated 29 August 202 3 by 
a majority of two to one did not consider the grounds raised in the said 
application, however, the minority order of the same date did so and is in 
accordance with the Act.  
 
ii) The Constitution Petition filed by Mr. Niazi under Ar ticle 184(3) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (‘ the Constitution ’), 
was not maintainable in the light of the decision of this Court in the case of 
Benazir Bhutto v Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1988 Supreme Court 416)  as 
a Writ Petition No. 2557 of 2021 was filed by the Islamabad High Court Bar 
Association , through learned senior counsel Mr. Hamid Khan , and which 
was pending adjudication . Therefore, this Court should have awaited the Intra Court Appeal No. 2/2023 etc.  
 
 4
decision thereof, where -after there was t he possibility to assail the decision 
therein before this Court through a petition for leave to appeal  or an appeal . 
 
iii) The amendments made to the National Accountability Ordinance, 
1999 vide National Accountability (Amendment) Act, 2022  and National 
Accountability (Second Amendment) Act, 2022  (‘the Amending Acts ’) were 
struck down despite the fact that many of the provisions thereof were 
borrowed from the ordinances , enacted by the Government of which Mr. 
Niazi himself was the Prime Minister , as under:   
 
Ordinance No. XXI of 2019 (‘ First Amendment Ordinance ’) 
Ordinance No. XXVII of 2019 (‘ Second  Amendment Ordinance ’) 
Ordinance No. V of 2021 (‘ Third  Amendment Ordinance ’) 
Ordinance No. XXIII of 2021 (‘ Fourth  Amendment Ordinance ’)  
Ordinance No. XXVI of 2021 (‘ Fifth Amendment Ordinance ’) 
(collectively referred to as ‘ the Amending Ordinances ’). 
 
iv) Mr. Niazi had not approached this Court in  a bona fide  manner and 
his antecedents prevented him from challenging the Amending Acts , many 
provision s whereof wer e the same as those in the Amending Ordinances , 
which were promulgated on the advice he had tendered to the President of 
Pakistan , which the President can only do if ‘ Circumstances exist which 
render it necessary to take immediate action ’ as stipulated in Article 89(1) of 
the Constitution. Mr. Niazi also  did not have the requisite locus standi  since 
the Amending Acts did not adversely personally affect him . Consequently, 
this Court had carried out an academic exercise as there was no actual 
controversy befo re it in that neither his right nor that of any person had 
been adversely affected nor were the Amending Acts ex-facie discriminatory.  
 
v) In the constitutional scheme it is for Parliament to legislate and 
courts to adjudicate and courts make every effort  to uphold legislation 
unless it is unconstitutional , and if there are two views possible the one in 
favour of upholding the legislation is always preferred.  
 
vi) The Amending Acts had sought to reduce the rigor s of the National 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 , therefore, the same could not be stated to 
be violative of the citizens Fundamental Rights , which the Supreme Court 
may enforce under Article 184(3) of the Constitution .   
 Intra Court Appeal No. 2/2023 etc.  
 
 5
vii) The matter of retrospectivity was misunderstood and was not 
attended to in terms of the Constitution . Article 12 of the Constitution 
prohibits retrospective punishment but does not prohibit or restrict 
retrospective relief or benefit to be granted.   
 
viii) Some of the amendments contained in the Amending Acts sought to 
give ef fect to the decisions of the superior courts , therefore, an anomalous 
situation has been created as the decisions of the superior courts , which 
were not under challenge , have been effectively negated . 
ix) The majority judgment has re -written the Constituti on and a number 
of statutes by creating an artificial distinction between civil servants  and 
public servants  and elected holders of public office  and person s in the service 
of Pakistan . The minority judgment has correctly observed this.  
 
x) The majority judgment accepted the limit of hundred million rupees 
prescribed in the Standard Operating Procedures (‘ SoPs ’) of NAB with 
regard to the cases it can investigate and send for trial but struck down 
legislat ion which had increased the limit to f ive hundred million rupees . 
SoPs, which are an administrative measure, cannot prevail over legislation 
enacted through the Amending Acts.  
 
xi) The Amending Acts did not decriminalize any offence, and had only 
changed what may be investigated by NAB and th e forum of the criminal 
trial, no person can be adversely affected with such change.  
 
xii) If the Legislature could enact t he NAB Ordinance it is also 
empowered to repeal it. However, in the present case only certain 
amendments were made  to the NAB Ordina nce.   
 
5. Copy of this order be sent to learned senior counsel Khawaja Haris 
Ahmed  and to Mr. Niazi to help them to formulate their responses to the 
aforesaid submissions.  
 
6. NAB is directed to provide the following information for the last ten 
years:  
 
(a) The number of cases it investigated;  
(b) The number of prosecutions which were successful, and convictions 
sustained by the High Court and the Supreme Court;  Intra Court Appeal No. 2/2023 etc.  
 
 6
(c) The amounts recovered;  
(d) Where was the amount deposited, and whether any portion was 
retained by NAB and if so the quantum thereof;  and 
(e) The amount spent on NAB.  
 
7. To come up on Thursday, 16 May 2024 at 11.30 am.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
 
Judge 
 
Judge  
Islamabad : 
14.05.2024  
(M. Tauseef)  
Approved for Reporting  