IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
 (APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
 PRESENT:  
 Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
 Mr. Justice Ch. Ijaz Ahmed  
 Mr. Justice Ghulam Rabbani  
 
CPs 1049, 1348 and 1406  of 2009  
And HRC 1827 -P & 12388/09  
 
Syed Rahat Mehmood      (in CP 1049/09)  
Muhammad Akhtar       (in CP 1348/09)  
Muhammad Farooq Ansari     (in CP 1406/09)  
Petitioner  (s) 
Versus  
NAB thr. Its Chairman and others  
…Respondent(s)  
 
 
For the petitioner (s): Syed Rahat Mehmood in person  
    (in CP 1049/09)  
 
    Mr. Amin K. Ja n, ASC  
    With petitioner Muhammad Akhtar  
    (in CP1348/09)  
   
    Rai Muhammad Nawaz Kharal, ASC  
    With petitioner M. Farooq Ansari  
    (in CP 1406/09)  
 
Respondents:   Mr. Shah Khawar, DAG  
     
    Mr. Sultan Mansoor Chaudhry, Acting P.G. NAB  
    Dr. Asghar Rana, ADPG, NAB  
    Mr. Naveed Ahsan, Chairman NAB  
    Col (R)Tarqi Mehmood Bhatti, I/o  
 
For RDA:    Mr. Bashir Awan  
 
Date of hearing:   19.02.2010  
 
ORDER  
 
 After passing order in judgment dated 16 th December, 2009 in the 
case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan Vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2010 SC 1)  
appearance of the representative s/prosecutors on behalf of the NAB in 
different cases has become irregular, except in few cases wherein one of 
the Prosecutors is appearing regularly and during the hearing of th is case 
we have noticed that despite allowing sufficient  time  to the NAB no 
progress has been  made and Mr. Sultan Mansoor, Acting Prosecut or 
General , who appeared , also could not answer satisfactory as to why the  2 
matter was not settled so far. Therefore, we have summoned the 
Chairman , NAB in the Court and asked him  as to why , in pursuance of 
the Judgment in the case of Dr. Mobashir Hassan (ibid)  the Prosecutor 
General and Additional Prosecutor General , have not been removed, so 
the new incumbent  may  take the ch arge for effective prosecution of the 
cases and appea r before this Court as well as other  Courts. He state s that 
he was under the impression that all this was to be done by the Attorney 
General or by the Ministry  of Law . It is  pointed out to him that act ion was 
to be initiated from his office and he would perform his duty in respect of 
action which was required to be taken in the light of the judgment of 17 
Members Bench , referred above . He request s that time be given to him so 
he may start performing his  part of obligation from today onward. It may 
be cleared that if no action  relevant to his performance  is taken by him, the 
coercive measures including attachment of his salary will be taken and 
directions will be made that no one on behalf of the NAB shou ld appear 
unless the compliance of the judgment with regard to the Prosecutor 
General and Additional Prosecutor General is made. However, we give 
him a chance on his assurance that all necessary steps shall be taken  in this 
regard . He is directed to appear  on the next date of hearing and submit 
progress report in respect of the observations made in the case of             
Dr. Mobashir Hassan (ibid)  
2. Despite clear directions no progress has been made in satisfying the 
claim s except that according to Mr. Tari q Mehmood Bhatti I/O, NAB he 
has registered claims of about 11000 people from whom amount was 
taken by Syed Rahat  Mehmood . In this regard, a report has also been 
submitted by the NAB.  
3.   Malik Bashir Awan  appeared on behalf of RDA to whom notice 
was give n in view of the statement of Syed Rahat  Mehmood . He is 
interested to purchase the property owned by accused. Learned counsel 
states that the claim so put forward by the accused is not correct as in the 
Adyala village, where the RDA intends to acquire the land for the purpose 
of building  a city, he had only a small  portion of land i.e. 2 kanals. In this 
behalf Syed Rahat  Mehmood  has offered flimsy explanation, which  
exfacie,  is not relevant for the disposal of the claim s of the claimants 
because he alongwi th other co -accused persons are responsible to satisfy 
their claims. He has however, requested that if two weeks’ time is given to  3 
him, he would be in a position to come out with a positive result. At his 
request, case is adjourned to 12.3.2010.  
 
Chief Jus tice 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
19 February, 2010  
Nisar/*  
 