IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
  Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
  Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi  
  Mr. Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail  
Mr. Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar  
 
 
SUO MOTO CA SE NO. 3 OF 2022  
(Re: Independent and Transparent Investigation 
into the Murder of Renowned Journalist, Mr. 
Arshad Sharif in Kenya ).  
 
 
In attendance:  
 
 
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
Mr. Irfan, Director Law M/o Information  
Mr. M. Syrus Sajjad Qazi, Addl. Sec retary M/o Foreign Affairs  
Mr. Murad Wazir, DG M/o Foreign Affairs  
Mr. Asad Khan Burki , LA M/o Foreign Affairs  
Syed Faraz Raza, ALA M/o Foreign Affairs  
Syed Waqar, Member, JIT  
Mr. Sajid Kiyani, IB  
Mr. Awais Ahmed, DIG  
Mian Shehbaz, I.O  
Barrister M. Javed B uttar, ASC  
(on behalf of Mrs. Javeria Siddique , wife of Arshad Sharif)   
Mr. M. Ayub Ch. Addl. Sec. (M/o Interior)   
   
Date of Hearing :             13.02.2023    
 
ORDER  
   Today, t he learned Addl. Attorney General has 
referred to two reports: one, filed  by the  Ministry of Foreign Affairs  
(“MoFA” ) (CMA No.492/2023) and second , filed by the Special 
Joint Investigation Team (“SJIT ”) (CMA No.493/2023). The report 
by the MoFA  details the steps  that were  taken by it to assist the 
SJIT during their visits to Ke nya and UAE whereas the report by 
the SJIT states the headway made in the investigation of the 
murder of the deceased Mr. Arshad Sharif.  
2.   The learned Addl. Attorney General has  also pointed 
out that the Kenyan Government has become reluctant to render  SMC 3 OF 2022  
 2
assistance in the investigation  and that the SJIT was not allowed 
to examine witnesses or inspect  the crime scene  during its visit. 
The SJIT report suggests  that possibly  the premature r elease  of 
the fact-finding report  prepared by the two-member  committe e 
has alarmed  the Kenya n authorities . We are not inclined at this 
stage  to speculate  on the reason behind the change in approach 
of the Kenyan Government.  Nevertheless  the M oFA, keeping in 
view the subtle formalities  of foreign relations  and the fact that 
Kenya is regarded  a friendly State by Pakistan , shall liaise with 
the concerned authorities in Kenya to ascertain the cause(s) of 
the Kenyan Government’s reluctance to assist with the 
investigation and address these on a priority  basis for the smooth 
progr ess of the investigation.  
3.   In response to the Court’s suggestion that the United 
Nations may be involved in the investigation to ensure the 
cooperation of  the Government of  Kenya, the learned Addl. 
Attorney General submit s that the proper diplomatic c hannel  has 
been invoked under the Mutual Legal Assistance Act, 2011 for 
seeking the cooperation of the Government of Kenya . Therefore, 
time may be given for that process to run its course before 
approaching the United Nations . The request appears reasonabl e 
and is granted. However, in the meanwhile  the MoFA  shall 
familiarise itself about the terms and conditions for requesting  
the assistance of the United Nations i n case  the need  
subsequently  arises.  
4.   On its part , the SJIT should probe the following 
matters: 
i. What motivated Mr. Arshad Sharif to leave Pakistan? In 
this respect the SJIT may investigate the multiple FIRs SMC 3 OF 2022  
 3
lodged against the deceased journalist and any sensitive 
information that may have been in his pos session.  
ii. Why did the Government of Duba i order Mr. Arshad Sharif 
to leave the country?  
iii. Who released the two-member committee ’s fact-finding 
report and what was the reason behind the same ? 
5.    The needful shall be done within  a period of  two 
weeks . Relist in March, 2023 . 
 
    CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
 
 JUDGE  
 
 
  
 JUDGE  
 
 
  
 JUDGE  
 
 
  
Islamabad  
13.02.2023  
Naseer /Meher LC  JUDGE  
 