IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 234 of 2020  
(Against order dated 3.2.2020 passed by 
the Peshawar High Court Peshawar in Crl. 
Misc. No.3759 -P/2019)  
 
 
Asfand Yar Khan & another  
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
The State & another  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Basharatullah Khan, ASC  
 Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
 
For the State (s): Mr. Arshad Yousafzai, ASC  
 with Durran Shah, Inspector  
  
Date of hearing:  02.04.2020. 
 
ORDER  
 
  Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Asfand Yar Khan and 
Salman Khan, real brothers  inter se , seek admission to bail ; they have 
been arrayed as accused through supplementary statement dated 
4.9.2019 , in a case of homicide , registered on 17.8.2019 at Police 
Station  Paharipura Peshawar  on the statement of Nadim Safdar, 
acclaimed witness of the incident ; he had  blamed Asad, Farhan, Imran, 
Amjad and Aamir as the culprits for committing murder of his siste r 
Sumera Safdar and driver Inaam Lag, who drove the entourage to 
attend proceedings in a case of murderous assault  in District Courts 
Peshawar. Motive for the crime is bad blood  over property with a string 
of cases raging between the parties . Sumera Safdar ’s daughter  through 
supplementary statement joined the petitioner s with the co -accused, 
initially omitted by the complainant as well as the witnesses who 
claimed to have survived the assault.  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Be that as it may, the petitione rs were not named in the 
crime report as being alongside the accused who gunned down the Criminal Petition No. 234 of 2020  
 
 2
deceased; all the witnesses are unanimous on the number of accused 
as five ; the omission is intriguing and by itself brings petitioner s’ case 
within the remit of subsection 2 of section 497 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure 1898 . Criminal Petition is converted into appeal and same is 
allowed; the petitioner s shall be released upon furnishing bond s in the 
sum of Rs. 500,000/ - with one surety  each in the like to the satisfaction 
of the learned trial Court/Duty Judge.   
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad , the 
2nd April, 2020  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 