IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
  
 
 PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Umar Ata Bandial, CJ  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar      
 
CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 9 OF 2023  
(Holding General Elections of National Assembly and 
Provincial Assemblies on same date)  
 
 
Sardar Kashif Khan  …Petitioner (s)  
  
Versus  
Federation of Pakistan, Law and 
Justice Division through its  Secy. to 
the Law and Justice Division and 
others   
 
 
…Respondent(s)  
 
 
For the Petitioner (s) :  Mr. Shah Khawar, ASC 
   
For Federation  : Mr. Mansoor Usman Awan, AGP  
Ch. Aamir Rehman, Addl. AGP  
Malik Javed Iqbal Wains, Addl AGP  
   
For Jamat -e-Islami  : Mr. Siraj -ul-Haq, Amee r 
   
For PPPP  : Mr. Farooq H. Haek, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Qamar  Zaman Kaira  
   
For PML(N)  : Kh. S aad Rafiq ue 
Sardar Ayaz Sadiq  
   
For PTI  : Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
Mr. Faisal Fareed Ch. ASC  
Mr. Makhdoom Shah Mahmood 
Hussain Qureshi  
Mr. Fawad Ahmed Ch. 
   
For PML(Q)  : Mr. T ariq Basheer Cheema  
   
For ECP  : Mr. Sajeel Shehryar Sawati, ASC  
Mr. Om er Hamid Khan, Sec. ECP  
Mr. M. Arshad, DG ECP  
   
For PML (Awami)  : Sh. Rasheed Ahmed  
   
For MQM (P)  : Engr.  Sabir Hussain Kaim Khani  
   
For BAP  : Mr. Israr Ullah Tareen  Const. P. 9 of 2023   
   2
   
JUI(P)  : Nemo  
   
Date of Hearing  : 20.04.2023 
 
O R D E R 
 
   Pursuant to our yesterday ’s order dated 19.04.2023 , 
the representatives of the respondent No.1 and 2 and the senior 
leadership of all political parties  who have duly been instructed  
and repr esent their respective parties are present in Court today 
to inform us of the position of their parties on a political dialogue  
being held for settling a single date  for holding General Elections 
to National Assembly and  four Provincial Assemblies.  
2.  On be half of P akistan Peoples Par ty Parliamentarian s 
(“PPPP ”), Mr. Faoo q H. Naek , Sr. ASC has app eared and stated 
that a process for conducting such dialogue  has been i nitiated 
within the coalition partners of Pakistan Demo cratic Move ment  
(“PDM”) and that it is agreed that heads of all p olitical parties 
shall meet with the Opposition parties t o arri ve at a con sensus 
date for holding the General Elections to the said Assemblies  
simultaneously .  
3.  Khawaja Saad Rafique  has appeared on behalf of 
Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz) [“PML(N) ”] and endorsed the 
statement  made on behalf of PPPP . He also has expressed  the 
willingness of his party to enter in to neg otiation s with all political 
parties t o arrive at a consensus date for holding of General 
Elections of the Nati onal Assembly and four Provin cial Assemblies 
simultaneously . 
4.  Mr. Qamar  Zaman Kaira , for PPPP ; Engineer Sabir 
Hussain Kaimkhani  for MQM(P) ; Mr. Tariq Bashir Cheema, Const. P. 9 of 2023   
   3
PML( Q); Mr. Israr Ullah Tareen  for BAP  and Sardar Ayaz Sadiq 
duly instructed on behalf of BNP (Mengal)  also addressed the 
Court an d supported the views expressed by Mr. Farooq  H. Naek 
and Khawaja Saad Rafique.  
5.  Mr. Makhdoom Shah M ahmood Hussain Qureshi, 
Vice President, P akistan Tehreek-e-Insaaf ( “PTI”) also addressed 
the Court . He assured that notwithstanding the misgivings of his 
party with the political environme nt and disposition , his party 
was will ing to move  forward within the fram ework of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 
(“Const itution ”) to negotiate on an agreed date for holding of 
General Elections of the Nati onal Assembly and four Prov incial 
Assemblies simultaneously . Howeve r, he emphasised that the 
process of negotiation s should not be  open ended and not to be 
turned into a ploy for delaying  elections , which is the 
apprehension of his party. He emphas ised that such process 
should be regulated by a timeframe to ensure that the outcome is 
accomplished expeditiously , failing which  the Court ’s decision for 
General Elections for the  Provinci al Assembly of Punjab  to be h eld 
on 14.05.2023 be complied.  
6.  Mr. Siraj -ul-Haq, Ameer Jamat -e-Islami  has app eared 
and stated that dialogue  and consultatio n (ﻣﺷﺎورت   ) is not an 
option in public affairs but a duty as enunciated in the Holy 
Qurán . The 1973  Constitution forms the inali enable basis for our 
political  structure through democratic  government  for which 
elections are indispensable . According to him t he election is not a 
matter concerning two pol itical parties only but the will of the 
nation as a whole.  The world is changing an d Pakistan must Const. P. 9 of 2023   
   4
resolve its own issue s. He has further stated tha t for a political  
dialogue  it is essential  for all particip ants to be flexible about 
their respective  positions  and the approach of the parties should 
not be dictated  by ego or pride. He suggested a time frame unde r 
which two important  events  ought to be accounted for : firstly, the 
wheat harvesting season in May and secondly the occasion  of 
Hajj. According  to him  General Election s could be held 
immediately thereafte r.  
7.  Having heard the positive statement s of p olitical 
leadership of the country representing all major political parties 
with respect to the simultaneous  holding of General Elections of 
the Nati onal Assembly and four Provin cial Assemblies  gives cause 
for optimism  that they would agree to an e lection date sooner 
rather than later. However, the Court is also impressed to note 
that all political leaders affirm ed their fidelity  to the Constitution  
of Pakistan which is supreme and must be adhered to . We are 
cognizant that if political  dialogue extends to address all 
grievance s, then it is likely to be  a lengthy process  and the correct 
forum for that is the politi cal arena and political institutions . 
Howev er, we d id not find any reservations to the negotiations 
being c entred solely on a one-point  agenda , namely,  consen sual 
fixation of a date for holding of General Elections of the Nati onal 
Assembly and four Provin cial Assemblies  which is a constitutional 
and legal question . It is im portant tha t such result is 
accomplished expeditiously because  our judgment rendered in 
Constitution Petition No.5 of 2023 on 04.04.2023 has already 
fixed the date of election s to the Pun jab Provincial Assembly as 
14.05.2023. That judgment  holds the field and , ther efore, it s Const. P. 9 of 2023   
   5
ruling is binding on all judicial and executive authorities  in the 
country  under Article 189  and Article 190 of the Constitution. 
Therefore,  the proposal that the  first meeting of th e 
representatives of all political  parties be held today was 
appreciated and w elcome d by the Court. The Court adjourned the 
matter till 4:00 pm.  The Attorney Gen eral for Pakistan was 
directed to report the pro gress made in the matter today in 
Chambers.  
8.  Thereafter, the l earned Attorney General for Pakistan 
along with Mr. Farooq H. Naek, learned Sr. ASC met the Bench in 
Chambers and appr ised them of del iberation s amongst the senior 
Cabinet members  of the Governmen t and their interac tion with a 
senior officer bearer  of the PTI.  They s ubmitted that a recess is 
being taken on account of Eid-ul-Fitr holidays because  several 
political leaders and party heads have already left or leaving 
Islamabad for their home towns to celebrate  Eid-ul-Fitr. However, 
a meeting has been scheduled amongst the said leaders on 
26.04.2023 . The proceedings and progress of which  shall be 
reported to the Co urt on 27.04.2023.  
  To come up o n 27.04.2023  for report and further 
proceeding.       
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
 Judge  
 
 
  
 
Islamabad  
20.04.2023  Judge  
 