IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
   PRESENT  
   Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ   
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja  
Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain  
 
 
 
HUMAN RIGHTS CASE NO.19 OF 1996  
 
[Application by Air Marshal (Retd.) Muhammad Asghar Khan]  
 
 
 
 
Air Marshal ( Retd.) Muhammad Asghar Khan   … PETITIONER  
 
VERSUS  
 
General (Retd.) Mirza Aslam Baig, former Chief of Army Staff & others   
         …  RESPONDENTS  
 
For the petitioner:   Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC  
     Assisted by Malik Ghulam Sabir, Adv.  
a/w Air Marshal (R) M. Asghar Khan  
 
For the Federation/ :   Mr. Irfan Qadir Attorney General for Pakistan  
M/o Defence    Mr. Dil Mo hammad Khan Alizai, DAG  
     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  Assisted by:  
     Barrister Shehryar Riaz Sheikh,  Adv. 
Commander Hussain Shahbaz, Director (L)  
Wing Comd. M. Irfan, Deputy Director  
 
For Respondent No. 1:   Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC  
     Assisted by Ch. Hassan Murtaza Mann, Adv.  
a/w Gen. Retd. Mirza Aslam Baig  
 
Respondent No. 2:   Lt. Gen. Retd.  Asad Durrani, Ex -DG, ISI  
     In Person  
 
For Respondent No. 3:   Mr. Muhammad Munir P iracha,  Sr. ASC 
 
For the Applicant(s):   Sh. Khizar Hayat, Sr. ASC  
     (CMA No. 918/2007)   
 
Mr. Roedad Khan in person  
 (CMA No. 3196/2012)  
  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 (in CMA 3410/12)  
 
 HRC 19/1996  2 
On Court’s notice:   
 
For President Secretariat:  Malik Asif Hayat, Secretary to the President  
 Mr. Arshad Ali Chaudhry, Director Legal  
  
For SBP:     Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
For NAB:     Mr. Mazhar Ali Chaudhry, DPG  
 
     Brig. (R) Hamid Saeed, in person  
 
For HBL:     Nemo  
 
Date of Hearing:    19.10.2012.  
…  
 
         O R D E R  
 
  IFTIKHAR MUHAMMAD CHAUDHRY,  CJ. – The 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan commands that it is 
the will of the people of Pakistan  to establish an ord er wherein the 
State shall exercise its powers and authority through the chose n 
representatives of the people,  wherein the principles of democracy, 
freedom, equality, etc., shall be fully observed,  so that the people of 
Pakistan may prosper and  attain thei r rightful and honoured place  
amongst the nations of the world , and make their full contribution 
towards international peace and progress and happiness of humanity. 
People of Pakistan had been struggling to establish a parliamentary 
and democratic order si nce long within the framework of the 
Constitution and now they foresee a strong system which is 
establish ed by the passage of time without any threat  and which is  
subject to the constitution and rule of law.  
2.  The essence  of this Human Right s case is ba sed on  the 
fundamental right  of citizens enshrined in Article 17 of the 
Constitution. It r aises an important question of public  importance to 
enforce  the fundamental rights, inter alia , noted hereinabove, HRC 19/1996  3 
therefore, in accordance with the provisions of Art icle 184(3) of the 
Constitution , jurisdiction has been  assumed and exercised  to declare , 
for the reasons to be recorded later , as under :- 
 
(1) That citizens of Pakistan as a matter of right are free to 
elect their representatives in  an election process being 
conducted  honestly, justly, fairly and in accordance with  
law. 
(2) The general election held in the year 1990 was 
subjected to corruption and corrupt practices as in view 
of the overwhelming material produced by the parties 
during hearing it has been establishe d that a n “Election 
Cell” had been created  in the Presiden cy, which was 
functioning to provide financial assistance to the  
favoured  candidates, or a group of political parties to 
achieve desired result by polluting election process and 
to deprive the peopl e of Pakistan from being  
represented by their chosen representatives.  
(3) A President of Pakistan , in Parliamentary system of 
government , being head of the State represent s the 
unity of the Republic under Article 41 of the 
Constitution. And as per the oath of his office in all 
circumstances, he will do right to all manner of people, 
according to law , without f ear or favour, affection or ill -
will. Thus, holder of office of President of Pakistan, 
violates the Constitution, if he fails to treat all manner 
of peopl e equally and without favouring any set , 
according to law, and as such , creates/provides an 
occasion which may lead to an action against him under 
the Constitution and the Law.  
(4) The President of Pakistan , Chief of Army Staff, DG  ISI 
or their subordinates c ertainly are not  supposed to 
create an Election Cell or to support a political party/ HRC 19/1996  4 
group of political parties, because if they do so, the 
citizens would fail to elect their representatives in an 
honest, fair and free process of election, and their 
actions would  negate the constitutional mandate on the 
subject.  
(5) However, in the instant case it has been established 
that in the general elections of 1990 an Election Cell 
was established in the Presidency to influence the 
elections and was aided by  General ( R) Mirza Aslam 
Baig who was the Chief of Army Staff and by  General 
(R) Asad Durrani, the then Director General ISI and 
they participated  in the unlawful activities of the 
Election Cell in violation of the responsibilities of the 
Army and ISI as institution s which is an act of 
individuals but not of institutions represented by them 
respectively, noted hereinabove.   
(6) ISI or MI may perform their duties as per the laws to 
safeguard the borders of Pakistan or to provide civil aid 
to the Federal Government, but su ch organizations have 
no role to play in the political activities/politics, for 
formulation or destabilization of political Governments, 
nor can  they facilitate or show favour to  a political party 
or group of political parties or politicians individually, in 
any manner, which may lead in his or their success.    
(7) It has also been established that late Ghulam Ishaq 
Khan, the then President of Pakistan with the support of 
General (R) Aslam Baig, General (R)  Asad Durrani  and 
others, who were servi ng in M.I and n ow either have 
passed away or have retired, w ere supporting the 
functioning of the ‘Election Cell’, establish ed illegally.  
(8) Mr. M. Younas A. Habib, the then Chie f Executive of 
Habib Bank Ltd. at the direction and behest of above 
noted functionaries, arrange d/provided Rs.140 million 
belonging to public exchequer , out of which an amount HRC 19/1996  5 
of Rs.60 million was distributed to politicians , whose 
incomplete details have been furnished by General (R) 
Asad Durrani, however, without a thorough probe no 
adverse order can be passed against them  in these 
proceedings .  
(9) The Armed Forces of Pakistan , under the directions of 
Federal Government , defend Pakistan against external 
aggression or threat of war and , subject to law,  are to  
act in aid of civil power when called upon to  do so under 
Article 245 of the Constitution , thus , any extra -
constitutional  act, calls for action  in accordance with the 
Constitution  of Pakistan and the law  against the 
officers/officials of Armed Forces without any 
discrimination .  
(10) The Armed Forces have  always sacrificed  their lives  for 
the country to defend any external or internal 
aggression for which it being an institution  is deeply 
respected by the nation.  
(11) The Armed Forces , in discharge of their functions, seek 
intelligence and support  from ISI , MI, etc., and on 
account of security threats to the country on its 
frontiers or to control internal situation s in aid of civil 
power when called upon to do so . However, ISI, MI or 
any other Agency like IB have no role to play in the 
political affairs  of the c ountry such as  formation or 
destabilization  of government , or interfere in the  
holding of honest, free and fair elections by Election 
Commission of Pakistan. Involvement  of the 
officers/members of secret agencies i.e. ISI, MI , IB, etc. 
in unlawful activiti es, individually or collectively call s for 
strict action being , violati ve of oath of their offices, and 
if involved, they are liable to be dealt with under the 
Constitution and the Law.  HRC 19/1996  6 
(12) Any Election Cell /Political Cell  in Presidency or ISI or MI 
or within  their formations shall be abolished  
immediately  and any letter/notification to the extent of 
creating a ny such  Cell/Department  (by any name 
whatsoever , explained herein, shall stand cancelled  
forthwith.   
(13) Late Ghulam Ishaq Khan, the then President of 
Pakistan, Genera l (R) Aslam Baig and General (R) Asad 
Durrani acted in violation of the Constitution by 
facilitating a group of politicians  and political parties, 
etc., to ensure their success against the rival candidates  
in the general election of 1990, for w hich they  secu red 
funds from Mr. Younas Habib.  Their acts have brought a 
bad name to Pakistan and its Armed Forces as well as 
secret agencies in the eyes of the nation, therefore, 
notwithstanding that they may have retired from 
service, the Federal Governm ent shall take necessary 
steps under the Constitution and Law against them .  
(14) Similarly, legal proceedings shall be in itiated against the 
politicians, who allegedly have received donations to 
spend on election campaigns  in the general election of 
1990, ther efore, transparent investigation on the 
criminal side shall be initiated by the FIA  against all of 
them and if sufficient evidence is collected, they shall 
be sent up to face the trial, according to law . 
Mr. Younas Habib shall also be dealt with in the sam e 
manner.  
(15) Proceedings shall also be launched against the persons 
specified  hereinabove  for affecting the recovery of  sums  
received by them with profit  thereon  by initiating civil 
proceedings,  according  to law.  
(16) An amount of Rs.80 million , statedly,  has be en 
deposited in Account No. 313  titled Survey and 
Construction Group Karachi, maintained by MI, HRC 19/1996  7 
therefore, this amount with profit shall be transferred to 
Habib Bank Ltd.  if the liability of HBL has not been  
adjusted so f ar, otherwise, the same may be depo sited 
in the treasury account of Government of Pakistan.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
Judge  
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the   
19th October , 2012  
Nisar/*  
 
  Approved For Reporting  
 
 