IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Original Jurisdiction) 
 
 
 
PRESENT:  
   Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, CJ 
   Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan 
   Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed 
   Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi 
 
   Suo Motu Case No.1 of 2020 
(SUO MOTU ACTION REGARDING COMBATING THE PANDEMIC OF CORONA VIRUS (COVID -19) 
 
IN ATTENDANCE:  
 
For the Federation  : Mr. Khalid Javed Khan,  
Attorney General for Pakistan  
Mr. Sohail Mehmood,  DAG 
Mr. Idrees Mehsood, Member NDMA  
Mr. Aamir Ashraf Kh.,  
Secretary M/o NHRC. 
Dr Malik M. Safi, D.G. Health, NHRC  
Rana M. Safdar, Dir. NHRC  
Mr. G.M. Jakharani, Dy. Dir. (Lit), NHRC  
Mr. Asif Suhail, Dir. (Lit), NHRC  
   
For ICT : Mr. Niaz Ullah Khan Niazi,  
Advocate General, Islamabad. 
Waseem Ahmed, Addl. Dy Commissioner 
Mr. Amer Naveed, Asst. Director (Lit)   
   
For Govt. of Punjab  : Mr. Shan Gul, Acting Adv. General, Punjab.  
Mr. Jawad Yaqoob, Asst. AG Punjab. 
Mr. Muhammad Usman,  
Secy Primary & Secondary Health Deptt 
Mr. M. Nabeel Ahmed Awan,  
Secy. Specialized Health Care & Medical 
Education Deptt 
Mr. M. Aslam Ramay,  
Administrator Zakat & Ushar.  
Alamgir Khan, Secy. Zakat & Ushar  
(all via video link from Lahore Branch) 
Ch. Faisal Fareed, Addl. A.G. Punjab  
Mr. Rauf Siddiqui, Addl. A.G. Punjab . 
   
For Govt. of Sindh  
 : Mr. Salman Talib udin,  
Advocate General, Sindh  
Mr. M. Usman Chachar,  
Addl. Chief Secy, Home, Sindh. 
Dr. Saeed Ahmed Qureshi, 
Focal Person to Chief Secy. Sindh  
Mr. Zahid Abbasi, Secy. Health  
Mr. Salman Shah, D.G. PDMA 
Mr. Jalalani, Addl. Secy. (L.Govt)  Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020 
 2
Mr. Mazhar Hussain, AIGP (Legal)  
Mr. Iftikhar Shalwani, Commissioner 
Karachi. 
(all via video link from Karachi Branch) 
   
For Govt. of KPK  
 : Mr. Shumail Butt, Advocate General, KP  
Syed Imtiaz Ali Shah,  
Secy. Health, KP 
Mr. M. Idrees Marwat,  
Secy, Social Welfare Dept. 
Syed Wilayat Shah, Dir Operations  
Mr. Motasim Billah Shah,  
Special Secy.(Local Govt.) 
Mr. M. Israr, Secy Agriculture  
Mr. Parvez Sabitkhel, DG, PDMA.  
Mr. Jabriel Raza, Dy Secy, R & R. KP  
(all via video link from Peshawar Branch)  
   
For Govt . of 
Balochistan : Mr. Arbab Muhammad Tahir,  
Advocate General, Balochistan. 
( via video link from Quetta Branch) 
Mr. Ayaz Khan Swati, Addl. A.G. 
   
For Govt. of GB  : Mr. Muhammad Iqbal,  
Advocate General, Gilgit Baltistan  
 
For Pakistan Medical  
Association  
:  
Syed Iqbal Hashmi, ASC  
 
 
In C.M.A. 
No.3099/2020 : Mr. Samuel Payara,  
Chairman, Implementation of Minority 
Rights Forum  
   
Date of Hearing  : 08.06.2020.  
   
 
ORDER 
 
  Gulzar Ahmed, CJ.-  Reports have been filed by the National 
Health Services and Research Centre (NHSRC), the National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA), Cantonment Boards, the Islamabad 
Capital Territory, the Provinces of Punjab, Sindh, K.P. and Balochistan. 
While hearing the matter, the learned Attorney General for Pakistan has 
pointed out that the National Coordination Committee (NCC) made a 
unanimous policy dated 01.06.2020 (at page 6 of CMA No.3398 of 2020) for 
dealing with the Coronavirus (COVID-19). On our questioning, as to 
whether any law has been made in this regard, he stated that although 
some Provincial Governments have made laws, as yet no law has been Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020 
 3
made at the national level for dealing with the Coronavirus (COVID-19) 
and its effects on the citizens. This Court has emphasized to the learned 
Attorney General that making of laws at the national level is essential for 
dealing with the cases of Coronavirus (COVID-19) and that this Court 
vide its order dated 07.04.2020 has emphasized its importance, however, 
we observe that the needful in this regard has not been done. We, 
therefore, re-emphasize the importance of legislation at the national level. 
More so, it is observed that while passing executive orders, some 
Fundamental Rights of the citizens are trampled and affected.  He has 
contended that the Federal Government, Provincial Governments, Local 
Governments, Cantonment Boards, ICT and Gilgit-Baltistan Government, 
which are required to maintain sewerage, including man-holes and 
cleaning of medical refuse and general cleaning of their respective areas, 
should be directed to provide, to the sanitary workers, all required safety 
kits in order to ensure that while doing their work, their health is not 
adversely affected by any disease.  We note that sanitary workers, 
although employed for doing sanitary work, this does not mean that they 
should do sanitary work where their health and life may be jeopardized.  
They should not be asked to work beyond the call of duty.  If they are 
made to do work which has the remotest possibility of their being affected 
by such disease or ailment which may pose a threat to their life; strong 
and effective steps should be taken by the Federal Government, 
Provincial Governments, Local Governments, Cantonment Boards, ICT 
and Gilgit-Baltistan Government, for ensuring that all sorts of safety kits 
are mandatorily provided tosanitary staff and none of them should be 
allowed to work without safety kits being made available to them.  If 
legislation to this effect has not been made by the Federal Government, 
Provincial Governments, Local Governments, Cantonment Boards, ICT Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020 
 4
and Gilgit-Baltistan Government, they shall ensure that such legislation 
dealing with this very aspect of the matter shall be made, which is very 
important and a requirement under Article 9 of the Constitution, 
2.   Mr. Idrees Masood, Member, NDMA has stated that Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) is being manufactured by Pakistan Ordnance 
Factories (POFs) Wah Cantt as well as DESTO. He states that both 
companies are owned by the Ministry of Defence, Government of 
Pakistan. It is admitted that the machinery for manufacture of PPE was 
recently imported by DESTO.  Let documents of import of these 
machineries be filed by the NDMA with its next report to be submitted to 
this Court.  Such documents shall comprise of; Contract of Purchase, LC, 
Airway Bill, Packing List, Invoice, Custom Documents etc., if any.  The 
Member, NDMA is not aware of the correct number of laboratories 
conducting Coronavirus (COVID-19) tests in Pakistan.  He is directed to 
file a report regarding all the laboratories which are operating all over 
Pakistan and are providing testing facility for Coronavirus (COVID-19).  
3.  On the subject of locusts, the Member, NDMA stated that a 
survey was carried out all over Pakistan and a considerable area of all the 
four Provinces was found affected by locusts. 26 million hectares of land 
were surveyed and 500,000 hectares of land have been sprayed so far. He 
states that there are four spraying Beaver aircrafts which are with the 
Department of Plant Protection, out of which one is operational in the 
Sukkur region and the remaining three are not operational due to lack of 
availability of pilots. He states that one aeroplane was obtained from 
Turkey, on a wet-lease, and the same is being used to spray insecticides 
while three helicopters and ground vehicles are also being used for the 
undertaking of this exercise in all the Provinces. The Member, NDMA 
states that pilots for the remaining three aeroplanes will be available and Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020 
 5
the aeroplanes will also become operational within a short span of time. 
Let all documents of the wet-leased aeroplane from Turkey be filed with 
the next report.  Such documents shall also include full details regarding 
the number of employees, who rode with the aeroplane, the salary and 
emoluments paid to them, so also the details of service so far provided by 
this aeroplane.  The non-use of the remaining three aeroplanes of the 
Department of Plant Protection should also be explained.  This is 
necessary, for when Pakistan had four aeroplanes for spraying purposes 
why the need was felt for the obtaining of an aeroplane on a wet-lease 
and yet, we note that three aeroplanes are still not in operation.   
4.  The locusts have already been in Pakistan for a long time and 
to our information they have completed two cycles of their breeding in the 
territory of Pakistan. Still, we note that all out efforts for combating this 
menace have not been undertaken.  There is no doubt that the locusts 
pose a serious danger to the agriculture sector in Pakistan, in that it may 
wipe out most of the agricultural production and there may occur serious 
shortage of agricultural goods.  This shortage of agricultural goods may 
lead to a shortage of food for the people.  Thus, we note that the locusts 
have to be immediately dealt with and totally eradicated from Pakistan 
with due promptitude in order to ensure that it does not cause 
substantial loss to the agriculture sector of Pakistan.  A categorical and 
comprehensive report in this regard be filed by the Department of Plant 
Protection, so also by the NDMA before the next date of hearing.   
5.  In our order dated 18.05.2020, we observed that shops may 
not be closed on Saturday and Sunday owing to the approaching Eid-ul-
Fitr.  Since Eid-ul-Fitr has already been observed, the order of opening of 
shops of Saturday and Sunday is recalled.  The Government may make a Suo Moto Case No.01 of 2020 
 6
policy for opening and closing of shops as per their strategy to meet the 
dangers of Coronavirus (COVID-19). 
6.  Adjourned to a date after two weeks.  
 
 
 
 
    Chief Justice 
 
 
 
 
 Judge    
 
 
 Judge 
 
 
 
 Judge   
Islamabad, the 
8th June, 2020 
Not approved for reporting 
Ghulam Raza/-  