IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 PRESENT:  Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ.  
   Mr. Justice Jawwad S. Khawaja.  
   Mr. Justice Khilji Arif Hussain.  
 
Human Rights Case No. 19/1996, etc.  
 
Air Marshal (Retd.) Muhammad Asghar Khan.   Applicant(s).  
 
Versus  
 
Gen. Retd. Mirza Aslam Baig, etc.     Respondent(s).  
 
For the Petitioner(s):   Mr. Salman Akram Raja, ASC.  
    a/w Air Marshal (R) M. Ashgar Khan.  
 
On Court’s Notice:   Mr. Dil Muhammad Khan Alizai, DAG  
    on behalf of AGP.  
 
For Respondent No. 1:  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC.  
    a/w Gen. Retd. Mirza Aslam Baig.  
 
For Respondent No. 2:  Lt. Gen. Retd. Asad Durrani, Ex -DG, ISI.  
 
For Respondent No. 3:  Mr. Muhammad Munir Peracha, ASC.  
 
For the Applicant(s):   Nemo.  
 
For M/o Defen ce:  Commander Hussain Shahbaz, Director (Legal).  
 
For M/o Interior:   Khawaja Siddiq Akbar, Secretary.  
 
For HBL:    Nemo.  
 
For SPB:    Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR.  
 
For NAB:    Mr. Mazhar Ali Chaudhry, DPG.  
 
Date of Hearing:   04.10.2012.  
 
ORDER  
 
 In response to t he order dated 13.09.2012 reference of which has also been 
made in the order dated 03.10.2012 the Secretary Defence Lt. Gen. (Retd.) Asif 
Yasin Malik has submitted the written submission contents whereof are as 
follows: - 
“ In compliance of Para 2 of the H onourable Supreme Court of Pakistan 
order dated 13th Sept, 2012 passed in the subject petition, it is submitted that 
presently no political cell is functioning in the Directorate General, Inter 
Services Intelligence or any other agency working under the ad ministrative 
control of Ministry of Defence. ” H. R. C. No. 19/1996, etc.  2 
2. Similarly, Khawaja Siddiq Akbar, Secretary Interior, Islamabad, submitted 
following statement: - 
“ In compliance of Para -2 of the Honourable Supreme Court order dated 
13.09.2012 passed in the subject case, i t is submitted that IB/ISI are not working 
under the administrative control of Ministry of Interior. Furthermore, there is no 
agency under the administrative control of Ministry of Interior running any 
political cell.  
2. Submitted for kind consideration. ” 
 
3. On query he info rmed that Intelligence Bureau i s administratively 
controlled by the Cabinet Division. Thus in view of such information notice be 
issued to Secretary Cabinet Division alongwith copy of order dated 13.09.2012 
and the instant order with di rection to certify or otherwise as to whether there is a 
political cell in Intelligence  Bureau presently or in the past. This 
certificate/statement must reach to the office of the Registrar before the next date 
of hearing.  
4. Learned counsel for the petiti oner when pointed out that as per the 
contents of various documents/pleadings allegedly in the year of 1990 a cell was 
functioning in the Presidency and from the perusal of some documents it 
transpires that M/s Roedad Khan and Jalal Haider were incharge/lo oking after the 
affairs of the cell and it was being run under the supervision of the then President 
of Pakistan, late Ghulam Ishaq Khan, in as much as it is also on record that at 
some stage when late Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari, President of Pakistan, was 
the President some consultation took place between him, Mrs. Benazir Bhutto, 
Prime Minister and late Naseerullah Babar wherein the affairs of the cell 
constituted to support Alliance of Political Parties  were discussed , therefore, it is 
necessary to have t he view point of the office of the Presidential office through its 
Secretary because we are of the considered opinion that under Article 41(1) of the 
Constitution there shall be a President being head of the State and he shall 
represent the unity of the re public and under Article 243(2) of the Constitution 
“(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Supreme 
Command of the Armed Forces shall vest in the President ”. Therefore, in view of 
the constitutional importance of the Presid ent of Pakistan who apparently is H. R. C. No. 19/1996, etc.  3 
symbol of the unity of republic cannot undertake such activities in pursuance 
whereof allegedly one particular group of the political parties was being 
supported in the name of national interest. Learned counsel for the pe titioner 
stated that he should have made a request to this Court for impleading the office 
of the President as party in view of the constitutional provisions and the facts 
which have been brought on record in pursuance of various documents/pleadings 
availa ble on the file.  
5. On having considered his answer and the legal provisions as well as the 
material which has been gone through so far we consider it appropriate to implead 
the office of the Presidency as party through its Secretary. The office is directe d 
that the copy of this order alongwith a letter informing to the Secretary that the 
office of the President has been made a party and copies of pleadings except the 
classified documents be sent to the office of the President with further observation 
to ma ke arrangement for appearance of the Secretary if so advised and desi re on 
the next date of hearing.  
6. In the meanwhile, C. M. A. No. 3196/ 2012 filed by Mr.  Roedad Khan is 
also allowed. Notice be issued to him for the next date of hearing as this matter i s 
lingering on for the last so many years.  
7. Mr. Hussain Shahbaz, Commander, stated that the Ministry of Defence 
has already engaged a learned DAG, however, today no one has appeared despite 
the fact that on 03.10.2012 case was adjourned in his presence n or there is any 
intimation on his behalf for not appearing.  
8. Let the case be adjourned to 15.10.2012 at Sr. No. 1.  
 
Chief Justice.  
 
 
 
Judge.  
 
 
 
Judge.  
ISLAMABAD.  
04.10.2012.  
(Farrukh)  
 