IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 
Present:  
Justice Qazi Faez Isa, CJ  
Justice Muhammad Ali Mazhar   
Justice Musarrat Hilali  
 
 
C.U.O.18/2024 IN C.P.NIL/2024  
(Declaring General Elections 2024 Null 
and Void due to the Flagrant viola tions of 
Democratic Norms)   
  
 
Ali Khan  …Petitioner  
                                        Versus  
Government of Pakistan through A.G. Islamabad 
and another   
…Respondents  
 
  
For the Petitioner : Nemo.  
  
For the State : 
 
 
 
 
Ono Court’s call:  Ch. Aamir  Rehman, Addl. AGP  
a/w Lt.Col.  Kafeel Khan, Director (Legal) 
M/O Defence  
Mr. Akhtar Zaman, SHO Humak  
 
Mr. M. Shahzad Shaukat, ASC.  
(President SCBA)  
 
Date of Hearing:  21.02.2024 
ORDER  
Qazi Faez Isa, CJ. On 19 February 2024 the following order was 
passed:  
‘This constitution petition was filed on 12 
February 2024 directly in this Court in its original 
Jurisdiction, under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic republic of Pakistan. 
However, prior to its filing its contents were 
broadcast on the el ectronic media and published 
in the newspapers. The office has raised a number 
of objections questioning the maintainability of the 
petition. In view of the fact that the matter 
pertained to the elections it was fixed in Court to 
attend to the office objec tions, and if they were 
overruled, to hear the petition. After filing of the 
petition, and having availed of the maximum 
publicity, an application was submitted by the 
petitioner stating that the petitioner wants to 
withdraw his case and the petitioner doe s not wish 
to pursue his case any further.  
 CUO 18/24  2 
 
2.  The notice of today's date of hearing was 
issued, however, the process server's report states 
that when he went to the given address of the 
petitioner no one answered the front door when he 
rang the bell and knocked. The report also states 
that the mobile phone of the petitioner (on the 
number mentioned in the petition) was called but 
that too was not answered. We had kept the 
matter aside and had asked the office to also 
contact the petitioner on his given mo bile phone, 
but the same was not answered . 
 
3.  Whilst ordinarily a petitioner is entitled to 
withdraw his petition but if a petitioner is to 
exploit the situation and for publicity, and having 
achieved this objective seeks to withdraw it 
without any reaso n then it is tantamount to the 
abuse of the process of this Court. This Court will 
safeguard that, such manipulation does not take 
place. However, before proceeding further let 
another opportunity be given to the petitioner to 
be in attendance on the next date of hearing. 
Notice be served through the normal process as 
well as through the concerned SHO. The petitioner 
had described himself as an ex -Brigadier, 
therefore, notice be also served upon him through 
the Ministry of Defence, Government of Pakistan. ’ 
 
2. Learned Additional Attorney -General for Pakistan (‘ AGP’) 
states that the representative of the Ministr y of Defence went to 
deliver the notice at the address of the petitioner on 20 February  
2024, and according to the report of the Ministry of Defence, the 
notice was received by Mrs. Amama Sohail, who stated that she was 
a family member of the petitioner ; the receipt of notice by Mrs. 
Amama Sohail is submitted in original. Notices were also sent 
through the Distric t and Session Judge, Islamabad, who se report 
states that the petitioner was not available at the given address.  The 
report of the SHO of the area states that no one answered the outer 
door of the petitioner’s residence, therefore, notice was pasted  on it;  
his report along with the photograph s of the pasted notice is 
received.  However, the petitioner is not in attendance nor is 
represented.  
 
3. The Fixation Branch of this Court has informed that they had 
received an e -mail dated 19 February 2024, wherein the petitioner 
stated that ‘ I am EX -Brigadi er Ali Khan’  and that he had sought 
withdrawal of th is petition by filing withdrawal application (CMA 
No.1211/2024) . The e -mail confirms that ‘I don’t want to pursue the 
said petition anymore’ . The e -mail concludes by stating that ‘ I deeply CUO 18/24  3 
 
regret any inconvenience I might have caused to the Honourable 
Supreme Court and seek their pardon for my inability to appear in 
person as I am currently out of the country. I shall be extremely 
grateful to the honourable Court for their magnanimity and for their 
kindnes s.’ Copies of the petitioner’s passport with exit from Pakistan 
stamp of FIA Immigration  dated 17 February 2024, boarding pass 
and e -ticket have also been provided  by the petitioner . The e -ticket 
shows that he paid Rs.162,756 on 13  February 2024 for his travel 
from Islamabad to Doha, Qatar, and for a connecting flight to 
Bahrain.  
 
4. The l earned AGP states that the petitioner cannot refer to 
himself as an Ex-Brigadier  because he was court martialed by the 
Pakistan Army for committing sedition,  mutiny and in subordination 
in the year 2012 . He was sentenced to five years rigorous 
imprisonment and was released after serving out four years of his 
sentence as he was granted remissions . The learned AGP  further 
states that the petitioner was stripped of his rank, wh ich he can no 
longer use and the normal benefits which would accrue to a retired 
officer were not given to him.  
 
5. The President of the Supreme Court Bar Association, learned 
Mr. Muhammad Shahzad Shaukat, is present in Court and was 
asked to assist the Co urt. He submitted that the given facts and 
circumstances of the case constitutes abuse of the process of the 
Court and it should be ensured that this should not take place in 
future  and therefore this petition should be dismissed with 
exemplary costs of on e million rupees.  
 
6. The petitioner did not disclose the fact of being court 
martialed and mentions the rank which he held before being court 
martialed . He misused the rank which he had previously held in the 
Pakistan Army  which he could not do  so. The pe titioner must have 
used his rank t o attract publicity and to ensure that the contents of 
his petition are widely broadcast in the media and published in 
newspapers . And after having achieved such purpose, the petitioner 
immediately bought a ticket (on 13 F ebruary 2024) to catch a flight 
out of the country . The usual practice  is to buy a return ticket , but 
the petitioner bought a one-way ticket. He also did not disclose 
when he will return to Pakistan. The petitioner also did not disclose CUO 18/24  4 
 
the reason for his sudden departure from Pakistan  nor why he had 
to go to Bahrain . It is also not disclose d why, just one day after 
filing the petition, he sought its withdrawal. The petitioner’s conduct 
demonstrates that he wants to undermine the credibility  of 
constitution al bodies , which is neither in the citizens  nor in the 
country’s interest . 
 
7. This petition has also consume d valuable court time, which is 
to be spent on deciding the cases of genuine litigants ; not use the 
media for ulterior and nefarious purposes . The petitioner got 
prominent coverage and then the petition was abandoned and the 
petitioner left the country . Responsible media will undoubtedly want 
to disclos e this order and the petitioner’s conduct  to redress the 
damage done . 
 
8. The application for withd rawal of the petition (CMA 
No.1211/2024) is allowed and the petition (C.U.O.No.18/2024) is 
dismissed as withdrawn with cost s of five hundred thousand rupees  
which are directed to be paid equally to the Pakistan Bar Council 
and to the Supreme Court Bar Asso ciation within thirty days, failing 
which they be recovered from the petitioner as ar rears of land 
revenue . We trust that the Government of Pakistan will be ensuring  
that the petitioner does not  use the rank of a Brigadier  or Ex or 
former Brigadier  with hi s name .  
 
 
 
 
 Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
ISLAMABAD  
21 February 2024 
Not approved for reporting  
Mudassar /                                          Approved for Reporting    
 