IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN 
(Appellate Jurisdiction) 
PRESENT: 
Mr. Justice Maqbool Baqar 
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed 
 
 
Criminal Petition No.231-K of 2019  
(Against order dated 21.10.2019  passed 
by High Court of Sindh Circuit Court 
Hyderabad in Cr. Bail Application . No.S-
988 of  2019)  
 
 
Abdul Aziz Memon 
 
    …Petitioner(s)  
     Versus 
The State  
 …Respondent (s) 
 For the Petitioner(s): Mr. Bashir A. Almani, ASC 
 
For the State: Mr. Hussain Bux,  
 Additional Prosecutor General Sindh 
 
Date of hearing: 26.12.2019 
 
ORDER  
 
       Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J.- Apprehending arrest, 
Abdul Aziz Memon, petitioner herein, seeks bail in anticipation thereto; 
he is accused in Crime No.109, registered with Police Station Matyari, on the complaint of Hakim Ali, allegedly duped for appointment as a 
Naib Qasid in the Education Department, in lieu of payment of 
Rs.500,000. An appointment letter, received by the complainant, 
turned out a fake instrument after two years service without pay.  
 Before the Courts below, the petitioner pleaded innocence, citing 
a dispute over a transaction involving wheat crop for a consideration of 
Rs.200,000 paid through different bank cheques  issued in 
complainant’s favour, followed by a default; the same story is reiterated, nonetheless, in the absence of any proof or investigative 
support.    2.  Heard. Record perused. 
3.  Complainant’s futile service as a Naib Qasid at a school for 
a period of two years, abruptly terminated when the appointment letter Cr.P. No.  231-k OF 2019  2 
provided by the petitioner, upon verification, was found as a forged 
instrument; two years of service and a fake appointment letter are 
circumstances, resting upon incriminatory statements, singularly 
pointed upon petitioner’s culpability that he cannot ward off by 
clamouring a bald plea of mala fide , structured upon denial and a 
parallel story. Grant of pre-arrest bail is an extraordinary remedy, 
rooted into equity, to protect the honour and freedom of the innocent in 
criminal cases actuated by abuse of process of law for oblique motives and purposes; this protection cannot be extended in every run of the mill criminal case without grievously hindering the investigative process. View taken by the High Court, being well within the remit of 
law,  does not call for interference. Petition fails. Leave refused.    
Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge 
Karachi, the  
26th December, 2019 
Not approved for reporting 
Azmat * 