IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(ORIGINAL JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
MR. JUSTICE MUSHIR ALAM  
 
S.M.C. NO. 1 OF 2014 AND C.M.A. NOs. 217 -K/2014 IN S.M.C. 
NO. 1/2014, H.R.C. NO. 29960 -P/2012 , C.M.A. NO. 110 -
K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, C.M.A. NO. 120 -K/2014 IN 
C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, C.M.A. NO. 1388 -K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 
737/2014, C.M.A. NO. 139 -K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, 
C.M.A. NO. 142 -K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, CRIMINAL  
M.A. NO. 322/ 2014 IN CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 17 -
L/2013 & CONSTITUTION PETITION NO. 98/2011  
(Suo moto actions regarding suicide bomb attack of 222.9.2013 on the Church 
in Peshawar and regarding threats being given to Kalash tribe and Ismailies in 
Chitral)  
 
In Att endance:  Mr. Salman Aslam Butt, Attorney General  
 Kh. Saeed uz Zafar, Addl. Attorney 
General  
 Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, DAG  
 Mr. Sohail Mehmood, DAG  
 Mr. Razzaq A. Mirza, Addl. Advocate 
General, Punjab  
Mr. Zahid Yousaf, Addl. A.G. KPK  
 Mr. Ayaz Swati, Addl. A.G Balochistan  
Mr. Muhammad Farid Dogar, AAG 
Balochistan  
 Mr. Muhammad Kassim Mirjat, Addl. 
Advocate General, Sindh  
 Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG Legal, Sindh  
 Rev. Shahid P. Mehraj, Dean of Lahore 
cathedral  
 Mr. Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta, ASC (for Mr. 
J. Salik , ex-MNA)  
Dr. Ramesh Kumar Vankwani, Chairman, 
Pakistan Hindu Council  
 Mr. Saleem Micheal, Justice Helpline  
 Mr. Nadeem A. Sheikh, Advocate, Justice 
Helpline  
 Mr. Gabrial Francis Khan, ASC  
  
Date of Hearing:   19.06.2014  
 
JUDGMENT  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   2 
 
  TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLA NI, CJ .-  
 
“All mankind is from Adam and Eve, an Arab has no superiority over 
a non -Arab nor a non -Arab has any superiority over an Arab; also a 
white has no superiority over black nor a black has any superiority 
over white except by piety (taqwa) and good  action.1” 
 
  These suo moto proceedings under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan were initiated on a 
letter received from the Justice Helpline, an NGO , regarding an 
attack on a Church in Peshawar in which 81 persons died (subject 
matter of FIR No. 728 dated 22.9.2013 under Sections 
302/324/427 PPC,  3/4 of the Explosive Substances Act and 
Section 7 of the Anti Terrorism Act at Police Station Khan Raziq 
Shaheed (Kabuli), Peshawar) . Complaints were also received from 
adheren ts of Hindu faith and it was prayed that the Court should 
direct the authorities to take remedial measures so that their 
places of worship are protected . On 20.2.2014 there was a news 
item and article published in Daily Dawn wherein it was averred 
that the Ka lash tribe and Ismailies  in Chitral were being coerced to 
convert to a different sect within Islam or to face death. The Court 
considered all such incidents to be violative of the Fundamental 
Rights guaranteed to these citizens as also of the Principles of  
Policy enshrined in the Constitution. It considered it imperative to 
find out the causes which lead to such incidents with a view to lay 
down guidelines for effective enforcement of the Fundamental 
Rights guaranteed to the people. Notices were issued to the learned 
Attorney General for Pakistan and all the four Advocate Generals. 
The learned Attorney General for Pakistan pursuant to the 
direction of this Court placed on record the names of different 
                                                             
1 The Last Sermon (Khutbah) of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) (Fare well Sermon)  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   3 
 
minority community organizations and the persons who were  
heading those so that their point s of view could be heard before 
passing any final order. Those are :- 
S. 
No. Name and Designation  Address  Telephone Nos.  
 
CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY / PROTESTANTS / CHURCH OF PAKISTAN  
1. Rev. Bishop Irfan Jamil  
Bishop of Lahore,  Church of 
Pakistan  Bishop House 
Cathedral Close, the 
mall, Lahore  0333 -4756730  
2. Mr. Shahid Miraj, PS to 
Bishop of Lahore, Church of 
Pakistan  Bishop House 
Cathedral Close, the 
mall, Lahore  0300 -8433287  
 
CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY / CATHOLICS  
3. Arch Bishop S ubastain 
Francis Shaw  
Archbishop of Lahore  1-Lawrence Road, 
Lahore  0307 -2346072  
4. Mr. Tariq Inayat, PS to 
Archbishop of Lahore  1-Lawrence Road, 
Lahore  0333 -4285290  
 
HINDU COMMUNITY  
5. Dr. Ramesh Kumar 
Vankwani, MNA  Patron Inchief, 
Pakistan Hindu 
Counci l. 0333 -2277370  
 
SIKH COMMUNITY  
6. Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara 
Parbandhak Committee, 
being reconstituted  Mr. Junaid Ahmad, 
Secretary, Evacuee 
Trust Property Board, 
Lahore.  042-99211035  
0300 -4661285  
 
2.  During the course of proceedings , some of the issues 
brought before the Court were broadly as follows: - 
i) the allegation that Hindu girls were forcibly converted 
into Islam regarding which criminal cases were 
registered but there has been no progress;  
 SMC No. 1/2014 etc   4 
 
ii) the compensation announced by the Federal 
Government  and Provincial Government for the victims 
of Church blast in Peshawar had not been disbursed;  
 
iii) the allegation that Kalash tribe and Ismailies were 
facing threats to leave their sect or face death;  
 
iv) the complaint regarding Hindu gymkhana establi shed 
in Karachi in 1926;  
 
v) the complaint regarding Christ ian Mission School, 
Karachi, wherein the founder of this country Quaid -e-
Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah had his early education;  
 
vi) the complaint regarding the desecration of historical 
Hindu Temple of Amrapur Asthaan ; 
 
vii) the complaint of Mr. Ramesh Kumar Vankwani 
alleging that in the preceding two months ther e have 
been six incidents of desecration of Hindu Temples / 
places of worship in the Province of Sindh alone;  
 
viii) the complaint regarding non-registration of Hindu 
marriages by the NADRA and Local Council 
Authorities;  
 
ix) the complaint regarding non -registration of marriages 
of Christians; and  
 
x) the complaint regarding the issue of Smadhi of Param 
Hans G. Maharaj.  
 SMC No. 1/2014 etc   5 
 
3.  The Court heard at  some length the representatives of 
the Christians and Hindu communities as also learned Attorney 
General and learned Advocate General of Sindh, Punjab  and KPK. 
So far as the question of Hindu Gymkhana is concerned, the issue 
was subject matter of a Consti tution Petition No. 6/2009 before 
the High Court of Sindh and currently it is subject matter of Civil 
Appeal No. 16-K/2014 . The said issue, therefore, would be dealt 
with separately in that case. Regarding the desecration of Temples 
in District Larkana, th e learned Additional Advocate General 
confirm ed that cases had been registered against the miscreants 
under the relevant provisions of Pakistan Penal Code and the 
accused shall be brought to justice. Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, AIG 
(Legal) Sindh has filed CMA N o. 2878/2004 wherein the detail of 
the cases registered in this regard has been given, which is as 
follows: - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SMC No. 1/2014 etc   6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  The issue of non -registration  of Hindu marriages was 
resolved by NADRA and Mr. Ramesh Kumar Vankwani confirm ed 
that NA DRA had started issuing registration certificates with 
regard to the Hindu marriages. So far as the allegation of forcible 
conversion of Hindu girls is concerned, although criminal cases 
were registered in Punjab, Sindh and Balochistan yet generally it 
was found that most of the girls had eloped with persons of their 
choice and married at their own free will. Nevertheless, the Court 
would not like to comment lest it may prejudice the case of either 
side as some of those cases are pending trial before the ap propriate 
Courts. The learned Acting Advocate General, Punjab, submitted 
that in terms of the Christian Marriage Act, 1872, 150 Pastors and 
Bishops already stand registered in 20 Districts and any Christian 
marriage solemnized by a license holder under the  afore -mentioned  
Act from the concerned Church / denomination is duly registered 
under the Punjab Local Government Act and the Rules framed 
thereunder. Regarding the question of non -payment of 
compensation announced by the Prime Minister, the  learned 
Advoc ate General, KPK, has pointed out that the Provincial 
SMC No. 1/2014 etc   7 
 
Government had already disbursed the requisite funds to the  
victims of bomb blasts. So far as the  threats to Kalash minority by 
extremists was concerned, the Government of Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa took effect ive steps and learned Advocate General 
KPK has placed on record the report of the Commissioner, 
Malakand, which is to the said effect: - 
“i. The Commissioner Malakand in this connection visited 
District Chitral on 21st and 22nd February, 2014. On 
21st he we nt to Bumburet Valley of Kalash community 
by road, where he held a meeting with the Kalash 
minority. The issue was personally discussed by the 
Commissioner in present of the stakeholders at district 
level. It was confirmed that the threat mentioned 
earlier  by the TTP is not new and in this regard the 
video referred to in the various international 
newspapers and reflected in electronic media has not 
been circulated to the general public in Chitral. The 
Kalash minority, the district administration and the 
DPO Chitral expressed the opinion that the news story 
is old and it has been re -picked by some sectios of 
media for vested interests.  
ii. The Commissioner assured the Kalash minority that 
government will provide security to them and it was 
further communicat ed to them that a unit of Pak Army 
AK-42 regiment is already deployed in the area. 
Another platoon of police in addition to the already 
present one has reached the Bumburet valley. Police 
station Bumburet has a strength of 55 pesonnel in 
addition to specia l force of 15 personnel and 15 
personnel of border police are also vigilantly 
performing duties in the area. The district police officer 
informed that Kalash valley has its border with 
Nooristan province of Afghanistan but the area is 
presently inaccessibl e and snow bound totally and 
right from Arandu to Lutkoh there are 16 check posts 
located. At these 16 check posts Pak Army and other 
LEAs are regularly patrolling the Pak -Afghan border 
and any incursion from Nooristan into Pak territory is 
almost impossib le. However, as mentioned, LEAs at 
these 16 check posts are vigilant to counter any such 
attempt by the TTP.  
iii. The representatives of Kalash minority expressed 
complete satisfaction over the response of the 
administration and they were satisfied with t he 
security arrangements in the valley. They appreciated 
the visit of the Commissioner, the aim of which was to SMC No. 1/2014 etc   8 
 
assess the ground situation and have a direct 
interaction with the Kalash minority and share their 
grievances. The Commissioner also attended fu neral 
of an elder of the Kalash community, who died on that 
very day. The Kalash minority appreciated the 
Commissioner for participating in the funeral 
ceremony of their elder. On this occasion the 
Commissioner allowed the community to perform their 
ritual s according to their traditions and assured them 
that there will be no hindrance in the way.  
iv.  On 22nd a meeting was held in the Governor’s cottage 
Chitral with the Ismaili community in presence of the 
district administration. A direct feedback was 
obtained from the community. The Ismaili community 
of Chitral pointed out the broadcasting of provocative 
speeches from a local FM channel. It was revealed 
that the FM channel is a religious one and has been 
allowed by the PEMRA under the law, however the 
owner has been summoned by the district 
administration. He has been warned and strictly 
directed not to broadcast live discussions and only 
recorded programs will be allowed for broadcasting 
subject to the screening by the district administration. 
A timely ac tion has been taken in order to prevent any 
communal problem in Chitral and to promote complete 
harmony amongst the different sections of Muslim 
communities and minorities. The Commissioner 
directed the district administration to monitor the 
broadcasting o f the FM channel and in case it violates 
the agreement with the district administration, PEMRA 
will be requested for cancellation of its license 
accordingly.  
v.  The Ismaili community was assured that the 
administration is fully aware of the situation and  the 
Commissioner informed them, that it is right of every 
citizen to be given protection by the state as enshrined 
in the constitution of Islamic Republic of Pakistan and 
the government will leave no stone unturned for the 
safety and security of the Ismai li community, who 
have contributed for the development of not only 
Chitral but for the entire country. The Commissioner 
appreciated the role played by the Ismaili community 
in progress and development of the country, 
particularly Chitral and Northern areas . There is no 
one to deny the services of Sir Sultan Muhammad 
Agha Khan -III, for founding Muslim League in 1906 
and subsequent struggle for freedom movement. The 
district administration was directed to keep on board 
the representatives of the Ismaili commu nity for 
durable peace in the area.  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   9 
 
vi.  Moreover the administration and the Pak Army have 
taken all possible steps and security has been further 
beefed up in the area. It is worthy mentioning that on 
22nd February General officer Commanding, 17 Div of 
Pak Army, general Javed Bukhari also visited Kalash 
valley and reviewed the security arrangements. This 
also has boosted the morale of the people of Chitral, 
particularly the Kalash minority and Ismaili 
Community.  
2. The Ismaili community and Kalash minority  of Chitral 
acknowledged the prompt response of the administration 
and they expressed complete satisfaction over the security 
measures taken in the aftermath of the appearing of the 
news story in the media. In this respect, both the 
communities appreciated  the efforts of the provincial 
government for direct interaction with the stakeholders on 
the issue. It was confirmed that there is no indigenous 
sectarian issue in Chitral and all the Communities including 
the Ismailies and Kalash tribes live in complete harmony, 
and the story reflected in the international media has been 
reported with ulterior motives.”  
 
5.  Learned Attorney General for Pakistan  placed on 
record  (CMA No. 3426/2014) a notification  issued by the 
Government of Pakistan, Cabinet Secretariat, Establishment 
Division dated 26.5.2009, which is to the following effect: -  
 “The undersigned is directed to state that it has been 
decided by the Federal Government to reserve, with 
immediate effect, 05% q uota for employment of Minorities 
(Non-Muslims), a s defined in Article 260(3)(b) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973, to all 
posts across the board in the Federal Government  Services / 
jobs to be filled by direct recruitment including CSS, in 
addition to their participation in th e open merit.  
 
2. This reservation will have the same parameters as 
were prescribed for reservation quota for women vide 
Establishment Division’s O.M. No. 4/15/2006 -F.2 dated 
22.5.2007 and will count as part of overall provincial 
allocation as contained i n the Establishment Division’s O.M. 
No. 4/10/2006 R -2 dated  12.2.2007 and will be calculated 
against the quota of the province of origin of the Minority 
(Non-Muslim) candidate concerned.  
 
3. The above reservation will not apply to: - 
i) the percentage of v acancies reserved for 
recruitment on the basis of merit;  
 
ii) recruitment made by promotion or transfer in 
accordance with the relevant rules.  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   10 
 
 
iii) short terms vacancies likely to last for less than 
six months; and  
 
iv) isolated posts in which vacancie s occur only 
occasionally;  
 
4. The vacancies reserved for Minorities (Non -Muslims)  
for which qualified candidates are not available shall be 
carried forward and filled by Minority (Non -Muslim) 
candidates.  
 
5. These orders shall also apply to initial appo intments 
in all attached departments / autonomous / semi 
autonomous bodies / corporations / Public corporations and 
Companies etc. administratively controlled by the Federal 
Government.  
 
6. Ministries / Divisions are requested to kindly bring the 
above in structions to the notice of all concerned for 
information and compliance while making  future recruitment.  
 
7. For removal of any difficulty the interpretation of the 
Establishment Division shall be final.”  
 
6.  Learned Law Officer adds that the afore -referred 
notification also finds mention in the Federal Public Service 
Commission Rules for Competitive Examination, 2014. Learned 
Additional Advocate General, Punjab, has also placed on record a 
notification dated 27.3.2010, which is to the following effect:  
“No. SCR -III(S&GAD)1 -35893. In exercise of the powers 
conferred under Section 23 of the Punjab Civil Servants Act, 
1974 (VII of 1974) and in supersession of Notification No. 
SOR-III(S&GAD)1 -35/1993, dated 23.10.2009, the Governor 
of the Punjab is pleased t o direct that notwithstanding 
anything contained in the method of recruitment prescribed 
in all the services / recruitment rules, 5% quota shall be 
reserved for Minorities (Non -Muslims) as defined in the Article 
260(3)(b) of the Constitution of Islamic Rep ublic of Pakistan, 
1973, against the total number of posts advertized in future, 
including the posts to be filled on the basis of competitive 
examination to be conducted by the Punjab Public Service 
Commission. However, all the conditions prescribed under 
the respective service rules shall continue to apply.  
 
2. The reservations of vacancies referred to above will 
not apply to: - 
(i) appointment made by  promotion or transfer in 
accordance with the relevant rules;  
 
(ii) short term vacancies likely to last f or less than 
six months;  
 
(iii) isolated posts in which vacancies occur only 
occasionally; and  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   11 
 
 
(iv) vacancies reserved for Minorities for which 
qualified candidates are not available. These 
vacancies shall be treated as unreserved and 
filled on merit.”  
 
7.  Learned Additional Advocate General, KPK, also 
admits that in the KPK  Civil Servants (Appointment, Promotion 
and Transfer) Rules, 1989, Rule 10 specifically provides 
reservation of 5%  quota for minorities in all provincial services.  
Learned Additional  Advocate General Balochistan has made a 
similar statement with regard to the reservation of special quota for 
minorities in provincial service.  
8.  We find that the incidents of desecration of places of 
worship of minorities could be warded off  if the au thorities 
concerned had taken preventive measures at the appropriate time. 
The Court also found that the inaction on the part of law 
enforcement agencies was on account of the lack of proper 
understanding of the relevant law. For instance, the Court was 
surprised when the learned Additional Advocate General , Sindh, on 
Court query submitted that the desecration of places of worship of 
minorities was not blasphemous and not an offence under the 
Pakistan Penal Code.  When he was confronted with Section 295 
PPC he had nothing to say but to concede that desecration of places 
of worship of even a non -Muslim is an offence under the PPC.  
9.  There is a general lack of awareness about minority 
rights among the people and those entrusted with enforcement of 
law are al so not fully sensiti zed to this issue either. It needs to be 
reiterated that under the Constitution minorities have a special 
status. This Constitutional status has a historical background.  It 
would be counter intuitive if the right to freedom of religion SMC No. 1/2014 etc   12 
 
enshrined in Article 20 is interpreted in the manner which has the 
effect of encroaching upon religious freedoms of minority religions 
in Pakistan.  According to Tayyab Mahmud, Professor at Seattle 
University School of Law and Director of the Centre for Glo bal 
Justice, “The express guarantees for freedom of belief and practice 
of religion, rule of law, due process, equal protection, and a 
progressive legislative agenda, proffered by the leadership of the 
Pakistan Movement, constitute an implied social covena nt with 
religious minorities in Pakistan2. The protection of the freedom of 
religious belief and practice of all communities was indeed the 
predominant right asserted in several propositions and resolutions 
passed by the All India Muslim League (AIML). Despite the fact that 
members of the AIML were being strongly influenced by secular 
liberal thought, the idealogy underlying the Pakistan  Movement 
was the creation of a separate nation state for the protection of the 
interests of the Muslim minority in India.  However, these freedoms 
were not limited to the protection of the Muslim minority but all 
religious minorities. One of the famous Fourteen Points 
enumerated by Mohammad Ali Jinnah on proposed constitutional 
changes was that “full religious liberty, i.e. l iberty of belief, worship 
and observance, propaganda, association and education shall be 
guaranteed to all communities.3” Furthermore, “ adequate, effective 
and mandatory safeguards should be specifically provided  in the 
Constitution for minorities in these  units and in the regions for the 
protection of their religious, cultural, economic, political, 
                                                             
2 Feedom of Religion and Religious Minorities in Pakistan; A Study of Judicial Practice, Tayyab 
Mahmud, Fordham International  Law Journal, 19:1 (1995), p.51  
3 Point No. 7  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   13 
 
administrative and other rights and interests in consultation with 
them” as stated in the Resolution adopted by the 27th Annual 
Session of the AIML at Lahore on  22-24 March 1940 , which we 
now celebrate as Pakistan Day. Thus the very genesis of our 
country is grounded in the protection of the religious rights of all, 
especially those of minorities.  
10.  It was because of the historical context given in the 
precedi ng para that i n all the constitutional dispensations 
eversince the creation of this country besides Islamic provisions, 
the religious freedom and minorities’ rights were always provided 
for. The clauses and terms in the Constitution of Islamic Republic 
of Pakistan, 1973, relatable to religion are as under: - 
 (a) Religion [Preamble, Articles 2, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27].  
 
(b) Islam [Preamble, Articles 1, 2, 19, 31, 40, 62(d)(e), 
203C(3A), 203D, 203E, 203H, 227, 228, 229, 230, 
231] 
 
(c) Muslim [Preamble, Articles 3 1, 40, 41, 91, 203B(c), 
203C(2), 203E(4), 203F(3)(a), 230, 260(3)(a), 227]  
 
(d) Quran and Sunnah (Preamble, Article 227, 228, 230)  
 
(e) Sects (Articles 20, 28, 33, 227)  
 
(f) Belief, Faith and Worship [Preamble]   
 
(g) Non-Muslim [Articles 37, 51, 59, 62, 10 6, 224, 227, 
260(3)(b)]  
 
(h) Minorities [Preamble, Article 36]  
 
11.  An examination of the abovementioned various religion 
oriented provisions of the Constitution tells us that various rights SMC No. 1/2014 etc   14 
 
and privileges are conferred on various persons and entities. Th ese 
can be categorized as follows: - 
(a) A special place has been conferred to Islam as a 
religion.  
 
(b) Muslims have been conferred certain non -religious 
privileges in comparison to Non -Muslims [For example; 
The President and the Prime Minister can only b e a 
Muslim under Articles 41 and 91].  
 
(c) Various provisions seek a positive enforcement of the 
Islamic way of life [For example, the establishment of 
the Council of Islamic Ideology and the Federal Shariat 
Court].  
 
(d) Within the positive enforcement o f the Islamic way of 
life as described in para (c) above, the existence and 
importance of sects is recognized [For example, Article 
227 & 228].  
 
(e) Various rights and protections are conferred on Non -
Muslims/Minorities.  
 
(f) Regardless of the rights and privileges described in 
Para (a) to (e) above, the right to religious conscience is 
a right equally granted to all citizens, religious 
denominations and sects.  
 
12.  A reference to the provisions which specifically provide 
for religious freedom and minorit ies’ rights would be pertinent. 
Those are: - 
“20. Subject to law, public order and morality, -- 
 
(a) every citizen shall have the right to profess, 
practise and propagate his religion; and  
 
(b) every religious denomination and every sect 
thereof shall have t he right to establish, 
maintain and manage its religious institutions.  
 
21. No person shall be compelled to pay any special tax 
the proceeds of which are to be spent on the SMC No. 1/2014 etc   15 
 
propagation or maintenance of any religion other than 
his own.  
 
22. (1) No person  attending any educational institution 
shall be required to receive religious instruction, or take part 
in any religious ceremony, or attend religious worship, if 
such instruction, ceremony or worship relates to a religio n 
other than his own.  
 
(2) In resp ect of any religious institution, there shall be no 
discrimination against any community in the granting of 
exemption or concession in relation to taxation.  
 
(3) Subject to law,  
 
(a) no religious community or denomination shall 
be prevented from providin g religious 
instruction for pupils of that community or 
denomination in any educational institution 
maintained wholly by that community or 
denomination; and  
 
(b) no citizen shall be denied admission to any 
educational institution receiving aid from public  
revenues on the ground only of race, religious, 
caste or place of birth.  
 
(4) Nothing in this Article shall prevent any public 
authority from making provision for the advancement of any 
socially or educationally backward class of citizens.  
 
28. Subject to Article 251 any section of citizens having a 
distinct language, script or culture shall have the right to 
preserve and promote the same and subject to law, establish 
institutions for that purpose.  
 
36. The State shall safeguard the legitimate rights an d 
interests of minorities, including their due representation in 
the Federal and Provincial services.”  
 
13.  Religion has played an important role in human 
history, and faith has influenced the minds and actions of 
individuals, societies and nations down the ages. By freedom of 
religion and belief is meant the right of a person to follow a 
doctrine or belief system which, in the view of those who profess it, 
provides spiritual satisfaction. However, it is impossible to define 
the term ‘religion’ in rigid t erms. The freedom of religion must then 
be construed liberally to include freedom of conscience, thought, 
expression, belief and faith. Freedom, individual autonomy and SMC No. 1/2014 etc   16 
 
rationality characterize liberal democracies and the individual 
freedoms thus  flowing f rom the  freedom of religion must not be 
curtailed by attributing an interpretation of the right to religious 
belief and practice exclusively as a community -based freedom. The 
freedom of religion and conscience has been protected in several 
treaties and dec laration4. Article 18 of the United Nations 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 provides as follows: - 
“Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, 
conscience and religion. This right shall include  freedom to 
have or adopt a religion or be lief of his choice, and freedom, 
either individually or in community with others and in public 
or private, to manifest his religion or belief or belief in 
worship, observance, practice and teaching. ” 
  
14.  The fundamental  right to freedom  of religion and belief 
was articulated at the international level by the Declaration on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination 
Based on Religion or Belief. These human rights norms then serve 
as moral checks and efforts are continually being mad e to 
incorporate these rights into domestic laws. The Supreme Court of 
Pakistan has invoked International Human Rights norms in 
numerous cases5. It is evident from a bare reading of these 
provisions that the freedom of conscience cannot be separated 
from t he freedom of religion. While the freedom of conscience is an 
individual right, the right to religion has both individual and 
community based connotations.  Sub-article (a) of Article 20  of the 
Constitution also recognizes the individual and communal  nature  
                                                             
4 European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Article  9), the American 
Convention on Human Rights (Article 12), the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights 
(Article 8)  
5 Sardar Farooq Ahmed Khan Leghari Vs. Federation of Pakistan [PLD 1999 SC 57] at page 191; Al -
Jehad Trust Vs. Federation of Pakistan [P LD 1997 SC 84]  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   17 
 
of the right to freedom of religion as it addresses “every citizen” and 
“every religious denomination and every sect thereof” and one 
aspect cannot trump the other. Moreover, the individual aspect to 
the freedom of religion applies both against inter -religion and 
intra-religion conflict.  
15.  Of all the Articles relating to the minorities’ rights, 
Article 20 is of prime significance. A close reading of this provision 
would indicate that the freedom to practice religion and manage 
religious institutions und er this provision is multifacet ed because:  
(a) The right to religious conscience conferred under this 
Article does not make any distinction between majority 
and minority or Muslim and Non -Muslim. It is in the 
nature of an Equal Religious Protection Clause 
conferred on every citizen, every religious 
denomination and every sect thereof. This equal 
religious protection clause is in the same nature as the 
equal justice under the law and equal protection under 
the law clauses conferred under Articles 4 and 25. I n 
other words, every absolute equality and there is no 
distinction among citizens, religious denominations 
and sects thereof, as far as the right to religious 
conscience, is concerned.  
 
(b) The right to religious conscience is a fundamental 
right. It has not been subjected or subordinated to any 
other provision of the Constitution because it is only 
subject to law, public order and morality and not to 
any religious clauses of the Constitution. The very 
term law, public order and morality has been used in SMC No. 1/2014 etc   18 
 
non-religious terms as the notion of law or public 
order or morality is not reducible to the Islamic 
meanings of these terms. Therefore, Article 20 has a 
certain preeminence in the Constitution being only 
subject to the general restrictions of law, public o rder 
and morality, which three terms cannot be interpreted 
or used in such a restrictive way as to curtail the basic 
essence and meaning of the pre -eminent right to 
religious conscience.  
 
(c) The right to profess  and practice is conferred not only 
on religious communities but also on every citizen. 
What this means is that every citizen can exercise this 
right to profess, practice and propagate his religious 
views even against the prevailing or dominant views of 
its own religious denomination or sect. In ot her words, 
neither the majority religious denominations or sect 
nor the minority religious denomination or sect can 
impose its religious will on the citizen. Therefore, not 
only does it protect religious denominations and sects 
against each other but prote cts every citizen against 
the imposition of religious views by its own fellow co -
believers. It needs to be mentioned here that every 
citizen would necessarily include both males and 
females (Article 263), which point needs emphasis 
considering the exclusio n or subordination of women 
in relation to numerous forms of religious practices.  
 SMC No. 1/2014 etc   19 
 
(d) As far as every religious denomination is concerned, 
even sects within these religious denominations have 
been conferred the additional right to establish, 
maintain and  manage its religious institutions. 
Therefore, even sects within these religious 
denominations have been protected against their own 
co-religious denominations.   
 
(e) The right of religious conscience conferred on every 
citizen is a right conferring three  distinct rights i.e. 
Right to Profess, Right to Practice and Right to 
Propagate. What this means is that Article 20 does not 
merely confer a private right to profess but confers a 
right to practice both privately and publicly his or her 
religion. Moreover , it confers the additional right not 
only to profess and practice his own religion but to 
have the right to propagate his or her religion to 
others. It is important to note that this propagation of 
religion has not been limited to Muslims having the 
right to propagate their religion but this right is 
equally conferred on Non -Muslims to propagate their 
religion to their own community and to other 
communities. This should not be seen as a right to 
encourage conversions but more importantly, should 
be seen as  a right against forced conversions or 
imposing beliefs on others because if all citizens have 
the right to propagate then no citizen has the right of 
forced conversion or imposing beliefs on others.  
 SMC No. 1/2014 etc   20 
 
16.  Article 20 must then be interpreted to guarantee the 
rights of the community as well as the right of the individual 
against those from his own or other religious communities – the 
ultimate goal being the eradication of religious intolerance in the 
society. English political philosopher John Stuart Mill i n his 
treatise ‘On Liberty’ (1859) stated that “the great writers to whom 
the world owes what religious liberty it possesses, have mostly 
asserted freedom of conscience as an indefeasible right, and denied 
absolutely that a human being is accountable to ot hers for his 
religious belief. Yet so natural to mankind is intolerance in  
whatever they really care about, that religious freedom has hardly 
anywhere been practically realized, except where religious 
indifference, which dislikes to have its peace disturbe d by 
theologically quarrels, has added its weight to the scale. ” 
17.  Although in the West, the separation of the Church 
and the State and ultimately the Renaissance ushered in an era of 
objective reasoning, liberal democracy, freedom and secularism, it 
was soon  realized that religion could not entirely be relegated to 
the private / individual realm. The  political aspect of religion has 
been rife with  conflicts , extremism and a claim  of monopoly of 
truth  which historically has not been without its toll in h uman 
suffering. A step towards  resolution is promoting religious 
tolerance, which should be the underlying objective  in interpreting 
the right to freedom of religion. In the subcontinent , the individual  
right of freedom to religion has occasionally been tr umped by the 
right of the community, as in the above -cited Indian case  of Sardar 
Syedna . It is imperative that the right to freedom of religion be 
restored as an individual and indefeasible right , while concurrently SMC No. 1/2014 etc   21 
 
preserving and protecting this right at a communal level, where the 
latter does not infringe on the former. For, according to French 
writer, historian and philosopher Voltaire in his ‘Treatise on 
Tolerance’ (1763), “religion is instituted to make us happy in this 
life and the next. But what is r equired to make us happy in the life 
to come”  To be just.”  
18.  However, the question which calls for consideration is: 
do the minorities in practice enjoy the rights guaranteed to them in 
terms of the afore -referred provisions of the Constitution?  
19.  This question can best be appreciated if the socio -
political conditions in the country are kept in view. Pakistan is a 
transitional democracy and like all other countries (similarly 
placed ) is confronted with competing political and social 
challenges. Most  of the political institutions of consequence are in 
the process of evolution. However, the defining feature of a 
democratic governance is complete dedication and adherence in 
every day life to the seminal principles of equity, justice and 
inclusion of all  irrespective of their colour, creed, caste, sex or 
faith. The sustainability of democracy depends on how best these 
challenges are met. Democracy is not an unmixed blessing; on the 
one hand it confers respect for minorities’ rights and on the other 
it provides a platform where intolerance and hatreds get leeway 
leading to societal friction  and violence . Such intolerance and 
hatreds have found their way in the social media as well and no 
effort has been made to check it.  The English Daily Dawn alluded 
to this trend in social media in its editorial comment (dated 9th of 
June, 2014)  and said that: - 
“A Small -scale survey conducted by the online freedom of 
expression group Bytes for All of hate speech in social media SMC No. 1/2014 etc   22 
 
used and frequented by Pakistanis has produce d some 
disturbing, though not unexpected, results. Over 91pc of nearly 
600 respondents surveyed claimed to have come across hate 
speech online and a partial analysis of 30 popular Facebook 
and Twitter pages and accounts has shown how user 
comments are usua lly peppered with some form of hate 
speech . The names of the targeted groups will also cause little 
surprise: Shias, Ahmadis , Indians / Hindus, 
atheists/unbelievers, state institutions, women, gender 
minorities, Jews and local ethnicities. To be sure, view s 
expressed online do not automatically reflect the views of 
wider society especially in a country where roughly 10pc of the 
population is believed to be online. Yet, with the 3G/4G 
telecommunications revolution now just a matter of weeks or 
perhaps months , the number of Pakistanis online will certainly 
climb dramatically and soon. Hate speech online will be 
disseminated even  further as a result. Also while the 
anonymity of sitting behind a screen tends to coarsen public 
comments and discourse in the online  world internationally, 
there is a case to be made that the younger, tech -savvy 
Pakistanis online are taking their cultural, and hate, cues, from 
a society where such talk is increasingly acceptable currency.  
 
. 
. 
. 
. 
. 
 
 While not every hateful word can or does lead  to 
violence, there is surely more than just a correlation between 
the amount of hate speech against and the violence suffered 
by groups such as the Ahmadis and other religious minorities. 
With access to the online world about to explode, now i s the 
time for some serious thinking.”  
 
  It is because of absence of effective State action that 
despite elaborate textual guarantees for minorities’ rights, 
empirical realities reflect a mixed bag, rather a  dismal state of 
affairs.   
20.  The Human Right s Commission of Pakistan Report, 
2013 on sectarian violence makes a sad reading. “I n the first few 
weeks of 2013, sectarian violence claimed the lives of over 200 
Hazara Shias in Balochistan.  More than 200 sectarian attacks 
killed 687 people.  Seven Ahmadis  lost their lives in targeted 
attacks.  In the deadliest attack ever against Pakistan’s Christian 
citizens, over 100 people were killed in a Peshawar church.  A SMC No. 1/2014 etc   23 
 
Muslim mob torched a predominantly Christian neighbourhood in 
Lahore after a Christian man was ac cused of blasphemy. 100 
houses were burnt as residents fled.  Individuals charged with 
offences relating to religion included 17 Ahmadis, 13 Christians 
and nine Muslims . In Badin, dead bodies of two Hindus were dug 
up by mobs that claimed that the graveyard s belonged to Muslims 
and only Muslims could be buried there. ” 
21.  On a query made from the Chief Secretary 
Balochistan, the letter intimated the Registrar of this Court that 
about 415 Hazaras  who belong to Shia sect were killed on 
sectarian grounds in a period of 11 years.  
22.  The afore -referred report and other incidents of faith or 
ethnic based violence indicate that mere textual pledges in the 
Constitution, though important are not enough to ensure that 
those rights would be honored in practice. It i s, therefore, 
important that the concerned governments / institutions take 
proactive lead to ensure that those rights are respected and 
enjoyed in practice.  
23.  No society or nation is bereft of its share in 
discrimination, ethnic or religious bias  and t he resultant violence . 
In 1526 the Bishop of London was tried on the charges of terrorism 
and the allegation was that he wanted to blow the Parliament 
House because the Protestants had won majority in the 
Parliament. In his final play Henry VIII, Shakespea re has his 
Archbishop predict, “ the future Elizabeth will rule by a mixture of 
peace, plenty, love and a just measure of terror. ”  For hundred of SMC No. 1/2014 etc   24 
 
years the Northern and Southern Ire landers fought with each other 
and wrecked violence in the name of faith.  
24.  When we think of such incidents of violence in the 
name of faith, we are always remind ed of a quote from the Holy 
Quran6 wherein such acts have not only been condemned but have 
been classified as crimes against humanity. It ordains: - 
 
 
 
 
 
Translation : 
 
“On that account, We decreed to the Children of 
Israel the Eternal Moral Ordinance for all humanity 
(2:178) that whoever kills a human being, unless it is 
in the course of justice for murder or bloody crimes 
on the earth, it shall be as if he killed all  mankind. 
And whoever saves one life it would be as if he 
saved the life of all mankind. Our Messengers came 
to people with clear Truth, yet many of them 
continued to transgress in the earth.”  
  
25.  Islam does not compel people of other faiths to 
convert.  It has given them complete freedom to retain their own 
faith and not to be forced to embrace Islam. This freedom is 
documented in both the Holy Quran and the Prophetic teachings 
known as Sunnah. ALLAH addresses the Prophet Muhammad 
(PBUH) in the Quran:  
“If it had been your Lord’s will, they would all have believed 
all of who are on earth! Will you then compel humankind, 
against their will, to believe7?”  
……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………  
                                                             
6 Surah Al -Ma’idah (5:32). Translation by Moulana Shabbir Ahmed  
7 Holy Quran (10:99)  
SMC No. 1/2014 etc   25 
 
 
“Let there be no compulsion in religion; tr uth stands clear 
from error: whoever rejects false gods and believes in God 
has grasped the most trustworthy hand -hold that never 
breaks. And God hears and knows all things.8” 
 
 
26.  Not only does Islam give the freedom of religions 
freedom to non -Muslims,  its tolerant law extends to the 
preservation of their places of worship9. ALLAH says in the Quran:  
“(They are) those who have been evicted from their homes 
without right ---- only because they say, ‘Our Lord is God.’ 
And was it not that God checks the peo ple, some by means 
of others, there would have been demolished monasteries, 
churches, synagogues, and mosques in which the name of 
God is much mentioned  (praised). And God will surely 
support those who support Him (meaning His cause). Indeed, 
God is Powerf ul and Exalted in Might.10”  
 
27.  The Muslim Caliphs used to order their military 
leaders who went on military campaigns to take steps to guarantee 
this matter. The first example is the command of Abu Bakr to 
Usman ibn Zayd : 
“I command you to do then thing s: kill no woman, no child, 
nor an elderly person; do not cut down fruit trees, or 
vandalize homes , or burn it, do not be treacherous; do not be 
cowardly; and you will pass by people who have devoted 
themselves to monastery life; leave them alone to their 
devotions.11” 
 
28.  The second example is the treaty of Umar ibn al -
Khattab with the people of Iliya of Jerusalem:  
“This is the security given by the slave of God, Umar, the 
Commander of the Faithful, to the people of Iliya: they are 
guaranteed the security  if their persons, possessions, 
churches, crucifixes, and everyone within, whether sick or in 
good health, as well as everyone in their community. Their 
churches will not be occupied or demolished, nor will 
                                                             
8 Holy Quran (2:256)  
9 Aayed, Saleh Hussain, ‘Huquq Ghayr al -Muslimeen fi Bilad il -Islam, p.23 -24 
10 Holy Quran (22:40)  
11 Tabari, Tarirk al -Tabari, vol 3, p. 210 SMC No. 1/2014 etc   26 
 
anything be taken from them: neither furnishings nor 
crucifixes or money. They will not be forced away from their 
religion, or harmed because of it. They will not be occupied 
by the Jewish settlers in Illiya.12” 
 
29.  One of the foundational aim s of all the major religions 
in the world has been to eradica te this bias and to preach 
humanism. However, in practice on account of misinterpretation of 
some of the religious tenets, religion instead of liberating human 
beings from these curses of bias have enslaved them which has 
resulted in violence and human mis ery. Governments and 
parliaments in almost all modern democracies have endeavored to 
undo the injustices done to the minorities in the past.  
30.  In 1954 the U.S. Supreme Court in the case reported 
as Brown Vs. Board of Education  of Topeka  (347 US 483 (19 54) 
abolished  segregation in schools and ensured implementation of its 
judgment by directing the dispatch of federal troops to the 
concerned State. In the said judgment, the U.S. Supreme Court 
came a long way from its earlier judgment in Dred Scott Vs. 
Sandford (60 U.S. 393 (1857) where a colored was refused a status 
of a citizen. In not too distant past, the country elected a colored as 
its President i.e. Mr. Barack Hussein Obama.  
31.  In Canada only last month, the Parliament of British 
Colombia had to p ass a resolution of apology for discrimination 
and injustices meted out to Chinese immigrants. The daily ‘Globe 
and Mail’ editorially commented on this development and said: - 
 “It continues to be shocking that, as recently as 1947, 
there was explicit insti tutional racism against Chinese 
immigrants to Canada.  
 
                                                             
12 Tabari, Tarirk al -Tabari, vol 3, p.159  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   27 
 
 Last Thursday, the Legislative Assembly of British 
Columbia finally passed a motion to apologize to Chinese 
Canadians.  
 
Canada as a whole was deeply implicated. Though 
B.C. was the province chiefly co ncerned, the two most 
important laws that discriminated against Chinese 
immigrants were passed by the Parliament of Canada.  
 
Eight years ago, after he became prime minister, 
Stephen Harper moved promptly to offer an apology.  
 
According to the B.C. apology – a bipartisan motion 
presented by Premier Christy Clark – past B.C. governments 
enacted more than 100 laws, regulations and policies 
directed against the Chinese from 1871 to 1947. Jenny 
Kwan, an NDP MLA, gave the most substantial historical 
speech, point ing to 89 bills and 49 resolutions actually 
passed and seven reports delivered against Chinese 
Canadians and other non -whites. Almost every session of the 
House between 1872 and 1928 took such measures, and 
there were many other such motions, proposals and  MLAs’ 
questions.  
 
Early on, the fear of wage levels being undercut by 
immigrants was at least briefly set aside at the urging of Sir 
John A. Macdonald, who argued that the CPR would never 
get built without the labour of Chinese railroad workers.  
 
The head  tax – an oppressive economic disincentive to 
Chinese immigration enacted in 1885 – was not in the end 
effective. But anti -Chinese xenophobia seems only to have 
begun to wane when the Canadian government started to 
conscript Chinese Canadians in the Second  World War. The 
very restrictive and discriminatory Chinese Immigration Act 
was finally repealed in 1947, in the same year that Canada 
passed its first Citizenship Act, and in the period in which the 
Atlantic Charter, the Charter of the United Nations and the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights all emphasized our 
universal humanity.  
 
Thus, war and peace both worked against institutional 
racism.  
 
Of course, racism itself and some of its legacies are not 
dead. But progress, after all, is possible. And progr ess there 
has been.”  (Globe Editorial “B.C.’s overdue apology to 
Chinese Canadians’ dated 18th of May, 2014)  
 
32.  It requires a strong moral courage for an individual or 
a nation to apologize for having wronged a community. It is time 
for us as a nation a nd as individuals to have a moment of 
reflection, a moment of soul searching and perhaps a moment of 
reckoning to ask ourselves ; have we lived by the pledges made in SMC No. 1/2014 etc   28 
 
the Constitution and by the vision of Quaid -e-Azam Mohammad Ali 
Jinnah, the founder of thi s country who in his very first address to 
the Constituent Assembly on 11.08.1948 said:  
“You are free; you are free to go to your temples. You are free 
to go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this 
State of Pakistan. You may belong to any religion or caste or 
creed —that has nothing to do with the business of the 
State.”  
 
33.  The vision reflected in afore -quoted ex cerpt from the 
speech is the inspiration behind “Justice for All” (a poem created 
by one of us i.e. Mr. Justice Tassaduq Hussain  Jillani) which has 
been declared the Judicial Anthem by the Full Court and has been 
adopted by the Pakistan Bar Council as its theme song for its 
functions.  The poem reads as follows: - 
The toil, the sweat, the tears and the blood,  
Make up the labor for th e land begot.  
The freedom is won, but the chains are clung,  
There are miles to cover,  
The voyage is tough and the weather is rough,  
The odyssey begins; The Founder declares his vision  
Of Democracy, Faith, Tolerance and Compassion.  
Discriminate the State sh all not  
Thou may belong to any religion, creed or caste.  
Oh! The vision is distorted, the march is thwarted,  
Castles in the sand, babes in the woods,  
Recipes of fall abound in the books.  
The nation is cut, the land is bled  
When the message is lost, a die i s cast,  
The wages are loud, Beware of the clouds.  
Long live the message, the Lamp and the rays  
That glow The Temple, which holds the scales,  
Pinning the dreams, the hopes and the oath  
Of Justice for All  
   
34.  The Supreme Court, being the apex court in a liberal 
democracy, is mandated to protect and defend the Constitution 
which embodies the fundamental rights of its citizens. Thus, while 
deciding cases entailing inter -faith or intra -faith conflicts, the 
Courts should keep in view the fact that there are s ome in every 
faith who seek to interpret religion in myopic terms. In evangelistic SMC No. 1/2014 etc   29 
 
exuberance, they tend to forget that the message of all faiths is 
common and for the benefit of the entire humanity.  
35.  As Voltaire aptly stated in his ‘Treatise on Toler ance’ 
(1763): “O different worshippers of a peaceful God! If you have a 
cruel heart, if, while you adore he whose whole law consists of 
these few words, ‘Love God and your neighbor, ’ you have burdened 
that pure and holy law with false and unintelligible di sputes, if you 
havelighted the flames of discord sometimes for a new word, and 
sometimes for a single letter of the alphabet; if you have attached 
eternal  punishment to the omission of a few words, or of certain 
ceremonies which other people cannot compreh end, I must say to 
you with tears of compassion for mankind : ‘Transport yourselves 
with me to the day on which all men will be judged and on which 
God will do unto each according to his works. ’ 
36.  The spirit of pluralism reflect ed in the Holy Quran 
const antly points out that Muhammad (PBUH) had not come to 
cancel the older religions, to contradict their Prophets or to start a 
new faith. To the contrary, His message is the same as that of 
Abraham, Moses, David, Solomon or Jesus. The cherished goal of 
creat ing a more pluralistic  society where fundamental rights are 
respected would continue to elude us unless we realize that we are 
living in a world of globalized interdependence, a world of 
interconnectivity, of cyber space, of shrunken distances, of cross 
border migration, and a world of rapidly changing cultural 
identities. We  are all members of one race of humans with common 
challenges, and we cannot confront these challenges without 
forging a common alliance. This paradigm shift in the world 
around us can be achieved at the international and domestic levels SMC No. 1/2014 etc   30 
 
only by discouraging  sectarian, racial and ethnic biases which are 
violative of shared values and fundamental rights, and by the 
promotion of and strict compliance with these values and rights.  
37.  For what has been discussed above, we hold, declare 
and direct: - 
(i) the Federal Government should constitute a taskforce 
tasked with developing a strategy of religious 
tolerance;  
(ii) appropriate curricula be developed at school and 
college level s to promote  a culture of religious and 
social tolerance. In 1981 in one of its seminal 
declarations, the United Nations resolved that “ the 
child shall be protected from any form of discrimination 
on the grounds of religion or belief. He shall be brought 
up in the spi rit of understanding, tolerance, friendship 
among peoples, peace and universal brotherhood, 
respect for freedom of religion or belief of others, and in 
full consciousness that his energy and talents should be 
devoted to the service of his fellow men .” (UN 
Declaration on the Elimination on All Forms of 
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or 
Belief)  
(iii) the Federal Government should take appropriate steps 
to ensure that hate speeches in social media are 
discouraged and the delinquents are br ought to justice 
under the law;  SMC No. 1/2014 etc   31 
 
(iv) a National Council for minorities’ rights be constituted. 
The function of the said Council should inter alia be to 
monitor the practical realization of the rights and 
safeguards provided to the minorities under the 
Constitution and law. The Council should also be 
mandated to frame policy recommendations for 
safeguarding and protecting minorities’ rights by the 
Provincial and Federal Government;  
(v) A Special Police Force be established with professional 
training to prot ect the places of worship of minorities.  
(vi) In view of the statement made by learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan and learned Additional Advocate 
Generals of Punjab , KPK and Balochista n regarding 
reservation of quota for minorities in the federal and 
provincial services, it is directed that the Federal 
Government and all Provincial Governments shall 
ensure the enforcement of the relevant policy 
directive s regarding reservation of quota for minorities 
in all services.  
 
(vii) in all cases of violation of any of the rights guaranteed 
under the law or desecration of the places of worship 
of minorities, the concerned Law Enforcing Agencies 
should promptly take action including the registration 
of criminal cases against the delinquents.  
 
(viii) The office shal l open a separate file to be placed before 
a three Members Bench to ensure that this judgment SMC No. 1/2014 etc   32 
 
is given effect to in letter and spirit and the said Bench 
may also entertain complaints / petitions relatable to 
violation of Fundamental Rights of minorities in  the 
country.  
 
38.  These proceedings stand disposed of having fructified 
in terms noted above.  
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
19th of June, 2014  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  
 
 





S.M.C. NO. 1 OF 2014 AND C.M.A. NOs. 217-K/2014 IN S.M.C. NO. 1/ 2014,
H.R.C. NO. 29960-P/2012, C.M.A. NO. 110-K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737 /2014,
C.M.A. NO. 120-K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, C.M.A. NO. 1388-K/ 2014 IN
C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, C.M.A. NO. 139-K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737/201 4, C.M.A.
NO. 142-K/2014 IN C.M.A. NO. 737/2014, CRIMINAL  M.A. NO. 322/20 14 IN
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL PETITION NO. 17-L/2013 & CONSTITUTION
PETITION NO. 98/2011
 22.09.2013 

 









 Rev.

1



201419 





 184(3)  1973 

7 2 8 
 3/4  302/324/427  22-09-2013 
 7


 "" 20-02-2014 



2



   
 / /
0333-4756730 Bishop House
Cathedral Close,
the mall, LahoreRev. Bishop Irfan
Jamil Bishop of
Lahore, Church of
Pakistan1
0300-8433287 Bishop House
Cathedral Close,
the mall, LahoreMr. Shahid Miraj,
PS to Bishop of
Lahore, Church of
Pakistan2
 /
0307-2346072 1-Lawrence Road,
LahoreArch Bishop
Subastain  Francis 
Shaw
A r c h b i s h o p  o f
Lahore3
0333-4285290 1-Lawrence Road,
LahoreMr. Tariq Inayat,
PS to  Archbishop 
of Lahore4

0333-2277370 Patron Inchief,
Pakistan Hindu
Council.Dr. Ramesh
Kumar Vankwani,
MNA5

042-99211035
0300-4661285Mr. Junaid
Ahmad, Secretary,
Evacuee Trust
Property Board,
Lahore.Pakistan Sikh
Gurdwara
Parbandhak
Committee, being
reconstituted6

 1
3
 2

 3

 1926 4

 5

 6
 7

 8
 9
 10
 .3
 6  2009 
 16-K  2014 


 2014 
 2878
45
6
 .4




 150 1872 
 20





22 21  i
 21  2014 
  (Bumburet Valley) 


 TTP 





 ii
 AK-42 
7
 55 
15  15 




 16  16 
 LEAs 

 16  LEAs 


 iii










 22  iv

8











 v








 1906


 VI

9 17div  22



 2







 3426/2014  5
 26.05.2009 

 "
 5% 
 260(3)(b)  1973 

 CSS 

 2

10 22-05-2007  O.M.No.4/15/2006-F.2

22-05-2007  O.M.No.4/10/2006 R-2 


 3
 i

 ii

 (iii)

 (iv)
 4


 /  /  5
 /  / 


 /  6


 7

11 
 6
27-03-2010  2014

1974(VII of  SCR-111(S&GAD)1-35893 
 1 9 7 4 )
 23-10-2009  30R-111(S&GAD)1-35/1993
 / 


260(3)(b)  1973 

 2
 (i)
 (ii)
 (iii)
 (iv)

(  7
 10  1989 


 8
12


 295 


 9

 20 


"





 2"





" 


  3
"



 2422  27  "

 1940
13
 10
 1973 
2,20,21,22,26,27  a
1, 2, 19, 31, 40, 62(d)(e), 203C(3A), 203D, 203E, 203H, 227, 228 , 229,  b
230, 231)
31,40,41, 60(3)(a), 91,203(c),203(2),203E(4),203F(3)(a),227,230  c
227,228,230  d
20,28,33,227  e
 f
(37,51,59,62,106,224,227,260(3)(b)  g
36  ) h
 11

 a
  9141  b

 c 

 228227  'c' d
 e
 ea f

14 12
 -20"
 

 

 -21


  -22


 

 
 


 


 

 251 -28

15
 -36

 13




 "4 
 18 1966
 "


" 
 14


 5 

 (a) 20 
 "  "" " 

 20  15
16

 a


 254



 b




 20


 c






 263 

17
 d


 e
 20 







 2016

 (1859)(libety) 






 17


18

(Indian case of Sardar 
 Syedna)

 " (Voltaire) 
 " (1763) "

" 
 .18

 .19







14 "" 
 2014
 "

19 600  "
 30 
  face book 




 4 G 3G 















 2013  20
202000  200  2013
 7  687 
 100 
 100 
 9 13 17 

" 
 21
 11  415
 22


 23
 1526
 (Protestants) 
 "  " "
" 

 24




21



32 
 25




99 
 "


" 
256 
 26

"  "
 " 



40  
22 /  27

 "





" 
210 
 28
 "








" 
210 
 29
23



Brown Vs. Board

 195430
 of Education of Topeka (347 US 483 (1954)

 Dred Scott Vs. Sandford 960 US 393 (1857)



 /  31

 1947  "




 /




  

 / 
24
 1947  1871  BC 
 100 
 NDP 
49  89 

 7
1872 
 1928






 1885 - 
 - 



Chinese 
 1947  Immigraton Act
(Citizenship 
 Act)


25

 / 

 "   
201418 " 
 32


11 
 1948
 "



" 
"  "  33

 " " 
 (Theme Song)


26


















 34




 "Treatise on Tolerance"  " Voltaire  35
27 "

'

 '




" 

" 
 36








 37
 1
1981  2
 " 


" 

28 3


 4


 5
 6


 7


 8


 38




201419

29