IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:   
MR. JUSTICE MIAN SAQIB NISAR, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE FAISAL ARAB  
MR. JUSTICE IJAZ UL AHSAN  
 
 
Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
IN THE MATTER OF SLACKNESS IN THE PROGRESS OF 
PENDING ENQUIRIES  RELATING TO FAKE BANK 
ACCOUNTS, ETC.  
 
In Attendance:  
 Mr. Anwar Mansoor Khan, Attorney General 
for Pakistan  
Syed Asghar Haider, PG, NAB  
Mr. Khurram Saeed, Addl.AGP  
Mr. Salman Talib ud Din, AG, Sindh  
 Ch. Aitzaz Ahsan, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Gohar Ali Khan, ASC (Fo r Bahria Town)  
 Kh. Ahmed Tariq Raheem, Sr. ASC  
Mr. Azhar Siddique, ASC (For Zain Malik  & Malik Riaz ) 
 Mr. Naeem Bukhari, ASC  
Ch. Akhtar Ali, AOR for NBP  
 Mr. Farooq H. Naek, Sr. ASC  
Sardar M. Latif Khosa, Sr.ASC  
(For Asif Ali Zardari and Faryal Talpur)  
 Mr. Zakir Hussain Khaskheli, ASC  
Muhammad Irfan, Law Officer for MLD  
Mr. Imran Aziz, ASC for Silk Bank  
 Mr. Shahid Hamid, Sr. ASC  
Ms. Ayesha Hamid, ASC  
Syed Rafaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
(For Anwar Majeed a nd Abdul Ghani Majeed 
and Omni Group)  
 Mr. Munir Ahmed Bhatti, ASC  
(For Kh. Nimar Majeed, Kh. Mustafa  
Zulqarnain Majeed and Ali Kamal Majeed)  
 Kh. Naveed Ahmed, ASC for President 
Sindh Bank  and Mr. Ahsan Tariq, President 
Sindh Bank  
 Mr. Salman Aslam Butt, Sr. ASC for UBL  
 Mr. Ibrar Saeed, Legal Adviso r 
(For SECP)  
 Mr. Najeem  Jamali, ASC  
Mr. M. Qasim Mirjat, AOR  
(For Nasir Abdullah Lootha)  
 Mr. Abid S. Zuberi, ASC  
Mr. Tariq Aziz, AOR  
(For Summit Bank)  
 Mr. Shaukat  Hayat, ASC  
Mr. M. Qasim Mirjat, AOR  
(For Hussain Lawai)  
 Mr. Ahmed Nawaz  Chaudh ry, AOR  Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 2
(For Sher Muhammad Mugheri)  
 Mr. Shahab Sarki, ASC for Shahzad Jatoi  
(For A One Group)  
 
For FIA  Mr. Bashir Ahmed Memon, DG FIA  
Mr. Ali Sher Jakhrani, Dir Law  
Mr. I.D Mangi, AIGP (Legal) Sindh Karachi  
 Mr. M. Saleem Baig, Chairman, PEMRA  
Mr. Ali Zeeshan  Gondal, Head Legal, PEMRA  
 
For State Bank  Syed Ansar Hussain, AD  
Raja Abdul Ghafoor, AOR  
 
For JIT:  Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, ASC  
Mr. Ihsan Siddiqui, Addl.DG, FIA  
Brig. Shahid Parvez, ISI  
Mr. Muhammad Afzal, SECP  
Mr. Nauman Aslam, NAB  
Mr. Imran Latif, FBR  
Mr. Majid Hussain, SBP  
Malik Tariq, Addl.Dir Law, FIA  
 
Date of Hearing:  07.01.2019  
ORDER  
 
  IJAZ UL AHSAN, J -. This Court had taken Suo 
Motu notice under Article 184(3) of the Constitution of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 1973 (“the Constitution”)  
regar ding widespread reports of fake accounts in Summit 
Bank Limited, Sindh Bank Limited and United Bank Limited . 
These accounts were allegedly being used for money 
laundering and other unlawful activities involving tainted  
money , bribes and kickbacks. Directio ns were issued to 
Director General, Federal Investigation Agency (DG, FIA) to 
appear alongwith all relevant record s and apprise th is Court 
regarding the progress made in the matter and reasons for 
delay in finalization of the same.  
 
2.  The DG, FIA submit ted a report containing details 
of persons/companies in whose names fake bank accounts 
had been opened for the purposes of money laundering and Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 3
other unlawful activities. The names of persons who allegedly 
deposited the amounts running into Billions of Rup ees and 
alleged beneficiaries of the said accounts were also 
mentioned.  
 
3.  Having heard DG, FIA and on perusal of the report 
submitted by  DG, FIA, we as a first step directed that all 
those persons whose names appeared in the report be 
summoned to appea r before this Court. President s/Chief 
Executive Officers of United Bank Limited , Summit Bank 
Limited and Sindh Bank Limited were also directed to appear 
before this Court.  
 
4.  We were informed that a number of petitions had 
been filed before the High Cou rt of Sindh seeking various 
kinds of relief. The record of the said cases was also 
requisitioned for our perusal. We were also informed that 
shares worth Rs.7 billion representing equit y of the 
shareholders had been deposited by Summit Bank Limited 
with th e State Bank of Pakistan. An apprehension was 
expressed that the said shares/funds may be 
misappropriated . We accordingly directed that the pledged 
shares shall not be allowed to be withdrawn by the pledgor. 
Further, the accounts were also directed to be f rozen.  Both 
the said orders shall continue to hold the field.   
 
5.  Vide our order dated 12.07.2018, we had also 
directed that persons who were accused in criminal cases 
involving opening of fake accounts and either operating or 
being beneficiaries of the  same may be placed on the Exit Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 4
Control List (ECL) . The Ministry of Interior, Government of 
Pakistan, was accordingly directed to do the needful.  
 
6.  We also directed the Inspector General of Police, 
Sindh to ensure presence of all persons before this Co urt so 
as to give them an opportunity to clear their respective 
positions. A number of counsel appeared before this Court 
claiming to be authorized by M/s Anwar Majeed and Abdul 
Ghani Majeed.  However, most of them could not produce any 
validly executed pow er of attorney. Finally, Mr. Shahid 
Hamid, learned ASC, submitted his power of attorney to 
represent Omni Group as well as M/s Anwar Majeed, Abdul 
Ghani Majeed, Ali Kamal Majeed, Mustafa Zulqarnain Majeed 
and Namar Majeed. The said persons were also direct ed to 
appear before this Court in person.  
 
7.  There were also serious complaints by various 
employees of  the Banks including UBL, SBL and Sindh Bank 
Limited about harassment caused to them by private 
individuals as well as functionaries of Sindh Police. The IGP 
Sindh was summoned  before this Court and directed to 
provide necessary protection to the victims of harassment. 
The Group which prima facie  appears to have direct 
connection with most of the transactions was the Omni 
Group. It consists of various c ompanies  and is being run and 
operated by the Majeed Family directly or indirectly. The 
names of male members of Majeed Family were directed to be 
placed on ECL. Further, they were directed to appear before 
FIA for the purposes of interrogation and investi gation. Mr. Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 5
Asif Ali Zardari and Mrs. Faryal Talpur were also accused of 
having involvement in the transactions undertaken through 
fake accounts and were therefore directed to appear before 
FIA for investigation which they did after some initial 
hesitation . Mr. Anwar Majeed is in custody in a Hospital. Mr. 
Abdul Ghani Majeed is lodged in Adyala Jail, Rawalpindi.  
 
8.  It may be recalled that the matter initially arose 
out of inquiries initiated by FIA regarding fake/ Benami  
accounts  opened  by various individ uals and entities including 
M/s A -One International, Iqbal Metals, Lucky International 
and Omair Associates. Another inquiry was also initiated on 
receipt of Suspicious Transaction Report s (STRs) from 
Financial Monitoring Units (FMU) of the State Bank of 
Pakistan. An investigation team headed by Dr. Najaf Quli 
Mirza, Additional Director General, FIA was constituted to 
investigate the matter. Having received information that there 
was slackness and slow progress in the matter and the probe 
and investigation was being influenced, obstructed , hindered  
and hampered by certain individuals, this Court took Suo 
Motu Notice of the matter.  
 
9.  The record indicates that in one of the matters an 
FIR was also registered against some persons including 
members of the Maj eed family regarding which an interim 
challan had already been submitted in the Special Court 
(Banking), Karachi. In this regard, some of the accused 
persons holding senior positions in some Banks , including 
Mr. Hussain Lawai were also arrested and are presently  Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 6
confined  in Jail  in Karachi /Islamabad . Initial investigation 
found 29 suspicious/fake Bank accounts showing 
transactions in excess  of Rs.35 billion undertaken through 
various Banks. Ostensible owners of such bank accounts 
denied opening or operating  the accounts. There were valid 
reasons to believe that the accounts were opened by misusing 
National Identity Cards of different unsuspecting persons 
without their knowledge  or consent . This appears to have 
been done in order to undertake illegal rotation , layering and 
movement of huge sums of money through the said accounts 
presumably for money laundering of tainted money obtained 
through kickbacks, bribes and other unlawful means  and 
methods .  
 
10.  Interrogation of arrested suspects and connected 
person s led to recovery of further information about the 
accounts, companies and individuals who had links with the 
deposit of the funds in question. These included M/s Omni 
Group, its own ers, associates and sugar mills ; Bahria Town  
Private Limited;  Zardari Grou p Private Limited, Arif Habib  
Limited , Nas ar Abdullah Lootha, H & H Exchange Company, 
Parthenon Private Limited, Dream Trading & Company and 
Ocean Enterprises amongst others. Some of the accused 
persons were also arrested. Some are facing investigation, fe w 
are on protect ive bail and some are absconding.  
 
11.  We were informed by the DG, FIA that as 
investigation progress ed, more accounts and information was 
discovered by the investigators.  This pointed towards a series Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 7
of suspicious transactions involving  Billions of Rupees 
spanning various jurisdictions. This was done by a skillfully 
structured accounting method ology  involving layering  and 
other ways to camouflage  and avoid detection of transfer of 
huge sums of money by the Regulators and Law Enforcement 
Agencies . Despite bonafide  efforts on the part of the FIA, 
progress was slow on account of huge quantity of electronic 
data that required unraveling  and interpretation. For this 
exercise, FIA faced a lack of specialized investigators.  
 
12.  In order to co nduct effective, in -depth and incisive 
investigation s to discover the truth, cut through multiple 
layers of transactions, fake accounts, movement of funds, and 
trace the money trail and real identity of persons who were 
actual but hidden beneficiaries, a b road based, 
multidimensional and technically skilled team of experts was 
required which was not available with FIA. Further, on 
account of alleged involvement of high profile and powerful 
politicians, their cronies and other business figures connected 
with the tainted transactions, who had powerful connections 
within the government, investigation was being seriously 
hampered, handicapped and at times willfully obstructed at 
every stage. Further, we were informed that investigators were 
being threatened on a ccount of involvement of high profile 
and powerful persons. We were of the view that the fear s 
expressed before us were not without foundation, considering 
the general environment and the law and order situation in 
Karachi.  
 Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 8
13.  On account of the aforeno ted reasons, a prayer 
was made before this Court for appointment of a broad based 
and skilled Joint Investigation Team (JIT) consisting of an 
Additional Director General , FIA; Experts from Federal Board 
of Revenue (FBR), State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), Natio nal 
Accountability Bureau (NAB) and Securities & Exchange 
Commission of Pakistan (SECP) . Request was also made that  
representatives of Inter -Services Intelligence  (ISI) and Military 
Intelligence  (MI) may also be associated with the JIT . 
 
14.  The learned c ounsel appearing on behalf o f the 
Omni Group, Majeed Family, Asif Ali Zardari, Mrs. Faryal 
Talpur and Zain Malik/Bahria Town vehemently opposed the 
formation of the JIT. It was argued that it was not a case of 
an Investigating Agency  being unwilling to pro ceed with the 
matter. It was pointed out that FIA ha d already submitted an 
incomplete challan  before the competent Court. Therefore, the 
right of the accused persons that the final challan  be 
submitted and trial should commence without further delay 
could not be denied. It was further argued that since 
incriminating material and evidence against the accused 
persons was lacking or deficient, the matter of submission of 
final challan  was being delayed which was violative of the 
fundamental rights of due proce ss and fair trial guaranteed to 
the accused persons  by the Constitution.  The learned counsel 
submitted that FIA had sufficient powers under the Federal 
Investigation Agency Act, 1974 as well as  the Anti Money 
Laundering Act, 2010 , therefore,  there was no n eed for this 
Court to appoint a JIT. Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 9
15.  After having heard lengthy arguments addressed 
by learned counsel for the parties, we found that prima facie  
enough material was available on record to support the fact 
that fake accounts had been opened in various  Banks in the 
names of persons who se National Identity Cards had been 
misused without their consent or knowledge. Many such 
persons appeared before this Court and categorically stated 
that they had no knowledge of the accounts in question. 
Some of them als o complained of systematic harassment at 
the hands of police as well as private parties and sought 
protection. We also found from the material placed before us 
that huge sums of money running into Billions of Rupees had 
been deposited in the said accounts by or on behalf of 
persons who were under investigation or entities controlled by 
them. We noticed that after being deposited in the said 
accounts, such funds were either routed to other accounts 
which were /could be  traced with some due diligence or 
withdr awn without any ostensible trail available. Further, 
evidence of huge sums of money being remitted out of 
Pakistan , possibly through hawala /hundi  transfers added an 
additional dimension to the investigation.  
 
16.  On the basis of material placed before us , we 
found that specialized knowledge of financial transactions 
and expertise in identifying and tracing movement of funds 
through banking channels and otherwise was required in 
order to conduct a proper probe and investigation in the 
matter. Expertise in working of companies, banking 
transactions, electronic transactions and cyber activities Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 10
relating to money transfers was needed. Further, knowledge 
of reporting requirements and monitoring regime put in place 
by the State Bank of Pakistan, modes of discove ring and 
tracing suspicious transactions and methods utilized for 
unlawful circulation and movement of money within the 
country and abroad was required. Such expertise was not 
available with the FIA. We were therefore convinced that it 
was in the interest of justice and to ensure that national 
resources and national wealth which belong to the people of 
Pakistan was not loote d, plundered, misappropriated  or taken 
out of Pakistan .  
 
17.  It is significant to note that despite having 
reservations about the methodology or  the merits of the case 
presented by FIA, the learned counsel for the accused frankly 
conceded  that this Court had ample powers and jurisdiction 
in terms of Article 184(3) of the Constitution to appoint or 
nominate the JIT. We were also of the v iew that in appropriate 
cases technical inability to undertake a complicated modern 
day investigation furnished reasonable basis and justi fication 
to constitute a JIT which in our opinion was imperative and 
necessary  under the facts and circumstances of th is case . 
Accordingly, vide order dated 05.09.2018, we constituted a 
JIT consisting of six members with the following directions: - 
“i) The JIT shall set up its Secretariat at a place 
convenient to it;  
 
ii)  The JIT shall have all powers relating to inquirie s and 
investigations including those available in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1908; National Accountability Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 11
Ordinance, 1999; Federal Investigation Agency Act, 
1974 and the Anti Corruption Laws, etc;  
 
iii)  All executive authorities or agencies in the c ountry 
shall render assistance and provide support to the JIT 
in its working, if required;  
 
iv)  The JIT shall submit periodic reports before this Court 
qua the progress made in the investigation on 
fortnightly basis under sealed cover for our 
examination ;  
 
v)  The Additional Director General, FIA, who shall head 
the JIT may co -opt any other expert who may in his 
opinion be necessary to complete the investigation in 
an effective and timely manner; and  
 
vi)  First Report of the JIT shall be filed within a  period of 
15 days from today. ”  
 
18.  We also issued directions to Pakistan Rangers to 
provide adequate and effective security to investigators to 
ensure that they were able to perform their functions without  
any fear to their life or limb or that of thei r families. At that 
stage, we for the time being also declined the request of DG, 
FIA to transfer investigation of the case to Islamabad. 
However, we observed that in case any material ground or 
information came before this Court showing interference in 
investigation or an attempt at hampering, delaying or 
obstructing investigation or creating an environment of fear 
and pressure for the investigators, the said request could be 
reexamined for passing appropriate orders.  
 
19.  In the context of the aforenote d investigations, 
M/s Anwar Majeed, Abdul Ghani Majeed, Hussain Lawai and 
others had been arrested and continue to be behind bars. 
Various medical reports issued by various  Medical Boards Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 12
were presented before this Court . They included  periodical 
reports about the medical condition of M/s Anwar Majeed, 
Abdul Ghani Majeed and Hussain Lawai . On the basis of such 
reports, Anwar Majeed was admitted to a Hospital and 
continues to stay there. However, Abdul Ghani Majeed was 
ultimately directed by this Court to be  shifted to Adyala Jail, 
Rawalpindi where he continues to be detained.  
 
20.  At one stage, it was reported to this Court by the 
JIT that the Government of Sindh was not cooperating in the 
matter and the requested documents were not being provided 
by its respective departments rather such documents were 
deliberately being withheld or produced in an incomplete and 
piecemeal manner. This Court passed various orders directing 
the Sindh Government to cooperate in the matter  and provide 
the requisite  documentati on to the JIT  without unnecessary 
delay.  
 
21.  During the course of hearing these matters, it was 
pointed out to us that Omni Group had availed loans from 
various Banks including National Bank of Pakistan, Sindh 
Bank Limited, Summit Bank Limited and Silk B ank Limited. 
These loans had been secured by hypothecation / pledge of 
stocks of sugar. Upon verification, it was found that pledged  
stock s fell substantial ly short of what was pledged and 
considerable stocks were missing from the total pledged  
stocks valu ed at Rs.13.5 billion . Stocks worth approximately 
Rs.2 billion were available in the Godo wn while there was a 
deficit of Rs.11.5 Billion . We, therefore , directed that a probe Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 13
be conducted and in the event it was found that pledged 
stocks had been removed wi thout authorization, appropriate 
criminal action should  be initiated.  
 
22.  It appears that NBP having found the stocks short 
by substantial quantities filed a criminal complaint before  a 
Banking Court of competent jurisdiction. We were also 
informed by t he learned counsel for Omni Group that his 
clients had initiated negotiations with the Banks in order to 
resolve the disputes. Time was granted to explore the 
possibility of an out of Court settlement and in this regard a 
tentative agreement was also reach ed between the parties. 
However, the agreement fell through on account of the 
timeframe and methodology of payments and the security 
offered by Omni Group to secure repayment of the amounts 
owed to the NBP.  
 
23.  The JIT constituted by us filed periodical reports 
about the progress of investigation which indicated that Omni 
Group, B ahria Town, Zardari Group , Mrs. Faryal Talpur and 
a number of others were prima facie  involved in opening and 
operation of the bank accounts which were subject matter of 
these pr oceedings. On the basis of material placed before us 
vide our dated 24.12.2018 we issued a restraining order 
against sale, purchase and transfer of buildings and 
properties ment ioned in the report of the JIT, particularly, 
those held by or belonging to Par klane and Parthenon 
including Icon Tower and Opal 225, Karachi and any other 
propert ies or assets in which the said companies had any Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 14
direct, indirect or beneficial interest. It was also directed that 
caution be marked on all accounts mentioned in the repo rt of 
JIT and all transactions mentioned therein shall be monitored 
by the concerned Banks who shall retain all relevant records 
for production before this Court as and when required. Copies 
of the reports filed by the JIT were provided to the learned 
coun sel for M/s Anwar Majeed, Abdul Ghani Majeed, Omni 
Group, Asif Ali Zardari, Mrs. Faryal Talpur and others with a 
direction to file their response. It was pointed out to us , at 
that stage  that names of Mr. Farooq H. Naik, ASC, his son as 
well as those of Mr . Anwar Mansoor Khan , learned Attorney 
General for Pakistan  and his brother ha ve also featured in the 
report of the JIT. The members of the JIT were directed to 
justify the same and provide us the basis on which the said 
names had been included. We were al so informed that on the 
basis of the report of JIT and recommendations made therein, 
the Federal Government had placed the names of 172 persons 
on the ECL.  These names included some well known 
politician s including  Mr. Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, Co-
Chairman, Pakistan Peoples Party  and Mr. Murad Ali Shah, 
Chief Minister, Sindh. It was argued on behalf of Mr. Bilawal 
Bhutto Zardari and Mr. Murad Ali Shah that their names had 
been included mala fide  and in order to embarrass them 
rather than for any genuine and v alid reason.  
 
24.  After hearing the parties, we directed the Federal 
Government to reconsider its decision for placement of names 
recommended by the JIT on the ECL and any decision taken 
by it should show due application of mind and consideration Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 15
of mate rial placed before the Government. We were 
subsequently informed that the Cabinet had referred the 
matter to a Committee which would make its 
recommendations on the basis whereof a decision would be 
taken.  
 
25.  The parties have also filed their replies t o the JIT  
report  and have addressed arguments. Mr. Munir Ahmed 
Bhatti, learned ASC, representing Omni Group has submitted 
that the report of the JIT is against the facts as well as the 
record. He points out that the JIT has exceeded its 
jurisdiction and th e conclusions drawn are patently mala fide , 
erroneous and incorrect. He further submits that the JIT has 
made allegations that the Omni Group grabbed some sugar 
mills and misappropriated subsidies. He has vehemently 
argued that the Mills in question were lawfully purchased and 
there was no illegality or irregularity in relation to subsidies 
availed by the Group which were lawfully availed in 
accordance with the policy of the Government of Sindh. He 
also submitted that there were miscalculations in the 
aggre gate amounts which were allegedly deposited and 
withdrawn in various allegedly fake accounts.  
 
26.  Mr. Shahid Hamid, learned Sr.ASC, submitted 
that FIR No.4 of 2018 had been lodged against M/s Anwar 
Majeed, Abdul Ghani Majeed and others. An interim challan 
had been submitted. This Court had ordered that no further 
orders be passed in those matters without the approval of this 
Court. He maintains that it is the right of an accused person Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 16
to expect an expeditious trial which is not happening on 
account of s lackness on the part of FIA. On a question about 
the report of JIT, he submits that the report has been 
submitted and can of course be considered by this Court. 
However, as far as the NAB is concerned, it can examine the 
report and evidence collected and a rrive at its own 
conclusions or undertake additional or further investigations 
if required. However, this Court should desist from 
commenting or giving the report its stamp of approval . In 
case, this Court passes an order approving the report of the 
JIT it  may prejudice the right of the accused persons to a fair 
trial in terms of Article 10A of the Constitution. He further 
submits that FIA had identified only eight cases which during 
the course of hearing had increased to 32.  This indicates an 
effort to ent angle the accused in endless cases. Finally 
submits that in terms of paragraph 2 of the order of this 
Court dated 24.12.2018, the working of Omni Group has 
been seriously hampered as the order passed by this Court is 
for all intents and purposes an attachm ent order.  
 
27.  Mr. Farooq H. Naik, learned ASC, appearing on 
behalf of M r. Asif Ali Zardari and Mrs. Faryal Talpur has 
submitted that there were no direct allegations against the 
said persons. The conclusions of the JIT are presumptive and 
indirect. The y had been provided questionnaire s which were 
duly responded to. However, the report does not incorporate 
the response given by the said persons. He maintains that the 
JIT has raised issues which we re beyond its mandate . This 
has been done to malign and de fame the two families. Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 17
Further, the JIT has also reached conclusions regarding 
matters about which M r. Asif Ali Zardari and Mrs. Faryal 
Talpur were not even questioned. A media trial is being 
conducted which is meant to damage the name and 
reputation of th e said persons and their political party.  
 
28.  Sardar Latif Khan Khosa, learned Sr.ASC has also 
reiterated and supported the arguments of Mr. Farooq H. 
Naik.  
 
29.  Mr. Salman Talib ud Din, learned Advocate 
General , Sindh has submitted that the main purp ose of the 
investigation was to undertake a fact finding inquiry which 
has been undertaken subject to reservations of all concerned 
and their right to question the methodology as well as 
admissibility of material and documents on the basis of which 
conclus ions have been drawn . He further submits that the 
Chief Minister, Sindh was never involved in an y of the 
matters relating to FIA and there are defects and lacuna  in 
the report of the JIT. He maintains that the Chief Minister 
should have been given an oppor tunity to explain his position 
and answer any questions that the JIT needed to ask in order 
to reach its conclusions. He has however candidly conceded 
that prima facie , a case had been made out and the matter 
could be referred to NAB for further probe and if found 
necessary to proceed with it further in accordance with law.  
 
30.  Mr. Faisal Siddiqui, learned ASC, appearing for 
the JIT has submitted that so far 32 fake accounts have been 
discovered which had been opened and operated by persons Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 18
involving 11 entities. He has pointed out that the position of 
Omni Group which they had taken before the JIT to the effect 
that they had nothing to do with the fake accounts stood 
falsified by the fact that irrefutable evidence has been 
discovered showing that the Gro up had claimed amnesty  
against the same accounts. He further submits that the JIT is 
a fact finding and evidence gathering Team and as 
recommended by it, its report can be submitted to NAB 
alongwith all evidence collected by it. He further submits that 
NAB can conduct its own inquiry and investigation  (if 
necessary)  and on the basis of its finding s submit 16 different 
References before the Accountability Courts. He further 
submits that investigation of the JIT is inconclusive regarding 
9 other accounts in w hich more time is required to reach a 
conclusion. He seeks permission to do so.  
 
31.  We have heard the learned counsel for all 
concerned parties and carefully examined the record. The JIT 
had been constituted by us with the objective of conducting a 
fact finding inquiry, collect evidence and get to  the bottom of 
things. It was for this reason that expertise available with 
various departments was pooled in order to undertake this 
investigation/inquiry knowing that it involved complicated 
transactions skill fully structured in order to hide and 
camouflage  movement of funds, legitimacy of which was open 
to question. Further, we fin d that a network of carefully 
structured fake accounts has been put in place and 
transactions have been undertaken through a proces s of 
layering designed to hide the real beneficiaries of the Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 19
transactions. Further, it appears that a money laundering 
mechanism has been devised to legitimize funds whose 
source and legitimacy is highly questionable.  
 
32.  A perusal of the report submitte d by the JIT and 
the Final (Synthesis) Report dated 19.12.2018 indicates that 
the JIT has minutely probe d 32 fake accounts and thousands 
of transactions directly , indirectly or incidentally associated 
or connected with these accounts. A large number of 
documents and other evidence has been unearthed in the 
short period of time granted by us to the JIT. We have been 
informed that instances where evidence was insufficient, 
inconclusive or require d further probe have not been incl uded 
in the findings of the JI T for the time being.  
 
33.  From the information available to the JIT, the oral 
documentary evidence collected and information obtained 
from all other sources, the JIT has opined that prime facie  
cognizable off ences have been made out inter involving 
corruption , corrupt practices  and money laundering. Further, 
public sector institutions have been remiss negligent and 
heedless in following laws, rules and regulations and in some 
instances working in complete disregard of the same for years 
on end.  
 
34.  After having gone through the various reports as 
well as evidence placed befo re us, we are of the view that 
prima facie , a case for referring the report of the JIT, 
alongwith all relevant documents, evidence, statements and 
the recommendations of the JIT as well as various aspects of Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 20
violation of the laws, rules and regulations, receipt of bribes, 
kickbacks, misappropriat ion of public funds, misuse of 
authority, criminal breach of tr ust and related matters to the 
NAB for initiating proceedings under the Natio nal 
Accountability Ordinance, 1999 is made out. Even the 
learned counsel for the Respondents have not been able to 
advance any convincing argument why these matters may not 
be referred to NAB. In fact , some of the counsel frankly 
conceded that NAB and the Accountability Court are the 
correct fora to investigate, probe and try the offences that 
may ultimately be found to have been made out  on the basis 
of material before us.   
 
35.  As far as the recommendations relating to Mr. 
Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, Co -Chairman, PPP and Mr. Murad Ali 
Shah, Chief Minister, Sindh are concerned, the learned 
counsel for the JIT has frankly conceded that the material 
against the said persons may need re -examination to arrive at 
the correct conclusions. Further, their names may ha ve been 
included in the list of persons who have been recommended 
to be placed on ECL, without careful examination of the 
material available on record and the ramification s and 
consequences  of such orders for the said persons. In this 
regard, it has been p ointed out that Mr. Murad Ali Shah is 
the Chief Minister, Sindh . It would cause serious problem s in 
performance of his official functions in case his name is 
placed on the ECL and his movement s are restricted. We 
accordingly direct that the names of the sa id persons for the 
time being be removed from the ECL. However, it is clarified Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 21
that this would not prevent the NAB to probe their cases 
further and in case sufficient material is found connecting the 
said persons with cognizable offences, it shall not be 
precluded from making an appropriate request to the Federal 
Government to place their names on the ECL or take any 
appropriate action provided by law.  
 
36.  We have also been informed that name s of Mr. 
Farooq H. Naik and his son and that of Mr. Anwar Mans oor 
Khan, ASC/AGP and his brother also feature in the report of 
the JIT. It has been pointed out by the learned counsel 
appearing for the JIT that their names have been mentioned 
in the context of certain monetary transactions involving 
professional fee fo r services rendered. If that is the case, we 
direct that their cases may also be re -examined by NAB in 
light of material collected by the JIT . In case, no cognizable 
offence is made out, their names may be removed from the 
report /ECL . Till such time that N AB concludes its inquiry / 
investigation no adverse action of any nature shall be taken 
against the said persons. It is however clarified that in case , 
on the basis of material and evidence already on record or 
subsequently discovered a cognizable offence is made out, 
NAB shall not be precluded from taking appropriate action 
against the said persons in accordance with law.  
 
37.  In addition and without prejudice to what has 
been stated above, the following directions are issued: - 
i. The complete report of the  JIT alongwith all 
material and evidence collected by the JIT shall 
be transmitted to NAB immediately;  Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 22
ii. All members of the JIT shall be associated with 
NAB for the purposes of assisting  in any further 
probe, inquiry or investigation that NAB may 
consider ne cessary or appropriate in order to 
satisfy itself about the fulfillment of leg al and 
procedural requirements and to complete the 
investigation in its entirety.  
 
iii. All cases which have not been concluded or in the 
opinion of the JIT require further probe shal l 
remain within the jurisdiction of the JIT which 
shall continue its probe and investigation under 
the mandate granted by this Court and complete 
such investigation/probe within a reasonable 
time whereafter its report together with all 
material and evidenc e collected shall be 
transmitted to NAB without the need for any  
further orders from this Court for action in 
accordance with law.   
 
iv. We are cognizant of the fact that during the 
course of its probe and investigation, the JIT has 
discovered that funds depo sited in fake accounts 
and circulated through the same have been used 
for other unlawful activities which may not have 
strictly fallen within the parameters of the 
mandate granted by this Court. However, 
considering that all such transactions, activities, 
acts and omissions constitute a part of or arise 
out of the same set of events and transactions 
which have a direct, indirect or incidental nexus 
to questionable funds and their movement, we 
endorse the acts of the JIT in probing these 
matters and it will be deemed that  the original 
mandate of the JIT as granted  in the original 
order of this Court included within its scope  and 
parameters  a direction to probe such other 
activities, acts and or transactions which are 
hereby fully ratified  
 Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 23
v. NAB is directed tha t if it considers expedient and 
appropriate to conduct any further or additional 
probe, inquiry or investigation involving the 
matters which are the subject of the report of the 
JIT from a point of vie w of determining the true 
facts, it shall be free to do  so at Islamabad . 
However, such probe, inquiry or investigation 
shall be completed within  a maximum period of 
two months.  Thereafter, in case, cognizable 
offences are made out, the  recommendations 
contained in paragraph 300 at page 124 of the 
Final (Synthe sis) Report shall be acted upon and 
the requisite Reference shall be filed in the 
concerned Accountability Court.  
 
vi. We also direct that in view of the fact that the 
entire record of the JIT is to be submitted with 
NAB at Islamabad  and further inquiry (if a ny) is 
also to be conducted there,  the Reference shall be 
prepared and presented before the Accountability 
Courts at Islamabad/Rawalpindi.  
 
vii. We further direct that the Chairman, NAB shall 
designate a competent Director General, NAB who 
shall ensure prepara tion and filing of References 
in a timely manner and follow them up till their 
final conclusions. Further, a team of competent 
and experienced investigators and prosecutors 
shall be constituted to prepare and prosecute the 
References and take them to their  final 
conclusions. The NAB shall file periodic reports 
before this Court which shall be placed before an 
Implementation Bench to be constituted by the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of Pakistan for the said 
purpose.   
 
38.  This matter is accordingly disposed of , subject to 
the above directions and submission of reports by NAB. It is 
however, made clear that the matter may be resurrected at Human Rights Case No.39216 -G of 2018  
 24
any time on the application of any of the parties or at the 
discretion of the Implementation Bench.     
 
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
 
JUDGE  
 
ISLAMABAD, THE  
7th of January, 2019  
ZR/*  
Not Approved For Reporting  
 