IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate  Jurisdiction)  
 
PRESENT : 
Mr. Justice Mushir Alam  
Mr. Justice Yahya Afridi  
Mr. Justice Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed  
 
 
 
Criminal Petition No. 60 of 2017  
(Against the judgment dated  20.12.2016 passed by 
the Peshawar High Court Peshawar in Cr. A. No. 562-
P/2015 )  
 
 
 
Inhaf Ullah  
  …Petitioner (s) 
     Versus  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The State & another  
…Res pondent (s) 
 
For the  Petitioner (s): Mr. Astaghfarullah, ASC  
 
For the State:  Ms. Ayesha Tasneem, ASC  
 
Date of hearing:  07.04.2021 . 
 
JUDGMENT  
 
      Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed, J. - Atique, 6/7 , was 
playing outside his house , located within the precincts of Police Station 
Bhana Marri, Peshawar  on 16.10.2014 ; at 4:00 p.m, he took a bottle of 
water  from his house  to serve a passerby  whereafter  he vanished from the 
scene ; according to the prosecution, he was whisked away in an alto car ; 
the incident was reported same day by his brother Muhammad Aamir 
(PW-3); he also informed his father who was in China  on a business trip  
and rushed back to join search f or the child ; after 3/4 days of the 
occurrence, an unknown person delivered  fruit in  two shopping bags  to 
the complainant , purportedly sent by  his father’s friend  Tariq ;  the fruit 
carried a chit bearing a cell phone number and a message about the 
captivit y of the child  with the dispatcher. The complainant handed over 
the chit to his father Umar Khan (PW -2). The family contacted the captors 
on phone who demanded Rs.2 crore  as ransom, finally settled as 
Rs.800 ,000/ -, paid at the designated place  in lieu of a bductee’s release  on 
22.10.2014 . As the investigation progressed,  Inhafullah, Shahid, 
Musharaf Khan, Alif Khan, Shahzad Gul, Atlas alias Aslat and Asad Ullah  
were taken on board as accused; Inhaafullah petitioner , in response to a 
court question,  was ident ified by Umar Khan (PW -2) as recipient of the Criminal Petition No.60 of 2017  
 2
ransom . The learned trial Judge vide judgment dated 21.09.2015 
proceeded to convict all the accused under section 365 -A of the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced them to imprisonment for  life; on appeal, 
the Peshawar High Court, barring the petitioner , acquitted all the accused 
from the charge  vide impugned judgment dated 20.12.2010 , vires whereof, 
are being assailed on a variety of grounds. It is argued that neither the 
complainant nor his father  named or identified the petitioner in their 
examination -in-chief and it was in pursuance to a question  prompted  by 
the Court that Umar Khan (PW -2) reluctantly  pointed his finger upon the 
petitioner,  for the first time in the Court; according to the learned counsel,  
there was no occasion for the learned Judge to put Court question to a 
witness  undergoing examination -in-chief to the detriment of the 
petitioner ; that a different vehicle  other than the one used in the 
occurrence  was recovered , that too,  upon the disclos ure of a co-accused , 
since acquitted , and, thus, mere  recovery of ransom amount statedly 
upon petitioner’s disclosure  without any identification mark is hardly 
sufficient to sustain the charge . Acquittal of six out of seven co-accused 
brought the entire ed ifice to the ground, concluded the learned counsel . 
The learned Law Officer has faithfully defended the impugned judgment.  
2.  Heard. Record perused.  
3.  Abduction of a small child for ransom is a most serious offence 
and it is hard to expect that a fami ly would come up with a fake script , 
nonetheless, in the present case, we have noted glaring flaws and 
discrepancies that cannot be possibly ignored  on a perceptional  paradigm. 
According to the complainant, the incident  had occurred  on 16.10.2014  
and repor ted same day  in the absence of his father , present  in China 
looking after some trade assignment, however, according to the latter, 
upon receipt of information, he rushed back and  when  the incident was 
reported on 19.10.2014 . The  discrepancy may be viewed a s human error 
inasmuch as according to the record, the First Information Report was 
recorded on 16.10.2014 , nonetheless , arrival of a massage demanding 
ransom  through an unknown person  categorically claiming to have been 
dispatched by one Tariq without any  reaction or response , in those testing 
hours, fails to inspire confidence . Similarly, without intervention of police, 
payment of ransom to the petitioner and immediate release of the child 
are circumstances no less intriguing  either . No test identificatio n parade 
was carried out  to qualify the standard of proof within the contemplation 
of Article 22 of the Qanun -e-Shahadat Order, 1984 . Similarly, petitioner’s 
identification , with handcuffs in the dock,  through intervention of the Criminal Petition No.60 of 2017  
 3
Presiding Judge fails to c ommend our approval. The Court  bears  no 
responsibility either for the prosecution or the defence; it must maintain 
its neutrality to decide a case  on the strength of evidence  alone , 
essentially to be adduced by the prosecution  itself to drive home the 
charge. No doubt, the trial Court is vested with ample authority  to put 
questions to the witness , however, the power of this amplitude must be 
exercised with caution and circumspection , solely  in aid of justice  without 
disturbing equality in the scales ; in the  present case, incessant 
interventions by the trial Judge  has grievously undermined testimony of a 
witness , otherwise mute and  reticent on a fundamental detail  of the case . 
Acquittal of six out of seven accused , though assigned different roles, 
nonetheless , equally blamed  to have aided the crime,  leaves nothing in the 
field. It would be unsafe to maintain the conviction  Criminal petition is 
converted into appeal and allowed; impugned judgment is set aside; the 
appellant is acquitted of the charge and shall be released forthwith, if not 
required to be detained by law.   
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad , the 
7th April, 2021  
Not approved for reporting  
Azmat /- 