IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
 (Original Jurisdiction)  
 
 
 PRESENT:  
 Mr. Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, HCJ  
 Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed  
 Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
 
 
Constitution Petition No.05  of 2013  
(Challenging the constitution of Election 
Commis sion of Pakistan)  
 
Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri  
….Petitioner  
     Versus    
 
The Federation of Pakistan,  
thr. Secretary M/O Law, Islamabad & others  
Respondent  
 
 
Petitioner :     In person  
 
On Court Notice &  
For the Federation: (R -1&3)  Mr. Irfan Qadir, A. G. for Pakistan  
  
 
For Election Commission :  Mr. Muhammad Munir Peracha, Sr. ASC  
      Mr. Mehmood A. Sheikh  
      Mr. Abdul Rehman, Addl. DG. Legal  
 
For Parliamentary Committee:  Mr. Muhammad Latif Qureshi,  
Joint Secy.  National Assembly  
 
Dates of hearing:     11 to 13 .02.2013  
 
ORDER  
 
 Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, CJ. — For reasons to be 
record ed later  it is held that petitioner , Dr. Muhammad Tahir -ul-Qadri  
has failed to make out  a case for exercising the discretionary 
jurisdiction by this Court under Article 1 84(3) of the Constitution  of the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan , for the fact s that violation of any of the 
Fundamental Rights  under Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution  has 
neither been listed in the petition nor established  during course of 
arguments , despite of insistence by the Bench  to do so . The  petitioner 
has also failed to prove  his bona fides  in view of the facts , which have Constitution.P.5/13  2 
been noticed at the hearing  of the case , to invoke the jurisdiction of 
this Court coupled with the fact that under the peculiar circumstances 
he has no locus standi  to claim  relief as it has been prayed for in the 
petition, inter alia, for the reasons  that being  a holder of dual 
citizenship , he is not qualified ( disqualified ) to contest the election to 
the Parliament in view  of the constitutional bar under Article 63(1)(c) 
of the Constitution, which has been interpreted by this Court in the 
case of  Syed Mehmood Akhtar Naqvi v.  Federation of Pakistan (PLD 
2012 SC 1089).  
2.   However, it is loudly and clearly observed that as a voter 
like other overseas Pakistanis , whose names have been incorporated in 
the Electoral Rolls,  he can exer cise his right of vote as this right is 
recognized under the Constitution and has also been held by this Court 
in the case of Yasmin Khan v. Electi on Commission of Pakistan  (1994 
SCMR 113), which was finally disposed of vide judgment in 
Constitution Petition 26/1993 dated 18.12.1993 . Thus, the petition is 
dismissed.  
3.   Before parting with th e short order, it is essential  to note 
that at the time o f concluding his arguments on the points noted 
hereinabove , he started making uncalled for aspersions  against the  
member of the Bench , which are tantamount  prima facie  to undermin e 
its authority calling for action  against him  for Contempt of Court under 
Article 204(3) of the Constit ution read with section 3 of the Contempt 
of Court Ordinance, 2003 . However  we, while exercising  restraint , 
have decided not to proceed against him following the principle that 
such jurisdiction has to be exercised sparingly on c ase to case basis.  
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
Judge  
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
13th February, 2013  