IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
Present:  
MR. JUSTICE MAZHAR ALAM KHAN MIANKHEL  
MR. JUSTICE QAZI MUHAMMAD AMIN AHMED  
 
Criminal Petition No. 46-P of 2015  
 
 
Iftikhar Ali  
 …Petitioner  
Versus  
 
Gul Rehman and another  
..Respondent  
     
 
For the  Petitioner(s) : Mr. Altaf Khan, ASC    
 
For the Respondent (s): Mr. Muhammad Nisar,  
    Addl. A.G. K.P.  
 
Date of hearing:   12.7.2021  
 
ORDER  
 
 Qazi Muhammad Amin Ahmed , J-. Fazal Ilahi, 48, in the 
backdrop of a dispute over immovable property wa s shot dead at 8:00 p.m. 
on 1.1.2012  within the p recincts of Police Station Zaida District Swabi ; the 
incident was reported by his brother Iftikhar  who singularly blamed Gul 
Rehman respondent for the crime; convicted by a learned Additional 
Sessions Judge  at Swabi under clause (b) of Section 302 of the Pakistan 
Penal Code, 1860 , he was sentenced to imprisonment for life vide judgment 
dated 16.7.2012, however, acquitted from the charge by a Division Bench of 
Peshawar High Court vide impugned judgment dated 18.02.2015, vires 
whereof, are being assailed on the ground that in the face of overwhelming 
evidence primarily comprising ocular account by natural witnesses , there 
was no occasion for the High Court on prosecution’s alleged failure on 
peripheral issues , an error that , according to the learned counsel for the 
petitioner,  results into miscarriage of justice .  
2.  We have gone through the impugned reasoning recorded by 
the High Court  to overturn the conviction and found it to have been swayed 
primarily by a plea of alibi supported by the prayer leader  of the village 
mosque who , however,  opted to stay away from the witness -box alongside 
the respondent himself . Similarly, certain discrepancies in the site plan 
were viewed to prosecution’s detriment without havin g been confronted to 
the witnesses  during the trial . Unscathed survival of the witnesses was also  2
received with suspicion by the High Court . Generality of the above 
observation s, notwithstanding, nonetheless, the High Court  does not 
appear to have taken an y exception to the ocular account  furnished by the 
witnesses of locality in a small rural neighborhood , unanimously pointing 
their finger upon the respondent . We consider it expedient to grant leave to 
reappraise entire evidence  with a view to secure the e nds of justice . Send 
for Gul Rehman respondent through bailable warrant in the sum of 
Rs.200,000/ - with one surety in the like amount , returnable to the 
Assistant Registrar of this Court at Peshawar , executable through Station 
House Officer  concerned withi n a fortnight .  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Peshawar ,  
12th July, 2021  
Azmat /- 
‘Not approved for reporting’   