Yahya Afridi, J. - A Full Court was constituted by the worthy Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court of Pakistan (“the Chief Justice ”) to decide the 
petitions filed in the original jurisdiction of thi s Court, challeng ing the 
vires of the Supreme Court (Practice  and Procedure ) Act, 2023  (“the Act”). 
After consi dering the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties 
and the major political parties put on notice , this Court  announced  its 
short order  on 11 October , 2023. The order read s: 
“ORDER OF T HE COURT   
  
For reasons to be recorded later these petition s are decided as under:  
 
1.          Subject to paras 2 and 3 below, by a majority of 10 to 5 (Justice Ijaz 
ul Ahsan, Justice Munib Akhtar, Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, 
Justice Ayesha A . Malik and  Justice Shahid Waheed dissenting) the Supreme 
Court ( Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023 (‘ the Act’ ) is sustained as being in 
accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (‘ the 
Constitution ’) and to this exten t the petitio ns are dism issed.  
 
2.          By a majority of 9 to 6 (Jus tice Ijaz ul Ahsan, Justice Munib Akhtar , 
Justice Yahya Afridi, Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, Justice 
Ayesha A. Malik and Justice Shahid Waheed dissenting) sub -section (1) of 
section 5 of  the Act (g ranting a right of appeal prospectively) is decl ared t o be 
in accordance with the Constitution and to this extent the petitions are 
dismissed.    
 
3.              By a majority of 8 to 7 (Chief Justice Qazi Faez Isa, Justice Sardar 
Tariq Masood,  Justice Sy ed Mansoor Ali Shah, Justice Amin -ud-Din Khan, 
Justice Jamal Khan Mandokhail, Justice At har Minallah and Justice 
Musarrat Hilali dissenting) sub -section (2) of section 5 of the Act (granting a 
right of appeal retrospectively) is declared to be u ltra vires the Constitution 
and to this extent the petition s are allowed. ”. 
 
As stated abo ve, except for section 5 of the Act, I was part of the majo rity 
that up held the constitutional validity of the Act.  Herein , I propose to 
record the reaso ns for upho lding  the con stitutional  validity of the Act , 
except section 5  thereof, which provi des for a right of  appeal . 
  
Scope of a Full Court  
2.  To my mind,  the members of a Full Court are not to be shackled  
by precedents. No doubt, we are to draw wisdom from the decis ions 
already rend ered, but in no way are we bound by the  princ iple of stare -
decisis . And to do so , would defeat the very purpose of convening a Full 
Court to hear and decide a matter .   2
Preliminary Objection  
3. To start with, I would addr ess the  prelimin ary object ion raised  by 
the learned Attorney General of Pakist an regarding the maintainability  of 
the present petition s. The thrust of the obje ction was that the condi tions 
precedent for invoking the original jurisdiction of this Court under Art icle 
184(3)  of the Co nstitution of the Islamic Republic o f Pakistan  (“the 
Constitution” ), were not met , and in particular that , neither was there any 
violation of  the fundamental rights  nor was there an y issue of  public 
import ance raised in the petitio ns challenging the vires of the  Act.   
 
4. To appreciate  the preliminary  objection  raised , it would be useful  
to carefully read Article 184(3) of the Const itution , which reads : 
“(3) Without prejudice to the pr ovisions  of Article 199, the 
Supreme Court shall, if it conside rs that a  question of pu blic 
importance  with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights  conferred by Chapter I of Part I I is involve d, 
have the power to make an order of th e nature m entioned in the 
said Article. ” 
               (emphasis  provided ) 
 
5. As the above Article clearly provides, t he two esse ntial conditions 
precedent  require d for invoking the  original jurisdicti on of this Court 
under Articl e 184(3) of the Const itution  are that : Firstly, the matter 
raised in the pe tition  should relate to a mat ter of  public importance; and 
secondly, that the said matter  relate s to the enforcement of any of the 
fundamental rights provided under the Consti tution.  
 
6.  I find that , in essence, the petiti oners through these petitions seek 
to preserve and protect the independence of the judici ary, which 
undoubtedly,  is beyond the realm  of their priva te or individual  concern s, 
and most  certainly covers a more g enera l or w ider s phere , spanning the 
entire  society and affecting the public  at large. Thus, the pre sent 
petitions do relate to an issue of ‘public importance ’, and the objection to 
the maintainability  to the extent  of the first limb is repelled .   3
7. The second lim b of the objection  to the maintainability  of the 
petitions  was that the Act had not violated any of the fundamental  rights 
provided under the Constitution.  I am afrai d, this objection  of the 
learned Attor ney Gen eral is rather miscued . To start with, one must 
appreciate , the use of the words ‘with reference to ’, widen s the scope of 
justiciability , and then to follow  it with  the w ord ‘enforce ment ’, the 
legislative intent  is clear to further expand  the extent  of jurisdiction . To 
my mind , the wo rd ‘enforce ment ’ is not synonymous  to the w ord 
‘infringe ment ’, in fact , both words are dist inct, each havin g its own 
meaning an d connotation ; the w ord ‘enforce ment ’ is more inclusive , and  
inclu des both, the acts or omiss ions that would  actually  infringe, or that 
would  bolster  fundamental rights .  
 
8. Thus, the challenge made to the mai ntain ability of the p resent 
petitions on the gr ound that there wa s no infringement of a fund amental 
right is misplaced . The scope of taking cogniz ance of matter by the 
Supreme Court in its original jurisdiction under Article 184(3) is much 
wider and can also be invoked, even if there is no infringement of any 
fundamental rig ht, but w hat is essential i s tha t the matter raised in the 
challenge b efore the Court relates  to ensuri ng that the fundamental 
rights  of the ci tizens and /or persons , provided under the Constitution , 
are effectivel y exercised .   
 
9. Given th is aspect  of the jurisdiction  that can be invoked under 
Article 184(3) of the Cons titution, the present petition s, to my 
understanding , fulfill  both the conditions precedent for i nvoking the 
origina l jurisd iction of the Supreme C ourt. Accordingly , the preliminar y 
objection raised by the learned Attorney General of Pakistan  is repelled ,  4
and t he petition s are  in my opinion maintainable  under Article 184(3) of 
the C onstitution.  
 
Issues for determination  
10. For the convenience of dis cussion, I have di vided my opinion in to 
three parts: firstly, the  constitutional validity of the Ac t, in gen eral; 
secondly, my comments on section 2 of the Act ; and finally,  the 
legislative competence of the Parliament t o provide  a right of a ppeal 
under section 5 of the Act .  
Issue N o. I - Constituti onal validity of the  Act 
11. The challenge to the const itutiona l vali dity of the Act was 
essentially pr emised  on tw o contentions: firstly, that the subject matter 
dealt with in the Act does not fal l within the o rdinary legislati ve 
competence of the Parli ament, and secon dly, that th e provisions  of the 
Act violate  the fundame ntal right  of access to justice through an 
independent judiciary . I would take up and decide these contentions in 
seriatim. 
Legislative com petence of Parliament   
12. The Act generally  relates to the  practice an d procedure of this 
Court , as its na me sugges ts. To give an overview of the Act, it is noted 
that: The Ac t comprises eight sections. Section 1 prescribes the Act and 
declares it to have a prospective effect. Section 2 relates to the 
constitution of Benches and that  every cause , appeal or matter before  the 
Suprem e Court is to be hear d and disposed of by a Bench to be de cided 
by a Committee comprising of the Chief Justice and the two next  most 
senior Judg es. Subsections 2 & 3 of Section 2  provide for the framing 
procedure of the s aid C ommittee and its decisions. Sec tion 3 provides fo r 
the manner and mode  of how the Supreme Cou rt is to exer cise its  5
original jurisdiction provided under claus e 3 o f Article 184  of the 
Constitution. It mandate s the Committee to view the petition on th e 
touch stone of the condition s preced ent required under  clause (3) of 
Article 184  of the Constituti on and for the same to be placed before a 
Bench comprising of not less  than three Judges of t he Supreme Court. 
Section 4 mandates th at in cases where the inte rpreta tion of the 
Constitution  is involved, the Commit tee is to constitute a Ben ch of not 
less than f ive Judges of the Supreme Court. Section 5  creates an appeal 
agains t an order passed by a Ben ch exercising jurisdict ion under clause 
(3) of Article 184 of the  Constitution. It further mandates t hat the appeal 
is to be heard by a Larger  Bench  of the Supreme  Court. Further, 
subsection (2) of Section 5 vests a right of appea l to any a ggrieved person 
against w hom an order has been p assed under clause (3) of Article 18 4 of 
the Constitution  prior to the commencement of the Act , providing 
retrospective effect to such exercis e of right . Section 6 provides the right 
to appoint a co unsel of choi ce in filing a review appl ication under Article 
188 of the Constitution. Section 7 stipulat es fourteen days for fixation of 
any applica tion for  urgency or interim relief , filed in a cause , appeal or  
matter. Finally, Secti on 8 provides for  the provisions of the Act to have 
an overriding effect on any other law, rules  or regulations for the ti me 
being in force or ju dgment of any court including the Supreme Court and 
the High Court.  
 
13. To e stablish the legislati ve com petence of Parliament  on th is 
matter , the learned Attorney  General and other learned cou nsel, 
supporti ng the constitutiona l validity of the Act , placed reliance on 
Article 191  and Article 142(a)  read with Entries 55 and  58 of the Fed eral 
Legislative List provided in the 4th Schedule  to the Constitution .  6
14. Our constitutional  history bears witness to speci al attention being 
rendered by providing express provisions vesting authority to frame rules 
relating to  the practice and procedure  of the Sup reme Court. Reviewing 
the legislative evolution  of the said authority t o frame rules relating to  
the practice and procedure of the Sup reme Cour t, one finds the 
following:    
Government of India 
Act, 1935  1956 Cons titution  1962 Constitution  1973 Constitution  
 
Section  214(1) of the 
Government of India Act , 1935 
provided  that: 
 
“The Federal Court may 
from time to time, with 
the approval of the 
Governor -General in his 
discretion, make rules of 
court for regulating 
generally the practice and 
procedure of the court …”  
Clause 3 (1) of the 3 rd 
Sched ule to the Constitution 
provided tha t: 
 
“The Supreme Court 
may, wi th the p revious 
approval of the 
President, make rules 
for regula ting the 
practice and practice of 
the court …”   
Article 65 of the Constitution  
provided that : 
 
 
“Subject  to this 
Consti tution and  the 
law, the Supreme Cou rt 
may, with the app roval 
of the Pres ident, make 
Rules regulating the 
practice and procedure 
of the Court.”   
Article 191 of the  
Constitution  provide s that :  
 
 
“Subject t o th e 
Constitution and law, 
the Supr eme Court 
may make rules 
regulating the practi ce 
and procedure of the 
Court .” 
 
A care ful review of the above provisi ons shows  that t he evolution of the 
constitutio nal source s for framing rules regulating the practice  and 
procedure of the Supre me Court, as provided in the successive 
constitutions of our country , reveals  two marked trend s: first, the 
inclusion of  check of the Legislat ure on the rule-making authority of the 
Supreme Court ; and second , the removal of the Exe cutive to have any 
check on the f ormulation of  rules of practice and procedure  of the 
Supreme Court .  
 
15. Having considered  the legislative trend in the e volution of the rule 
making authority of the Supreme Court to frame rules relating to  its 
practice and  proced ure, it would now be expedi ent to carefully read  7
Article 191 of the Co nstitution  to understand  the true purport  thereof . 
For ease of reference , the said provision  reads: 
Subject to  the Constitution  and law, the Supreme C ourt may  make rules  
regulating the prac tice and proced ure of the Cour t. 
       (Underlining a dded)  
A watchful  reading of the above provision indicates thr ee legislative 
sources for framing and regulating  the prac tice and  procedure of the 
Supreme Court : firstly,  the Constitution, secondly, the  law, and finally, 
the rules framed  by the Supreme Court . No one ha s, before us, contested  
the above stated first and the third  legislative so urce – the Constitution 
and the rules made  by the Supre me Cou rt – for framing  and regulating 
the pra ctice and procedure of the Cour t. All before us agree that , by a 
constitutional amendment , the leg islature m ay incorporate in the 
Constitution , any provision on the m atter of the pra ctice and procedure 
of the Supreme Court,  and similarly, that the Supreme Court may make 
rules on  the mat ter of its practice and procedure. The contest between 
the parties was essen tially focused on the above stated second  source – 
the law.  
16. No doub t, opinion  of the parties may differ  on the scope of the term  
‘law’ as used in Article 191  of the Constituti on. Some may argue that , it 
includes th e principles of law en unciated  by the Court in terms  of Article 
189 of the Constitution  or any custom or usage having the force o f law. 
Whether or  not it is so, is not a matter in d ispute befor e this Cou rt in the 
present case.  However , the insertion of the  word ‘law’ employed in Article 
191 of the Constitution , could by no stretch  of legal interp retation , 
exclude a validly enacted piece of legislation.    
17. Saying  that a law enacted by a  comp etent l egislature cannot 
regulate the practice and procedu re of t he Supr eme Court would amount 
to shutt ing our  eyes on  the plain languag e of Article 191 of the  8
Constitution , and thereby offend s the settled ca rdinal princ iples of 
interpreta tion of constituti onal pr ovisions. However, it is a matter for  
judicial examinatio n and de termination , as to  wheth er the term ‘law’ 
used in Article 191 by  itself confers the le gislative power on Parliament o r 
the legislative competenc e of Parliament is to be culled from oth er 
provisions of the  Constitution.  
18. In this regard,  the lear ned Atto rney General  contended that , Article 
191 of the Constitution  by itself is an enabling pr ovision that c onfers the 
legislative competence  on Parliame nt to make ‘law’ on the s ubject of 
‘practice and procedure ’ of this Court . His reliance was on “[m]atters 
which under the Constitution are within the legislative competence of 
Majlis - e-Shoora (Parliament) ”, as provided  in the first part of Entry 58 of 
the 4th Schedule  to the  Constituti on. 
19. One cannot legally consider  the word ‘law’ in isolation to the  
expression  ‘subject to law ’ employed in Article 191 of the Constitution . 
One must  acknowledge that, the use of the expression  ‘subject to law ’ is 
not unique in Artic le 191 , as it has been used in s everal other provisions 
of the  Constitution. In my o pinion , the said express ion ordinarily makes 
the right or  power, in respect of which it is use d, subordinate and 
subservient to  the law e nacte d by a comp etent legisl ature . This 
expression , to my min d, does not by itself con fer any legisl ative power on 
a particul ar legislature. I t only envisages  that the right or power may be 
regulated, controlled,  or curtailed by law enacted by a comp etent 
legisla ture. This, in my opinion, was the intent of the framers to employ 
the expressi on ‘subject to law ’ in Artic le 191 of t he Constitution .  
  9
20. Given the above intent,  when we read Article 191 (supra ), it 
becomes c lear that by using the said e xpress ion therein , the legislat ure 
wanted to convey by implication  that, there was or may be law on the 
matter  of practice and pr ocedu re of the Supreme Court  other than the 
one framed by the Supreme Court , and when there is such a law or is to 
be competently  enacte d, the power of the Supreme Court t o make r ules 
on this matter or the rules alread y framed  shall stand eclips ed. In other 
words, the provisions of a law regarding matter of practice and procedure 
of the Supreme  Court  enacted b y the competent  legislat ure shall prevail 
over the p rovisions of  a rule also made thereon by the Supreme Cour t.  
 
21. In fact,  the Full Court that framed  the Supreme Court Rules , 1980 
(“the Rules” ), carried through the  above explained intent  of the makers of 
the C onstitution , in subjectin g the rule-making au thority of the Supreme 
Court to competently  enacted law. This is but evident from the provision s 
of Order XI  of the Rules, wherein, the authority of fixation of the cases 
before the Benches  of the Supreme C ourt was bound to an appropria tely 
enacted ‘law’. The said rule reads:  
“[s]ave as ot herwise p rovided by law  or by these Rules every cause, appeal or 
matter shall be he ard and disposed of  by a B ench consisting of not less than 
three J udges to be nominated by th e Chief Justice ”.   
      (emph asis provided)  
 
22. The legal signifi cance of th e check of ‘law’ on the r ule-making 
authority of the Supreme Court i s magnifie d manifold, when we note that 
the framers of the Cons titution did not pr escribe any such ch eck of ‘law’ 
on the rule -making a uthority of the Parl iament1 to regulate its 
                                                
1 Article 67 (Parl iament)  
67. (1) Subject to the Cons titution, a House may m ake rules for regul ating its procedure 
and t he conduct of its busi ness, and sha ll have  power to act notwithsta nding any vacancy 
in the mem bership  thereof, and any proceedings in the House sh all not be invalid on the  10
proceedings or for that matte r, the Executive2 to govern its  affairs  of 
govern ance. Thus, the intent of  the framer s of the Constitution  is but 
very obvious . 
 
23.  Reverting back to the iss ue of  tracing  the legisla tive source  to 
enact the law envisaged under Ar ticle 191 of the Constitut ion, w e have to 
first address  the two inter-connected issues : first, whether  Federal or 
Provinc ial or both , legislature s can leg islate on the matter  of practi ce and 
procedure of the S upreme Cour t; and secondly,  to identify the  enabling 
provision of the Con stitut ion.  
24. As per Article 142 of the Consti tution, Parliamen t has exclusiv e 
power to make laws with respect to  any matter  in the Federal Legisl ative 
List of the 4th Schedule  to the  Constitution, and all other matters ( except 
criminal  law, criminal procedure , and eviden ce) fall within the legislat ive 
competence of P rovincial Assemblies. On the m atters of criminal law, 
criminal pro cedure , and eviden ce, Parlia ment and P rovincial Assemblies 
have concurrent legislative power.  The ma tter of practice and proc edure 
of the Su preme Cou rt is not covered by th e matters of crimin al law, 
                                                                                                                                            
ground  that some persons who were not en titled to do so sat , voted or otherwise took  part 
in the proceedin gs. 
 
2) Until  rules are made under clause (1), the procedure and condu ct of bus iness in a 
House shall be regulated  by the ru les of p rocedure ma de by the  President.  
 
2 Article 90 and 99 (Exe cutive)  
90. (1) Subjec t to the Constitution , the executive au thority of the Fe deration shall be exercised in 
the name of the President by  the Federa l Government, consisting of the Prime Min ister an d 
the Feder al Minist ers, which shal l act through the Prime  Minister, wh o shall be  the chief 
executive of the Federation.   
(2) In the perf orman ce of his functions under the Constitution, the Prime Minister ma y act 
either directly or throug h the Fede ral Mini sters.  
 
99. (1) All executive actio ns of the Federal Gover nmen t shall b e expresse d to be taken in the name 
of the Presid ent. 
(2) The [Fed eral Government] shall be rules specify the manner in which  orders and  other 
instruments made and executed [in the name  of the Pre sident] s hall be authent icated, and 
the validit y of any orde r or instr ument so authenticate d shall not be que stioned in any 
court on the ground that it was not made or executed by the P resident.  
(3) The Federal Government shal l also mak e rules for the all ocation a nd transaction of its 
business.  
 
  11
criminal procedure , and eviden ce over which  Parliame nt and Provi ncial 
Assembly have co ncurrent  legislative power. Thus, with the issue of  
practice and proc edure of the Supreme Cou rt being ou tside the pale of 
the concurrent  legisla tive powe r of the  Parliament and Provi ncial 
Assembl ies, the moot question is,  therefore, further restricted  to: whether 
it is Parliament or Provin cial Assemblies th at ha ve the legislat ive 
competence on the matt er of practice and procedure of the Supreme 
Court.  
25. As per Ar ticle 141 of the Constitu tion, a Provincial Assemb ly can 
make laws for the Provi nce or a ny pa rt thereof; it cannot make laws th at 
can have extra -territorial operatio n beyond the territorial l imits of the 
Province. As Supreme Cou rt exerci ses its juri sdiction and judicial powers  
for the wh ole of Pakistan, the Provincial Assemblie s, thus, lack the 
legislative power to enact a l aw relating to the Supreme Court, including 
a law that regulat es its practice and proc edure. This would l eave us now 
to focus  on the issue:  whether Parliament  has the legislative  competence  
to legislate thereo n or otherwise .  
26. When  we read the Federal Legislative L ist of the 4th Schedule  to the  
Constituti on, we do n ot find the ma tter of practice and proc edure of the 
Supreme Court , expressl y mentioned therein. The reliance on En try 55 of 
the Federal Leg islative List by some of the le arned counsel supporting the 
validity of the Act, in my opinion, is not well placed.  Though the scop e of 
this Entry shall be di scussed i n detail later , suffice here to state that , 
this Entry relates t o ‘jurisdiction ’ and ‘powers’, and not the ‘practi ce and  
proced ure’ of the Su prem e Court .  
27. In order to establish legislative competence of the Parli ament , one 
must  carefully read  Entry 58 of the Federal Leg islative List  of the 4th  12
Schedule  to the  Constituti on. This entry along with Entry 59 are, in fact , 
independent source s of legislative competence for Parliament wit h 
respect to matters which und er the Constitut ion are within the leg islative  
competence of Parl iament or relate to th e Federation.  For ease of 
referenc e, Entries 58 an d 59 , are reproduced herein below for better 
underst anding. The pr ovisions  read as follows : 
Entry 58  
“Matters  which under the Con stitution are within the legislative  comp etence of 
Majlis- e-Shoora (Parl iament) or relate to the Federation .” 
 Entry 5 9 
“Matters incidental or ancillary to any matter enumerated in this Part .” 
 
28. The constitutional architecture necessitates that those matters 
stated in the legi slative lis t be interpreted not as expli cit grants of power, 
but as  frameworks outlining the scope of legislative competence. I n this 
light, these entries demand an interpretat ion that is not on ly liberal and 
broad but also deep ly rooted in the constitutional ethos a nd that bolster 
respect for the doctrine of separation of powers. In interpreting these 
entries, particularly i n the cont ext of a feder al str ucture, it is imper ative 
to give them the widest possible ambit. However, this does not imply an 
unfettered e xpansi on of legi slative competence into judicial domain . The 
phrase ‘[m]at ters which relate to the Federation’  in Entry 58, whi le broad, 
must  be un derstood within the bounds of  constitutional pr opriety and 
the underlying pr inciple that legislative overreach into 'jurisd iction' and 
'powers'  of the Supreme Court  is constitutional ly impermissible . This 
interpreta tion aligns with the foundational principle of constitutionalis m, 
which mandates  a clear demarca tion and balance between  legislative and 
judicial powers . Thus, while Entry 58 offer a basis for legislativ e action in 
matters of ‘practice and procedure ’ of the Supreme Cour t, such action  13
must be exercised with constitutional caution, ensuring that it  does not 
encroach upon the ‘jurisdiction ’ and ‘powers ’ of the j udiciary, as ex plicitly 
constrained b y Entry 55 . This delicat e bala nce is essen tial to uphold th e 
integrity and i ndependence of the judiciary, a cornerstone of dem ocratic 
gover nance and the ru le of law.  In this ba ckdrop, when we read Entry  
58, it becomes apparent  that, as Supreme Cou rt exercises its ju risdiction 
and jud icial powers for the whole of P akistan;  it is, i n this sense, a  
constitutional establishment , having direct nexus  with the Federatio n. To 
declare it s functions  otherwise th an ‘[m]at ters which  relate to the 
Federa tion’ provided in Entry 58 , would be factually an d legally incorrect.  
Therefore , the matter of practice and proc edure of the Supreme Court is 
a matter that relates to the Fede ration , and thus falls within the scope of 
Entry 58 of the F ederal Legislative List  in the 4th Schedule to the 
Constitution . Parliament, therefore, has the legislative compe tence to 
enact the Act on the matter of practice and p rocedure of the Suprem e 
Court . 
Conclusion on Legislative  Competence  of Par liament  
Given t he above, though I differ with the reaso ning rendered by the 
learned Attorney General in rendering legal cover to the Act, I concur 
with his conclusion  that, the ‘practice and proc edure’ of the Sup reme 
Court ment ioned in Artic le 191  of the Constit ution  falls within the sco pe 
of En try 58 of the Fede ral Legislative List, and thus,  the Parliament  has 
the le gislative c ompetence to legislate  on ‘practice and p rocedure ’ of the 
Suprem e Court . 
Violation of the fundamental  rights – provi sions of the Act   
29. Once the legislative competence of Parliament to legisl ate on the 
matter of ‘practice and procedure ’ of the S upreme Cou rt has been settled ,  14
the provision s of the Act are now to be examined  on the constitut ional 
touchstone of Article 8  of th e Constitution . This co nstitutional test is, 
whether a law enact ed by a comp etent legislature  can take away  or 
abridge any o f the funda mental rights guaranteed by the Constitution.  
30. The main thrust of the challenge made by  the petitioners to the 
validi ty of the Act was that it viol ates the independence of the judic iary, 
and there by offends the fundamental r ight of access to justice th rough 
an independent judicia ry, enshrined in the right to life and libe rty, as 
well as , in the right to a fair tria l and due proce ss guarante ed by Article s 
9 and 10A  of the Constitution , respectively .  
31. Admittedly,  the Act has essenti ally dea lt with the power  of 
constituting B enches and suo mo tu invocation of the original jurisdiction 
of this Court under Article 184  of th e Constituti on. Earlier, the 
constitution of Benches of the Su preme Court was  decided by the Chie f 
Justice alone, whereas the  enabling provisions of the Act ha ve conferred 
the said authority on a Committee , comprising  of the Chief Justi ce and 
two next most senior Judg es of th is Court. What is evident is that these 
powers have remained in and with the Cou rt, that  is, its Judges. No 
power h as been conferred on any outsider to the Court. Despite their 
lengthy arguments,  the learned cou nsel for t he petiti oners and other  
persons oppos ing the validity of the Act remained  unable to explai n, how 
the Act affects th e indepe ndence of the judiciary in  substituting the  Chief 
Justice with the Committee comprising not only the Chief  Justice but 
also the two n ext most senior Judges to exercise th e administrative 
power s of constituting Benches  and invoking suo motu  under the origin al 
jurisdiction of the Cou rt.   15
32. Undoubtedl y, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court  has been 
expressly veste d with special  power s in the Constitution , in pa rticular, 
matters relating to elevations to  the bench, admin istering oath of office , 
rendering recommen dation for appoi ntment s to various c onstit utional 
positions, and being part of commissions for r emoval of judge s of 
superior judici ary and other c onstitutional  office holders under t he 
Constitution .3 But when it came to framing  the rules fo r regulating  the 
‘practice and pr ocedu re’ of the Supreme Cour t, the framers of the 
Consti tution vested Supreme C ourt, and not the Chief Justic e, with the 
authority to regulate the same.  And, mind you,  the Supreme Cou rt under 
Article 17 6 of the Constitution, consists of the Chief Justice and the 
other judges of the Supreme Cour t. Thus, the clear intent of the framers 
of the Constitution  was, but obvious.  
33. Viewed from another legal perspective, it would be interesting to 
note that, in essence, the A ct makes the process of con stituting Benches 
more democratic, fostering a partici patory approach in decision -making.  
                                                
 
3  Rele vant Provisions of Chief Jus tice of Paki stan under the  Constitution  
 
Article  Title of the Article  Text of the Article  
10(4)  Safeguards  as to ar rest and detention   Appointment of Chairman and two me mber s of the Fe deral Review Bo ard  
 
146(3) Power of the  Federation to confer 
Provin ces to entrust functions to the 
Federation . Appoint arbitrator  in respect of any extra costs of administratio n incurre d by the 
Province in connectio n with the exercise of those powe rs or the discharge of transferred  
function s and dutie s of the Federation . 
152 Acquisition of land for Federal 
purpo ses  Appoint a rbitrator in relation to the agreement between the Fe deration and the Province  
relating to acquir ing land on behalf, and at t he exp ense, of the Fe deration or, if the land 
belongs to the Province, to t ransfer it to the Federation . 
159(4) Broadcast ing and telecasting  Appoint ar bitrator to re solve any questio n arising whether any conditions imposed  on 
any Provincial Government ar e lawf ully imposed, o r whether any refusal by t he Federal 
Government to ent rust functions is unreasonable . 
168(2)  Auditor General  of Pakistan   Administer  oath of office to the Audito r-General    
175A Appointment of Judges to the Supreme 
Court, High Court s and Fede ral 
Shariat  Courts  For Appointment o f Judges to the Supreme Cour t, High Courts and Federal Sha riat 
Courts , the Chief Jus tice of Pakistan  shall be the Chairman Commission . 
  
178 Oath  of office  Administer  oath of office to the  Judge of the Supre me Cou rt   
182 Appoi ntment of ad -hoc judges  Appointment of Ad -hoc judges o f the Supreme Court  
 
183(2)  Seat of  the Suprem e Court  The Supreme Court may from time to time sit in such o ther plac es as the Chief Justice 
of Pakistan , with the approval of the P reside nt, may appoint . 
200 Transfer of High Co urt judges  Consultee for the transfer of Ju dges from on e High Court to  another.      
209 Supreme Judicial Council  Member of the  Supreme Judicial Council of Pakistan  
214 Oath o f Office of Chief Election 
Commi ssione r  Before enter ing upon office, the Commi ssioner shall make before th e Chief Justice of 
Pakistan  and a member o f the Election  Commission shall make before the 
Commissioner] oath in the fo rm set-out in the Third Schedule . 
 
  16
No one can dispute that a decis ion b ased o n mutual consul tation of three 
Judges , instead of the solitary opinion of one J udge, would enhanc e 
transparen cy and responsib ility of the pro cess. We mu st not forget that 
central to all judicia l systems, regardless of their geograph ic, political, or 
societal differ ences,  is the resp onsibility that they m ust have the public 
trust and confidence in the m. To my mind, public trust in  the judicia ry 
does not merely  hinge on the l egal attributes of the  judgments rendered , 
but is based essentially on the trust and conf idence of th e public  in its 
impartiality and independ ence. Given th is ultimate obj ective , which was 
underscored by the m arked protests voiced by  the civil-societ y, political 
and lawyers  commun ity on the  process of the constit ution of Benches 
and the excessive exercise of  the original juris diction of  the Sup reme 
Court, the intro duction of a process of  mutual consul tation of three 
senior Judges of the S upreme Court , and that too , withou t any 
interfe rence of  any ‘alien’ authority, pe rson or body , would  promote 
transparenc y, and thereby, bolster the trust and co nfiden ce of the pub lic 
in the instit ution  and instead  of diminishing,  strengt hen the 
independen ce of the judiciary.   
Conclusion – whether provisions of the Act  violate fundamental  rights   
In vie w of the above, I am of the firm opinion  that the prov isions of the  
Act do not offend the fundamental  rights under the Constitution.  
There fore, th e challenge of  the petitioners to the constit utional validity of 
the Act fails on both co unts:  firstly,  lack of  legislative compete nce, and 
secondl y, violation of fundamen tal rights. 
Issue No.  II - Comments on Section 2 of th e Act   
34. What irks me is the expansive scope of authority vested in the 
Committee under section 2 of the Act . As per the Statement of Objects  17
and Reason s of the Bill introduced in the Parliament , the primar y aim 
was to regulate the prac tice and pr ocedure of t his Court in the ex ercise of 
its origina l jurisdiction under Article 18 4(3) of the Constitution  but the 
compa ss of section 2 of the Act g oes far beyond it , and cover s “[e]very 
cause,  appeal or matter” before the Court. This, I earnes tly regard to be 
rather  excessive . 
35. I have no hesitation in say ing that the Statement o f Objects and 
Reasons correctly identi fied the need for re gulating  the practi ce and 
procedure of the Court in r elation to the exerci se o f its original 
jurisdictio n under A rticle 184(3) of the Constitution . Not o nly the 
Pakistan Bar Council and the Supr eme Court Bar Association but also 
the J ustices  of this Court ha ve highlighted  such need.  Thus , none can 
dispute or den y the need for reforms in the practice and procedure  of this  
Court  in the exercise o f its origin al jurisdiction under Article 184(3) of the 
Constitution .  
36. In fact, I may a dd that not only the orig inal ju risdiction of the  
Court under Artic le 184 (3) of the Constitu tion, but in my opini on, the  
advisory jurisdiction of this Court under Article  186 of  the Constitutio n, 
warrant  to be regulated . To my mind , the framers of the Constitution 
envisag ed the exercise of original jurisdiction  under Arti cle 184(3)  by the 
Court  in cases relating to s uch segment s of the socie ty that do not hav e 
the politica l, financial, or legal means to agitate their cause w ith 
reference to the enforcement of their fundame ntal ri ghts before any 
political, administrative , or judicial forum . Similar ly, the ad visory 
jurisdiction , unde r Article 18 6 of the Cons titution, was inten ded to  
obtain an ‘opinion’ of the Court on a questio n of law of pub lic 
importance , but over the years , the ‘opinion ’ has been transformed int o a  18
‘decisi on’ having the  binding eff ect. Thus, the exerci se of these t wo 
jurisdictions require d introspection  by the Court, and in parti cular , the 
mode  and manner of c omposition of Benches was of utmost importance. 
This, I say witho ut imputing any mala fide  or bias on the decisions and 
opini ons that have been re ndered by different Bench es of this Co urt, 
while exercisi ng the se jurisdictions .  
37. I earnestly think  that none should doub t the integrity and good 
intention  of the Chief Ju stices in constituting  Benches but in the 
backdrop of the ch arged  political milieu in the coun try, the excessive 
exerci se of the original and ad visory jurisdict ion in matters of political 
nature led to aspe rsions , which could have been avoi ded had there be en 
transpare nt criteria for c onstitution of the Benches and fixation of the 
cases  under Articl es 184(3) and  186 of the Consti tution. We mu st alw ays 
remember tha t sin ce the real strength of a ny judicial syst em lies in 
public confidence, the public perceptio n regarding the composi tion of 
Benches and allocation of cases is of prime import ance.  
38. What, how ever, is noticeabl e that the issue re lated to the exercise 
of original jur isdiction  under Article 184(3) of the Constitution, but 
section 2  of the Act has expanded the scope of regulating t he practice 
and procedure of the Court to “[e]very cause, ap peal or matte r” before th e 
Cour t.  
39. No doubt, change  is good;  in cer tain matters , incrementa l change 
is even bette r. This is  to ensure that the sys tem aimed to be  reformed is 
not yoked and choked un der the weight and flow of the proposed  change  
itself. Theref ore, I urge the Fe deral Gove rnment to move Parliament to 
reconsider  section 2 of the  Act. I must clarify that in asking to reconsider  19
section 2 of the Act, I am in no wa y questioning the intent, wisdom , or 
authority of Parliament.  
Issue No.  III. - Constit ution al validity o f section 5 of the Act (ri ght of appeal)  
40. Section 5 of the Act has created  a right of ap peal against an order 
passed  by the C ourt in the exerci se of its original jurisdi ction  under 
Article 1 84(3) of the Con stitution. And this right of appeal has been ma de 
available, with retrosp ective effect , to an ag grieved person ag ainst whom  
the order  has b een made even before the commencemen t of the Act.  For 
the conveni ence of referen ce, section  5 of th e Act reads :  
5. Appeal .- (l) An  appeal sha ll lie within thirty days from a n ord er of a 
bench of the Sup reme  Court who exerc ised jurisdiction under clause ( 3) 
of Arti cle 184 of the Con stitution to a larger bench of the Sup reme Court 
and such appea l shall, fo r hearing,  be fixed wit hin a p eriod not e xceeding 
fourteen days.  
(2) The  right of appeal  under sub -section (1) shall also  be available to an 
aggrieved per son again st whom an order h as been made under clause (3) 
of Article 184 of the C onstitutio n, prior to the commencement of th is Act:   
Provided that the appeal under this sub -section shall be filed within 
thirty days of the c ommencement of this Act . 
 
41. The right of app eal is not a matte r of mere procedure but is a 
substantive right.  This is a well -settled principl e in our juris prudence, 
and no one has before us disputed its correc tness. I ma y add th at from a 
litigant’s viewpoint , the right of appeal is no doubt  a right  but from a 
court’s  perspective , it is a matte r of j urisdiction, whi ch can  only be  
conferred on a Court by the C onstitution or by  or under any law as per 
Article 175( 2) of the C onstitut ion. There fore, t o establish  the competence 
of the Parliament to enact a law that  confers  jurisdiction on this C ourt, 
one has to show an y provisio n in t he Const itution or any entry in th e 
Federal Legisla tive List contained in th e 4th Schedu le to the Constitut ion 
that empowe rs it in this regard.   20
42. To establish the  legislative competence of  Parliament  in enacting 
section 5  of the Act, the le arned Attorney -General has relied upon Entry 
55 of  the 4th Schedule  to the Constitution . For ease of refe rence, Entry 
55, is cited here : 
Entry No. 55 : Jurisdiction and power s of all  courts, except the Supreme  
Court, with respect to any of the matt ers in this List and, to such extent  
as is expressly authori zed by  or under the C onstitution, the e nlargement 
of the jurisdicti on of the Supreme Cou rt, and the conferring th ereon of 
supplemen tal powers.  
 
A bare readin g of Entry 55 shows that as per t he fir st part o f this E ntry, 
Parliament , the Federal Legislature , is com petent to make laws regarding 
the jurisdiction a nd powers of all Courts, except the Supreme Court , with 
respe ct to a ny of th e matters in the  list. Howe ver, t he second part of the 
Entry makes  Parliame nt, compete nt to make l aw for the enlargem ent of 
the jurisdiction of the  Supreme Cou rt, and the conferr ing thereon the 
suppl emental powers with the proviso  that this is to be done on ly to such 
extent , as is expressly authori zed by or under  the Con stitution . The 
phrase ‘to such exten t as is expressly  author ized by or  under the 
Constitution ’ has a qualifying and contro lling effect on the provis ion o f 
which it is a part . The lea rned Att orney  Genera l, however,  submi tted that 
this contr olling phrase is  not par t of the  provision tha t relates to th e 
enlargemen t of the ju risdiction  of the Supreme Cou rt, but relates  to the 
other Courts . According to him, the provision re lating to the other Courts 
is to be read as un der: - 
Jurisd iction and powers of all courts  … with respect to any  of th e 
matters in this List and, to such ext ent a s is ex pressly  authorized by or 
under the Constitution , … 
 
His argument , in esse nce, was that the requirement  of express 
authorization by or under  the Co nstitution  stated in E ntry 55 relates  to  21
the jurisdic tion a nd powers of other Courts,  not to the e nlarg ement o f the 
jurisdiction of the Supre me Court.  
43. The learned A ttorney  General has, to my mind,  missed to 
appreciate that the entries in relatio n to the j urisdiction and powers of 
Courts, ot her than the S upreme  Court, ha ve had a consis tent 
phraseology  throughout  the co nstitut ional histo ry of Pakistan. The 
controlling phrase , ‘to suc h extent  as is expressly auth orize d by or under 
the Constitution ’, has never  been used  with reference to the jur isdiction 
and powers  of other Courts in the r elevant Entries of the legi slative  lists 
provided in  all the previous  Constitutions of Pakis tan, as well as  in the 
present Constituti on. Such Entries may be ci ted he re, as a ready 
referen ce:  
The Government of I ndia Act, 19354 
Legislative List II  - Provinc ial Legislative List- 
Entry  No. 2.  Jurisd iction and powers of all courts  except the Federal 
Court, with res pect to any of the ma tters in this list; procedure in Rent  
and Reven ue Courts.  
Legislative Lis t III - Concurrent Legis lative  List, Part-1 
Entry No. 15. Jurisdiction and powers of all  courts,  except the  Federal 
Court, w ith respect  to any of the matte rs in t his list. 
 
The Constitution  of Pakistan, 1956  
Federal  List, Part II.  
Entry No. 29 . Jurisdiction and powe rs of all court s, exc ept the Supreme  
Court, wi th respect to an y of the m atters i n this List; offen ce against laws 
with respect to any of the matt ers in t his list . 
Concurrent  List, Part II.  
Entry No. 19. Jurisdic tion and p owers o f all courts, excep t the Sup reme 
Court, wit h resp ect to any of t he matters  in this List; o ffence aga inst law s 
with respect to any o f the matter s in this list . 
Provincial List . 
Entry  No. 92. J urisdiction and powers of all courts, exce pt the  Supreme 
Court, with r espect  to any of the ma tters in this L ist. 
The Constitution  of Pakist an, 1962  
Third S chedule (C entral  List). 
Entry No. 46 . Jurisdiction and powers of courts with respec t to any  of 
the matters enum erated  in this Schedule.  
The Interim Constitutio n of Pakis tan, 197 2 
List I I - Provi ncial Legislati ve Lis t, Part I  
Entry No. 2. J urisdiction and powers of all cour ts, exc ept the Sup reme 
Court, with respect to any of the matters i n this List; proc edure in Rent 
and Revenue Courts.  
 
List I II - Concurrent Legislative List, Part I   
                                                
4 This Act served  as th e first Constit ution of Pakistan till promulgation  of the 195 6 Constitution.   22
Entry No.  16. Offence ag ainst laws with respe ct to any of the matters i n 
this Lis t; juris diction  and powers  of all courts, except the Supreme 
Court, with respect to any of the matter s in t his List.  
The Constitution of P akistan, 1 973 
Concur rent Legislative  List (Si nce omitted)  
Entry No . 46. Offence a gainst law s with respect t o any of t he matte rs in 
this List; j urisd iction and p owers o f all co urts, except the  Suprem e 
Court, w ith respect to any of the matters in this List.  
 
The con trolling phra se, ‘to such extent as is expressly au thoriz ed b y or 
under the Consti tution’, or a ph rase similar to it , has been used in the 
following Entries of the three Constitutio ns: 
The Government of India Act, 1 935 (‘Act of 1935 ’) 
Legislative List I - Federal Leg islative List - 
Entry No. 53. Jurisdictio n and powe rs of all c ourts, except the Federal 
Court, wit h respect  to any of the matters  in this li st and, to such extent 
as is exp ressly authorized  by Part IX of this Act, the enl argement o f the 
appellate jurisdiction  of the Federal Court, and the conferr ing th ereon of 
supple mental powers.   
The Interi m Constitu tion of P akista n, 1972  
List I - Federal Le gislative List, Part I  
Entry N o. 55. J urisdiction and powe rs of all courts, exce pt the Supreme 
Court, with respect t o any of the mat ters in t his list and, t o such  extent 
as is e xpressly authorize d by or under the Constitut ion, t he enlarg ement 
of the jurisdiction of the F ederal Court, an d the c onferring thereon of 
supplemental powers.  
The Const itutio n of Pakistan, 1973  
List I - Federal Legislat ive List, Part I  
Entry No. 55. Juri sdiction and power s of all  courts, e xcept the  Supre me 
Court,  with respect to a ny of the matters in this list and, to such extent 
as is ex pressly authorized by or under the Con stitution, the enlar gement  
of the jurisdictio n of the Federa l Cour t, and the conf erring thereon of 
suppleme ntal power s.  
In all the above thr ee Entr ies, the co ntrolling phrase , ‘to such exten t as is  
expressly  authorized by or under the Cons titution ’, or a similar phrase  
with a mino r change in the Act of 1935 , has b een us ed when the Ent ry 
provided for the e nlarg ement of the ju risdiction  of the Supreme Court, or 
the Federal Court , the predecess or Court to the Supreme Cour t. This 
consistent phras ing of the rel evant legislative E ntries in the pre vious 
Constitutions , as well a s in the presen t Constitution , by its elf lends 
supp ort to principle  that under Entr y 55 (supra ), the controlli ng phrase  
only relates t o the e nlargement of the jurisdiction of the Suprem e Cour t, 
and is not relevant to the jurisdiction a nd powers of other Courts.  
44. Forem ost is the point  that t he reading o f Entry 55  suggested by  the 
learned Attor ney General would de feat the expr ess exclusion  provided in  23
the first part of the  Entry, as to the j urisdiction and powe rs of the 
Suprem e Court , and that  exclus ion would become redundant. The 
exclu sion in the first p art of the  Entry c an have a mean ing and e ffect 
only when we  read the latter  part of the E ntry with the controlling clause.        
45. To my mind, by creating th e right o f appeal against  orders passed 
by the Supreme Court in its e xistin g original juri sdiction under A rticle 
184(3) of the Constitu tion, Parliament has n ot ‘enlarged ’ the jurisdictio n 
but has in fact created a separate and new appellate jurisdiction , which 
was not provided for  in the Constit ution . By no stretch of  the imagina tion 
can the wo rd ‘enlargement ’, include  the ‘creation ’ of a new jurisdiction.   
46. There is an other aspect o f the matter , that the original jurisdiction 
under Article 184(3) has been confer red on the Supre me Court by the 
Constitution, it cannot ther efore be interfered w ith by the legisl ature 
through ordinar y legisl ation, such as section 5 of the Ac t, especially 
when Article 1 84(3) of the Constitution does not subject its exercise  of 
original  jurisdiction  being ‘subject to law ’.  
47. The l earned Attor ney General and all the other learned counse l, 
supporting the  const itutional validity of  section 5 of t he Act,  were unable 
to point  out any express authorization by or under the Constitution for 
Parliament to interfere with the origin al jurisdi ction of the  Supre me 
Court under Article 184(3) of the C onstitution . Thus,  in my conside red 
opinion,  Parliament  lacks legislativ e competence to enact s ection 5 of the 
Act. 
48. I may mention  here that providing a right of appeal against an 
order passed by this Court in its original jurisdiction  is, no doubt, a 
positive thought to better ensure  the requi rements of f air tr ial and due  24
process; but in pursuit of  a positive  outcome , the law no t less than the 
fundamental and su preme  law of th e land - the Constitution – cannot be 
disregarded.  If Parliament i ntends  to take the positiv e step  of provid ing a 
right of appeal ag ainst orders passed b y this Cou rt in the exe rcise of its 
original j urisdiction und er Art icle 184(3) of the Constit ution, it must 
adopt the “right course ” - amend  the Constitution.  
49. With utmost respect for Parliament,  I declare that section 5  of the 
Act has been ena cted by Parliament beyo nd its ordinary legisla tive power 
conferred on it under the Constitution; se ction 5 of  the Act  is, therefore,  
ultra vi res the Constitution, and thus of no legal effect.   
 
 
Judge  
 
 