IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(Appellate Jurisdiction)  
 
 
PRESENT:  
Mr. Justice Gulzar Ahmed, C.J.  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Sayyed Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi  
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL  NO. 985 OF 20 20 
(Against the judgment dated 
21.11.2019  of the K.P.K. Ser vice 
Tribunal, Peshawar  passed in  
Appeal  No.961/2018 ) 
 
 
Secretary Elementary & Secondary Education Department, 
Government of KPK, Peshawar and others  
 …Appellant (s) 
VERSUS  
Noor-ul-Amin  
 …Respondent(s)  
 
For the appellant (s): Mr. Zahid Yousaf Qureshi, Additional 
Advocate General, KPK  
  
For the respondent(s):  Mr. Khaled Rahman, ASC  
Syed Rifaqat Hussain Shah, AOR  
  
Date of hearing:  22.02.2021  
… 
ORDER  
 
  Gulzar Ahmed , C.J.- The respondent was employed 
as Primary School Teacher ( “PST” ) in the Education  
Department of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. He was granted ex -
Pakistan leave from 02.12.2012 to 01.12.2014 vide order dated 
31.12.2012. As the respondent did not report to duty on expiry 
of his ex -Pakistan leave, he was issued show -cause notice dated 
24.10.2017. As  the respondent did not report for duty despite 
issuance of notice in the newspaper, therefore, vide order dated 
03.01.2018 the respondent was removed from service. The CIVIL APPEAL NO. 985 OF 2020  -: 2 :-
respondent filed service appeal before the KPK Service Tribunal 
(“Tribunal” ) which by t he impugned judgment was partly 
allowed by converting the major penalty of removal from service 
into a major penalty of compulsory retirement with effect from 
the date of his absence i.e. January, 2013 and the absence 
period was treated as unauthorized abs ence. While doing so, the 
Tribunal in paragraph No.6 deal t with the matter as follows: - 
“6. Perusal  of the record  reveals  that the 
appellant  was serving  in Education  
Department as  Primary School  Teacher.  He 
was appointed as  Primary School  Teacher 
in the ye ar 2000. The appellant was 
imposed major penalty of removal from 
service but the respondent -department has 
not conducted a proper regular inquiry as 
neither charge sheet statement of allegation 
was framed and served upon the appellant 
nor any regular inqui ry was conducted 
against the appellant. Though the 
respondent -department has issued a show -
cause notice but neither the respondent -
department has dispensed the regular 
inquiry in the show -cause notice nor any 
reason for dispensing the regular inquiry 
has b een mentioned in the show -cause 
notice. Moreover, the appellant was 
appointed as Primary School Teacher in the 
year 20 00 and he was imposed major 
penalty of removal from service on the 
allegation of his absence from duty with 
effect from January 2013 meani ng thereby, 
that he was having more than 10 years 
service in his credit with effect from his 
appointment till his absence, therefore, the 
impugned order of removal from service appear 
to be har sh. As such, we partially accept the 
appeal, set aside the impu gned order and 
convert the major penalty of removal from 
service into a major penalty of compulsory 
retirement with effect from the date of his 
absence i.e. January 2013. The absence period 
is treated as unauthorized absence. Parties are 
left to bear their  own costs. File be consigned to 
the record room. ” CIVIL APPEAL NO. 985 OF 2020  -: 3 :-
It may be noted that the Tribunal has proceeded to modify the 
penalty on two counts; one that no regular inquiry was 
conducted and the other that the respondent has 10 years 
service.  So far the question of  regular inquiry is concerned, we 
note that the very fact of respondent remaining absent is not a 
disputed fact and thus there was no occasion for holding a 
regular inquiry in the matter. Reliance in this behalf can be 
placed upon the judgment reported as National Bank of 
Pakistan and another Vs. Zahoor Ahmed Mengal  (2021 SCMR 
144).  
2.  Being an employee for 10 years did not give any 
authority to the respondent on the basis of which he can stay 
away from job continuously for years altogether and thus in our  
view, such ground could not have been pressed for modifying 
the penalty imposed by the department upon the respondent  
giving premium to him on this misconduct.  More so, when we 
look at the travelling history of the respondent given at page 15 
of the paper -book it shows that almost twelve times the 
respondent has visited abroad and returned to Pakistan 
showing that he has some other activities and thus was not 
interest ed in continuing as PST. We, therefore, find that the 
modification of penalty by the Tribu nal was not in accordance 
with law. In this behalf reliance can be placed upon the 
judgments reported as Commissioner Faisalabad Division, 
Faisalabad and another Vs. Allah Bakhsh  (2020 SCMR 1418) 
and Government of the Punjab through Chief Secretary Vs. CIVIL APPEAL NO. 985 OF 2020  -: 4 :-
Muhammad Arshad and 2 others  (2020 SCMR 1962) . 
Resultantly, the impugned judgment to the extent of 
modification of penalty is set aside and the appeal to this extent 
is allowed.  
 
 
Chief Justice  
 
 
 
Judge  
 
 
 
Judge  
Islamabad, the  
22nd of February, 2021  
Approved for reporting  
Waqas Naseer/*  