1 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
Muhammad Ali Mazhar , J.–– By means of our short order dated 11.10.2023 , 
and for reasons to be recorded later,  by a majority of 10 to 5  the Supreme 
Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  (“the Act ”) was sustained as being in 
accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , 1973 
(“the Constitution ”), and to this extent the petitions were dismissed . In 
unison, by a majori ty of 8 to 7 , granting  a right of appeal with retrospective  
effect was declared to be ultra vires the Constitution , while the conferral of a 
prospective right of appeal was held to be intra vires the Constitution by a 
majority of 9 to 6 .  
 
2. Though  I have advocated and reinforced the majority view with regard to the 
legitimacy and const itutionality of the Act, but in tandem  I have declared the 
retrospect ive/retroactive right of appeal  conferred under sub -section (2) of 
Section 5 of the Act ultra vir es the Constitution to the extent of  the 
retrospective application thereof. In order to explicate the aforementioned 
position , I am adding  separate reasons in aid of the short order and the same 
are segregated in to two limbs , i.e. (i) concurring analysi s for judicial comity 
pertaining to the declaration of a segment  of the Act as intra vires , and (ii) 
dissenting analysi s with regard to declaring the right of filing appeal with 
retrospective effect  ultra vires . For convenience, m y reasons are categorized in to 
the following headings: 
 
Sr. 
No. Subject  Reference  
1.  Legislative C ompetence  (para 3 to para 10) 
2.  Doctrine of Intra V ires and Ultra V ires (para 1 1 to para 13 ) 
3.  Retroactive or Ex Post Facto Right of Appeal   (para 14 to para 17 ) 
4.  Distinction between  Article s 184 and 199 of 
the Constitution  (para 18 ) 
5.  Doctrine of Reading D own (para 19 to para 21 ) 
6.  Change  of Counsel in Review Petition   (para 22 ) 
7.  Master of the Roster  (para 23 to para 24 ) 
8.  Effect of Act on Decided C ases (para 25 ) 
9.  Hearing by Full Court  (para 26)  
 
 
1. Legislative C ompet ence  
3. According to the mandate and command of Article 141 of the Constitution,  
the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament)  may, subject to the Constitution , make laws 
for the whole or any part of Pakistan and a Provincial As sembly may make laws 
for the Province or any part thereof ; whereas under Article  142 of the 
Constitution , the Majlis -e-Shoora  (Parliament) has exclusive power s to make 2 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
laws with respect to any matter in the Federal Legislative List . Article 175 of 
the Constitution accentuates t he establishment and jurisdiction of c ourts , 
including the  Supreme Court of Pakistan, the High Court for each Province , the 
High Court of Islamabad , and such other courts as may be established by law , 
with the rider and qualification  that n o court shall have any jurisdiction save 
as is or may be conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under any law. Last 
but not least, Article  191 of the Constitution elucidates  that, again  subject to 
the Constitution and law, the Sup reme Court may make rules regulating the 
practice and procedure of the Court.  While construing and analyzing Article 
142 of the Constitution  in this  interrelated context, Entries  No.55 and 58 of the 
Federal Legislative List  provided in the Fourth Schedule  to the Constitution 
(“Federal Legislative List ”) cannot be disregarded or marginalized as they  
have direct nexus with the controversy emanating and stemming from the 
aforesaid petitions.    
 
“55. Jurisdiction and powers of all C ourts, except the Supreme 
Court, with respect to any of the matters in this List and, to such 
extent as is expressly authorised by or under the Constitution, the 
enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and the 
conferring thereon of supplemental powers. ” 
 
“58. Matters which under the Constitution are within the legislative 
competence of [Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament)] or relate to the 
Federation ”. 
 
 
4. While interpreting the Constitution , it is to be read as a whole without 
obliterating or annihilating  the other  provisions to ensure the rule of harmony.  
To understand its primordial  and elemental commandment s, and the language 
used in various Articles, it is necessary  to consider the h istorical background  
and the  textual and structural substratum  for its literal interpretation with 
liberal enforcement . It is a well settled exposition of law that a written 
constitution is, in essence, a form of statute which needs to be interpreted 
liberally  and read holistically as an organic document which contemplates the 
tricho tomy of powers between the three organs of the State, namely, the 
Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary. The doctrine of pith and 
substance places considerable emphasis on figuring out the distinct  attributes  
of constitutional provisions , and the doctrine of purposive interpretation lays 
down  a duty upon the c ourts to interpret the statute or the Constitution 
keeping in mind the purposefulness for which the provision in question was 
legislated while adopting a result -oriented approach , rather than construing it 
in a restrictive or stringent sense. According to Salmond  on Jurisprudence  (12th 
ed.) by P. J. Fitzgerald, M.A., at page 132,  interpretation or construction is the 3 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
process by which the courts seek to ascertain the meaning or intention of the 
legislature through the medium of the authoritative forms in which it is 
expressed.  
 
5. The litmus test for gauging legislative competence is unambiguously stated  
under Article 141 of the Constitution, i.e. that the Parliament , subject to the 
Constitution , is authorized  to promulgate the laws for the whole or any part of 
Pakistan , and also possesses  powers under Article 142 of the Constitution  to 
make laws with respect to any matter enumerated  in the Federal Legislative 
List. The Constitution plainly  lays down under Article 175 that no Court shall 
have any jurisdiction unless conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under 
any law. So far as Article  191 is concerned , it is quite visible that , subject to 
the Constitution and law, the Supreme Court may make rules regulating the 
practice and procedure of the Court.  A glimpse at the statement of objects and 
reasons  for the Act in questio n depict s that the exercise of original jurisdiction 
by the Supreme Court under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution , 
invocation  of suo motu  jurisdiction , constitution of benches , and the absence of 
a right of appeal  remained under discussion at different strat a and echelons  
and certain  reservations  were expressed  in this regard.  Therefore, i n order to 
streamline and restructure  some procedural intricacies , and to ensure the right 
to a fair trial and due process of la w as enshrined under Article 10A of the 
Constitution , as well a s provide the remedy of  an Intra Court Appeal, the 
Parliament promulgated the Act  pursuant to Article 175 (2) read with Article 
191 of the Constitution . For all intents and purposes, I have no hesitation or 
reluctance  in holding that the Parliament can make laws in relation to the 
Federal Legislative List . As earlier observed , Entry No.55 of the Federal 
Legislative List  is germane to the Jurisdiction and powers of all C ourts, except 
the Supreme Court, with respect to any of the matters in th e List and, to such 
extent as is expressly authorised by or under the Constitution, the enlargement 
of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, and the conferring thereon of 
supplemental powers.  In contrast, Article 175 explicates that  no Court shall 
have any jurisdiction unless conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under 
any law. The simple dictionary meaning of the word „enlargement ‟ used in 
Entry No.55  is to make larger or wider, increase the size or extend in scope, 
intensify, make more comprehensive , expand, amplify  or broaden [Ref: Shorter 
Oxford Dictionary  (6th ed.), Vol. I, page 836] . Whereas , in juxtaposition,  
according to Words and Phrases  (Permanent ed.), Vol. 23A , (pages 181 & 211 ), 
(1) “Jurisdiction” refers to court's power to adjudicate any issue or cause 
submitted to it; “practice” or “procedure” refers to manner in which p ower to 4 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
adjudicate is exercised  [Sheldon v. Powell, 125 So. 258, 263, 10 Fla. 782 ]; (2) 
“Jurisdiction” is power to hear and determine a cause while “procedure” is the 
mode of proceeding by which a legal right is enforced  [Snow v. 
Cincinnati  St. Ry. Co., 75 N.E.2d 220, 222, 80 Ohio App. 369 ]; (3) “Jurisdiction 
of court ” means power or authority , conferred upon a court by constitution and 
laws, to hear and determine causes between parties and to carry its judgments 
into effect, and this character of Jurisdiction cannot be conferred upon a c ourt 
by consent of the parties [ McBride v. McBride, Tex.C iv. App., 256 S.W.2d 250, 
254]; and  (4) “Jurisdiction of a court ” is that power which is conferred upon it 
by law and by which it is authorized to hear, determine, and render final 
judgment in an action and to enforc e its judgment by  legal process  [Jacuben ta 
v. Dunbar, 198 N.E.2d 674, 675, 120 Ohio  App. 249].  
 
6. It is a well -known  principle that the entries in the legislative lists represent  
fields of legislation which  must receive the broadest and most expansive  
interpretation , and are construed  to encompass  all ancillary or  subsidiary 
matters which can  reasonably be said to be compr ehended in them . In case of 
discord  or overlap with other entr ies, the rule of harmonious  construction is 
applied to reconcile the conflict for giving effect  to each of the entries . The items 
mentioned in the list cannot be read in a narrow or restricted sense but rather 
should be given a wide  and liberal interpretation  without constricting it with  
technical considerations , and  each general word should be held  to extend to all 
ancillary or subsidiary matters which can reasonably  be said to be 
comprehended in it. In the case of M/s Elahi Cotton Mills Ltd . and others v. 
Federation of Pakistan thr . Secretary M/o Finance, Islamabad and 6 others  
(PLD 1997 SC 582 ) it was held that t he entries in the Legislative List of the 
Constitution are not powers of legislation but only fields of legislative heads. 
The allocation of the subjects to the lists is not by way of scientific or logical 
definition but by way of mere s imple enumeration of broad catalogue. An entry 
in the Legislative List must be given a very wide and liberal interpretation.  
Similarly,  in the case of  Government of Sindh thr. Secretary, Health 
Department and others v. Dr. Nadeem Rizvi and others  (2020 SCMR 1 ), this 
Court held that  the legislative lists must be liberally construed and given the 
widest possible meaning and amplitude.  In this regard, reference may be made 
to the judgment reported as M/s Sui Southern Gas Company Ltd. and others v. 
Federatio n of Pakistan and others ( 2018 SCMR 802 ) in which this Court, while 
declaring the Industrial Relations Act, 2012 to be intra vires  the Constitution, 
extensively considered case law from the Indian and Pakistani jurisdictions 5 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
regarding interpretation of leg islative lists in a constitution and laid down the 
following principles of interpretation: - 
 
i. The entries in the Legislative Lists of the 
Constitution are not powers of legislation but only 
fields of legislative heads;  
   
ii. In construing the words in an Entry conferring 
legislative power on a legislative authority, the most 
liberal construction should be put upon the words;  
 
iii. While interpreting an Entry in a Legislative List it 
should be given widest possible meaning and should 
not be read in a nar row or restricted sense;  
 
iv. Each general word in an entry should be 
considered to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary 
matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be 
comprehended in it;  
 
v. If there appears to be apparent overlapping in 
respect o f the subject -matter of a legislation, an effort 
has to be made to reconcile the Entries to give proper 
and pertinent meaning to them;  
 
vi. A general power ought not to be so construed so as 
to make a particular power conferred by the same 
legislation and operating in the same field a nullity;  
 
vii. Legislation under attack must be scrutinized in its 
entirety to determine its true character in pith and 
substance; and  
 
viii. After considering the legislation as a whole in pith 
and substance, it has to be see n as to with respect to 
which topic or category of legislation in the various 
fields, it deals substantially and directly and not 
whether it would in actual operation affect an item in 
the forbidden field in an indirect way.  
 
 
7. There was m uch debate regarding the  right of an Intra Court Appeal , and it 
was repeatedly argued  that the same cannot be conferred through  an act of 
Parliament , but requires a constitutional  amendment . As a comparative study, 
I pored over the  Constitution of India  to survey  their legislative process and 
through this exercise I found that the s ubject -matter of laws made by 
Parliament and by the Legislatures of States  is provided under Article 246 
whereby  the Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any 
of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (Union List) , while 
for the matter s enumerated in  List II  (State List) , the Legislature of any State 
has exclusive power to make la ws for such State or any part thereof ; and for  
the maters enumerated  in List III  (Concurrent List) , both the Parliament and 
the Legislature of any State have power s to make laws . Entry No.77 of List I 6 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
(Union List)  of the  Seventh Schedule to the  Constitution of India pertains to the 
“Constitution, organization, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court 
(including contempt of such Court) ; and the fees taken therein; persons  entitled  to 
practis e before the Supreme Court ”. Under the aforesaid law-making powers, 
the Parliament of India promulgated the Supreme Court (Enlargement of 
Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction ) Act, 1970  on 9th August, 1970 . In the matter 
presently before us, the Parliament has, by virtue of the Act , made some 
procedural and substantive provision s which the Parliament was competent to 
legislate within the purview and premise of Article s 141, 142 and 175  of the 
Constitution, read with Entries  No.55 and 58 of the Federal Legislative List . 
Entry No.55 of  Federal Legislative List  was discussed and deliberated in the 
following dicta laid down by this Court as under: - 
  
1. Baz Muhammad Kakar and others v. Federation of 
Pakistan thr. Ministry of Law and Justice and others  
(PLD 2012 SC 923 ) 
 
“34. At this juncture, it may also be noticed that 
Entry 55 of the Federal Legislative List (Fourth 
Schedule to the Constitution) authorizes the 
Parliament to make law on jurisdiction and powers of 
all courts with respect to any of the matters in the 
said List to such extent as is expressly authorized by 
or under the Constitution. Thus, the said Entry on 
the one hand limits the legislative power of the 
Parliament to the making of any law on the 
jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court, and on 
the other hand empowers the Parliament to make law 
for enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court and the conferring of supplemental powers.  
 
(…) 
36. Under Article 70 of the Constitution, the 
Parliament is authorized to make laws with respect to 
any matter  in the Federal Legislative List by adopting 
procedure laid down in the Constitution. Entry No.55 
of the Fourth Schedule, in terms of Article 70(4), 
prescribes that laws can be promulgated pertaining to 
jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the 
Supreme Court, with respect to any of, the matters in 
this List and, to such extent as is expressly 
authorized by or under the Constitution, the 
enlargement of the jurisdiction (emphasis provided) of 
the Supreme Court, and the conferring thereon of 
supplement al powers. Under this Entry, the 
Constitution maker consciously separated the 
Supreme Court from all other courts. A plain reading 
of the words of this Entry, particularly, the portion, 
where emphasis has been provided, not only creates 
distinction between  the Supreme Court and other 
courts, but also speaks in respect of enlargement of 
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and conferring 
of supplemental powers. The literal rule of 
interpretation of the Constitution and statutes, also 
known as the golden rul e of interpretation, is that the 
words and phrases used therein should be read 
keeping in view their plain meaning. Reference in this 7 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
behalf may be made to the case of Syed Mukhtar 
Hussain Shah v. Mst. Saba Imtiaz (PLD 2011 SC 260), 
Mumtaz Hussain v. Dr. N asir Khan (2010 SCMR 
1254), Kamaluddin Qureshi v. Ali International Co. 
(PLD 2009 SC 367), Pakistan through Secretary 
Finance v. M/s Lucky Cement (2007 SCMR 1367), 
Federation of Pakistan through Secretary Ministry of 
Finance v. Haji Muhammad  Sadiq (PLD 200 7 SC 67), 
Mushtaq Ahmed v. Secretary, Ministry of Defence 
(PLD 2007 SC 405), S yed Masroor Shah v. State (PLD 
2005 SC 173), Federation of Pakistan v. Annnar  
Textile Mills (Pvt.) Ltd. (2002 SCMR 510), World Trade 
Corporation v. Excise and Sales Tax .4 Appell ate 
Tribunal (1999 SCMR 632) and State Cement 
Corporation of Pakistan Ltd. v. Collector of Customs, 
Karachi (1998 SCMR 2207).  
  
37. We believe that there could not be any other view 
except that the Constitution. favours enlargement of 
the jurisdiction of t he Supreme Court and conferment 
of supplemental powers. The enlargement of 
jurisdiction is to be understood under the 
Constitution that the jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court may be extended territorially like adhering to 
Articles 246 and 247 as well as to confer further 
judicial powers and also conferring supplemental 
powers to expand the scope of the powers, which it is 
already exercising. (…)” 
 
 
2. Wukala Mahaz Barai Tahafaz Dastoor and another v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others  (PLD 1998 SC 
1263 ) 
 
Per Irshad Hasan Khan, J. , in his concurring note : 
 
“43. As to the plea that paragraph (6) to Article 63A of 
the Constitution excludes the judicial review of the 
Courts and militates against Item No. 55 of the 
Federal Legislative List, which envisages that the  
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court could not be 
curtailed, it may be observed that Item No. 55 in the 
Federal Legislative List applies to ordinary legislative 
powers and not to Constitutional amendment. Clause 
(2) of Article 175 of the Constitution itself provides 
that no Court shall have jurisdiction save as is or may 
be conferred on it by the Constitution or by or under 
any law. Nevertheless independence of Judiciary 
which is guaranteed by the Objectives Resolution 
which is now the substantive part of the  Constitution 
cannot be abridged or abrogated.”  
 
 
3. The Province of Punjab and another v. National 
Industrial Cooperative Credit Corporation and 
another  (2000 SCMR 567 ) 
 
“16. Coming now to the present Constitution of 1973, 
it may be observed that, according to Mr. Abid Hassan 
Minto, learned counsel for the Government of Punjab, 
in view of Article 175(2) of the Constitution, under 
which jurisdiction can be conferred on any Court 
including the Supreme Court by or under any law, in 
relation to matters in respect of which Provincial 
Legislatures have power to make laws (including 
Cooperative Societies), additional/supplemental 
jurisdiction or powers can be conferred on the 8 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
Supreme Court by the Provincial Legislatures as the 
"law" mentioned in Article 175(2) includes a Provincial 
law and additional/supplemental jurisdiction or 
powers in the form of an appeal to the Supreme Court 
under section 22 of the impugned legislation was 
being conferred on the Supreme Court in respect of a 
matter on which Provincial Legislatures have 
exclusive jurisdiction under the Constitution to enact 
laws. Learned counsel also relied on the observation 
made by the Sindh High Court in the case of Inamur 
Rehman v. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 1977 Karachi 
524). Passage relied upon appears at page 532 of the 
report and it reads as follows: -- 
 
Item 55 of the Federal Legislative List in the Interim 
Constitution brings within the scope of the Federal 
Legislature  the jurisdiction and powers of the Courts, 
except the Supreme Court, in respect of matter within 
its legislative field, and even in respect of the Supreme 
Court, it conferred powers upon the Central 
Legislature to enlarge its jurisdiction and confer 
suppl emental powers therein. So far the Permanent 
Constitution is concerned, Article 175(2) thereof 
expressly provides that 'no Court shall have 
jurisdiction save as is or may be conferred on it by the 
Constitution or by or under any law.' It is, thus, 
permissi ble for the appropriate Legislature, acting 
within the scope of its Constitutional powers, to take 
away or enlarge the jurisdiction of any Court or enact 
that a particular matter shall not be determined by 
normal Courts, except that the Legislature cannot,  
abridge the Constitutional jurisdiction and powers of 
the superior Courts save by way of amendment of the 
Constitution.  
 
In our view there is no ambiguity in interpreting Entry 
No. 55 of Part I of the Federal Legislative List (Fourth 
Schedule) of the 1973  Constitution. Such Entry read 
with Articles 175(2) and 142(a) of the Constitution 
confers exclusive powers on the Parliament to make 
laws for enlargement of jurisdiction of the Supreme 
Court or conferring on it supplemental powers.  
 
If Entry No. 55 was no t there in the Federal 
Legislative List, it could be argued that under Article 
175(2) of the Constitution, in respect of matters 
relating to Cooperative Societies exclusively falling 
under the competence of the Provincial Legislature, a 
law can validly be made by a Provincial Legislature 
enlarging jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and 
conferring on its supplemental powers but Article 
175(2) is not to be interpreted in isolation. It has to be 
read and interpreted along with Article 142(a) and the 
Entries in the Legislative Lists. Under Entry No. 55 of 
the Federal List, Federal Legislature is competent to 
make laws regarding jurisdiction and powers of all 
Courts (except the Supreme Court) with respect to 
any of the matters in such list. The other part of this 
entry makes the Federal Legislature competent to 
make laws enlargement of the Supreme Court and the 
conferring thereon the supplemental powers with the 
proviso that this is to such extent as is expressly 
authorised by or under the Constitution. Powers and 
jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court by the 
Constitution can neither be interfered with or varied 9 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
nor taken away by Legislature. However, jurisdiction 
of the Supreme Court can be enlarged and 
supplementary powers can be conferred on the 
Supreme Cour t by "law" in view of the Article 175(2) of 
the Constitution, and Entry No. 55 read with Article 
142(a) of the Constitution leave no doubt that such 
enlargement of the jurisdiction and conferment of 
supplementary powers can only be done through law 
made by  Federal Legislature.”  
 
 
8. It is pertinent to mention that the provision of a right of appeal to the 
Supreme Court th rough an ordinary a ct of Parliament is not a unique or novel 
idea and has , in the past, been supported by various piece s of legislation , as 
listed below , and such right s of appeal , or leave to appeal , are in addition to the 
jurisdiction conferred by Arti cle 185 of the Constitution :  
 
Sr. No.  Law Section Conferring Appeal  
1. Competition Act, 2010  44. Appeal to Supreme Court. –– Any 
person aggrieved by an order of the 
Competition Appellate Tribunal may 
prefer an appeal to Supreme Court 
within sixty days.  
2. Newspaper Employees 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1973  13A. Appeal from sentence of 
Tribunal.  –– Any person convicted and 
sentenced by the Tribunal under 
section 55 of the Ordinance to 
imprisonment for any period not less 
than six months may, with the leave of 
the Supreme Court, prefer an appeal to 
that Court.  
 
 
 
 
3.  
 
 
 
Contempt of Court Ordinance, 
2003  
 
 
(See: Article 204 (3) of the 
Constitution )  19.  Appeal. ---(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law or 
other rules for the time being in force, 
orders passed by a superior Court in 
cases of contempt shall be appealable 
in the following manner: --- 
 
(i) (…)  
 
(ii)  in a case in which the original order 
has been passed by a Division or larger 
Bench of a High Court an appeal shall 
lie to the Supreme Court; and  
 
 
(iii) in the case of an original order 
passed by a Single Judge or a bench of 
two Judges of the Suprem e Court an 
intra-Court appeal shall lie to a Bench 
of three Judges and in case the original 
order was passed by a Bench of three 
or more Judges an intra -Court appeal 
shall lie to a Bench of five or more 
Judges.  
4. Legal Practitioners and Bar 
Councils Act,  1973  48. Appeal to the Supreme Court.__  
Any person aggrieved by an order made 
by the disciplinary committee of the 
Pakistan Bar Council under subsection 
(3) of section 46 or subsection (2) of  
section 47 or a final order of a Tribunal 
of the Pakistan Bar Council, may, 
within sixty days from the  date on 
which the order is communicated to 
him, prefer an appeal to the Supreme 
Court which may  pass such order 
thereon as it may deem fit.  10 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
5. Elections Act, 2017  9. Power of the Commission to 
declare a poll void. — (5) Any person 
aggrieved by a declaration of the 
Commission under this section may, 
within thirty days of the declaration, 
prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court.  
155. Appeal against decision of 
Election Tribunal. — (1) Any person 
aggrieved by the final decision of the 
Election  Tribunal in respect of an 
election petition challenging election to 
an Assembly or Senate may, within 
thirty days of the date of the decision, 
appeal to the Supreme Court.  
202. Enlistment of political 
parties. — (6) A political party which 
has been refused enlistment or whose 
enlistment has been cancelled under 
this section may, within thirty days of 
the refusal or cancellation of 
enlistment, file an appeal before the 
Supreme Court.  
 
(7) Where the Government declares that 
a polit ical party has been formed or is 
operating in a manner prejudicial to the 
sovereignty, or integrity of Pakistan, it 
shall within fifteen days of such 
declaration refer the matter to the 
Supreme Court.  
 
 
9. The minutiae of Article 191 of the Constitution enunciate  that subject to the 
Constitution and law , the Supreme Court may make rules regulating the 
practice and procedure of the Court.  The interpretation of the phrase “subject 
to” was a source of heated debate  during the course of the proceedings in this 
case and the learned counsel articulated a plethora of diverse  interpre tation s 
thereof . The indispensable and imperative duty of the Court in interpreting a 
law is to discover the intention of the legislature  in enacting the law and  then 
endeavor to interpret the statute in order to promote or advance the object and 
purpose of the enactment. In the case of Dada Soap Factory Limited v . 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Central Zone B, Karachi  (1987 PTD 420 ), the 
Court held that the words „s ubject to‟  are not descriptive words but impose 
conditions and obligations , whereas in the case of Islamic Republic of Pakistan  
thr. Secretary, M/o Interior and Kashmir Affairs, Islamabad  v. Abdul Wali 
Khan , MNA  (PLD 1976 SC  57), this Court held that t he expression „subject to‟ 
has also been defined as “ conditio nal upon or dependent upon” or exposed to 
(some contingent action), being under the conting ency. In the case of  Gram 
Panchayat, Gorakhpur vs. Khushali Dindayal Sahu  (AIR 1973 MP 19 ), the 
learned cou rt held that  the words "subject to rules made in this behalf" or 
similar words are commonly employed in enactments  where the legislature 
contemplates framing of rules in exercise of delegated powers , and this  
expression has to be interpreted according to t he context in which it is 11 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
employed. In each case the scheme and the provisions of the Act have to be 
examined. Where power is conferred and machinery for its exercise already 
exists, it c an be said that the expression “ subject to rules made in this behalf”  
has merely an overriding effect so that if any such rules are made, the exercise 
of the power shall be subject to such rules , but where a special power is 
conferred and there is nothing to regulate its exercise , then that expression 
connotes that the power can be exercised only when the rules are framed and 
in accordance with them. To put it differently, in the former case  the rules will 
be considered to  supplement  the section, whereas in the latter case  they wil l 
complement the section. In the for mer case, the law is complete  even without 
the rules such that the rules, if any framed , would have overriding effect and , 
in that case, the power will be exercised only in accordance with them , but in 
the latter case  the law is incomplete and was d eliberately left so by the 
legislature to be completed by delegated legislation pursuant to  the relevant  
rule-making power s. The phrase “subject to”  signifies both these meanings i.e. 
(1) liable or exposed to: likely to have; a nd (2) dependent or conditional on.  
 
10. Procedural law sets out to activate  the process and course of action 
through which the lawsuit  moves on and the way in which court proceedings 
are undertaken  and it also regulates  and oversees the procedure s employed . 
Substantive law , on the other hand,  denotes  the statutory obligations which 
relate to  the subject matter,  proclaims  the relevant rights and obligations , and 
regulates the demeanor  of an individual or government . Jeremy Bentham, an 
English philoso pher, jurist, and social reformer first coined the terms 
„substan tive laws‟ and „adjective laws‟  (i.e. procedural laws ) in his book  The 
Works of Jeremy Bentham  while describing the procedure and course  taken for 
the execution of laws in 1843. However, he stated that in jurisprudence  both 
procedural and substantive laws should co -exist, and  neither  can exist without 
the help of the other.  Similarly,  Thomas Holland, t he British jurist, in his book 
The Elements of Jurisprudence  defined „substantive law‟  as the laws which 
specify the way the laws will aid to protect rights, whereas  „adjective laws ‟ or 
„procedural laws ‟ are the laws which provide the methods of aiding and 
protecting the rights. According to Salmond, as stated in Introduction to 
Jurispruden ce (3rd ed. Reprint, 2011)  by Dr. Avtar Singh & Dr. Harpreet Kaur , 
the law of procedure may be defined as that branch of the law which governs 
the process of litigation. It is the law of actions , jus quod ad actiones pertinet , 
which  includes all legal proc eedings , civil or criminal. Salmond has drawn the 
following distinctions between substantive law and procedural law: (i) 
Substantive law determines the conduct and relations of the parties inter se  in 12 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
respect of the matter litigated, whereas the procedural  law regulates the 
conduct and relations of Courts and litigants in respect of the litigation; (ii) 
Substantive law deals with the ends which the administration of justice 
contemplates while the procedural law deals with the means and instruments 
by which the ends of administration of justice are to be attained; (iii) The 
question as to what facts constitute a wrong is determined by the substantive 
law, while what facts constitute proof of a wrong is a question of procedure; (iv) 
Substantive law defines the  rights whereas the law of procedure defines the 
modes and conditions of the application of one to the other; and (v) Substantive 
law relates to the matter outside the Courts, whereas the procedural law 
regulates affairs inside the Courts [Ref:  Judgment au thored by me, Meeru 
Khan v. Mst. Naheed Aziz Siddiqui and others  (PLD 2023 SC 912 )]. 
 
2. Doctrine  of Intra Vires  and Ultra V ires 
11. The learned counsel for the petitioners collectively argued that the whole of 
the Act is ultra vires  the Constitution . The  terms  „intra vires ‟ and „ultra vires ‟, 
both Latin phrases,  are diametrical opposites . Ultra vires  is an expression  
which means “beyond the powers” . If an act entails legal authority and it is 
done with such authority, it is symbolized as “intra vires ”, that is, within the 
precincts o f powers,  but if it is carried  out shorn of authority, it is “ultra vires ”. 
It is well settled that the constitutionality of any law can be scrutinized and 
surveyed  and the law can be struck down if it is found to be offending the 
Constitution due to an absence of  law-making  and jurisdictive competence , or 
found in violation of the fundamental rights  enshrined therein . At the same 
time, it is an established precept of the int erpretation of laws, one backed by 
judicial sagacity and prudence in the form of numerous precedents of the 
superior Courts, that the law should be saved rather than be destroyed and the 
court must lean in favour of upholding the constitutionality of legis lation 
unless it is ex facie  violative of a c onstitutional provision. An action of an 
authority is “intra vires ” when it falls within the limits of the power conferred 
on it but “ultra vires ” if it goes outside this limit. The f unction of judiciary is not 
to legislate or question the wisdom of the legislature in 
making  a particular  law, nor can  it refuse to enforce a law . However, where 
practicable, the doctrine of severability  may be used to preserve those parts of 
the statute t hat are constitutional , as discussed hereinbelow. The following  
principles can be deduced from the aforementioned dicta for striking down or 
declaring a legislative enactment void or unconstitutional:  
 13 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
1. Baz Muhammad Kakar and others v. Federation of 
Pakistan and others  (PLD 2012 SC 923 ), it was held 
that the d octrine of severability permitted a court to 
sever the unconstitutional portion of a partially 
unconstitutional statute in order to preserve the 
operation of any uncontested or valid remainder, but if 
the valid portion was so closely mixed up with the inva lid 
portion that it could not be separated without leaving an 
incomplete or more or less mixed remainder, the court 
would declare the entire Act void. The intention of the 
legislature is primarily to be gathered from the language 
used, which means that att ention should be paid to what 
has been said as also to what has not been said. The 
words of a statute are first understood in their natural, 
ordinary or popular sense and phrases and sentences 
are construed according to their grammatical meaning, 
unless th at leads to some absurdity or unless there is 
something in the context, or in the object of the statute 
to suggest the contrary.  The superior courts time and 
again pronounced that any law which is inconsistent and 
in contravention of fundamental rights or  which took 
away or abridged such rights, is void, to the extent of 
such contravention. Paramountcy of fundamental right 
is recognized by the Constitution limiting the powers of 
State organs to the extent that what had been conferred 
by the Constitution as  fundamental rights  could not be 
taken away or abridged by the State. What had been 
guaranteed by the Constitution as a fundamental right 
could not be annihilated or taken away in the garb of 
reasonable restrictions. The infringement of fundamen tal 
rights can be in many ways.  
 
2. Federation of Pakistan and others v . Shaukat Ali Mian 
and others  (PLD 1999 Supreme Court 1026 ), it was 
held that a colourable legislation is that which is enacted 
by a legislature which lacks the legislative power or is 
subject to Constitutional prohibition.  
 
3. Benazir Bhutto v . Federation of Pakistan and another  
(PLD 1988 Supreme Court 416 ), it was held that vires 
of an Act can be challenged if its provisions are 
ex facie discriminatory in which case actual proof of 
discriminatory treatment is not required to be shown. 
Where the Act is not ex  facie discriminatory but is 
capable of being administered discr iminately then the 
party challenging it has to show that it has actually been 
administered in a partial, unjust and oppressive manner.  
 
 
4. Dr. Mobashir Hassan and others v. Federation of 
Pakistan and others  (PLD 2010 SC 265 ), it was held 
that a duty is cast upon the Supreme Court that it 
should normally lean in favour of constitutionality of a 
statute and efforts should be made to save the same 
instead of destroying it. Principle is that law should be 
saved rather than be destroyed and the court m ust lean 
in favour of upholding the constitutionality of legislation, 
keeping in view that the rule of constitutional 
interpretation is that there is a presumption in favour of 
the constitutionality of the legislative enactments, unless 
ex facie, it is vio lative of a constitutional provision. 
Where a statute is ex facie discriminatory but is also 
capable of being administered in a discriminatory 
manner and it appears that it is actually being 
administered to the detriments of a particular class in 
particula r, unjust and oppressive manner then it has 
been void  ab-initio since its inception.  
 14 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
5. Sui Souther n Gas Company  Ltd. and others  v. 
Federation  of Pakistan  and others,  (2018  SCMR  802), 
the Court held that when a law was enacted by the 
parliament, the presumption was that parliament had 
competently enacted it and if the vires of the same are 
challenged, the burden is always laid upon the person 
making such challenge to show that the same was 
violative of any  of the fundamental rights or the 
provisions of the Constitution. Court should lean in 
favour of upholding the constitutionality of a legislation 
and it was thus incumbent upon the Court to be 
extremely reluctant to strike down laws as 
unconstitutional.  
 
6. Lahore  Development  Authority  thr. DG and others  v. 
Ms. Imrana  Tiwana  and others  (2015  SCMR  1739 ), this 
Court  summarized  the rules  applicable  while  
determining  the constitutionality  of a statute  as follows:  
 
(i) There was a presumption in favour of constitutionality 
and a law must not be declared unconstitutional unless 
the statute was placed next to the Constitution and no 
way could be found in reconciling the two;  
  
(ii) Where more than one interpretation was possible, one 
of which would make the l aw valid and the other void, 
the Court must prefer the interpretation which favoured 
validity;  
  
(iii) A statute must never be declared unconstitutional 
unless its invalidity was beyond reasonable doubt. A 
reasonable doubt must be resolved in favour of the  
statute being valid;  
  
(iv) Court should abstain from deciding a Constitutional 
question, if a case could be decided on other or narrower 
grounds;  
  
(v) Court should not decide a larger Constitutional 
question than was necessary for the determination of the 
case;  
  
(vi) Court should not declare a statute unconstitutional 
on the ground that it violated the spirit of the 
Constitution unless it also violated the letter of the 
Constitution;  
  
(vii) Court was not concerned with the wisdom or 
prudence of the le gislation but only with its 
Constitutionality;  
  
(viii) Court should not strike down statutes on principles 
of republican or democratic government unless those 
principles were placed beyond legislative encroachment 
by the Constitution; and  
  
(ix) Mala fide s should not be attributed to the 
Legislature.  
  
[Ref: Province of East Pakistan v. Siraj  ul Haq Patwari  
(PLD 1966 SC 854 ); Mehreen Zaibun Nisa v. Land 
Commissioner  (PLD 1975 SC 397 ); Kaneez Fatima v. 
Wali Muhammad  (PLD 1993 SC 901 ); Multiline 
Associates v . Ardeshir Cowasjee  (1995 SCMR 362 ); Ellahi 
Cotton Mills Limited v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 1997 
SC 582 ); Dr. Tariq Nawaz v. Government of Pakistan  
(2000 SCMR 1956 ); Mian Asif Aslam v. Mian Muhammad 
Asif (PLD 2001 SC 499 ); Pakistan Muslim League (Q) v.  
Chief Executive of Pakistan  (PLD 2002 SC 994 ); Pakistan 15 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
Lawyers Forum v. Federation of Pakistan  (PLD 2005 SC 
719); Messrs Master Foam (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Government of 
Pakistan  (2005 PTD 1537 ); Watan Party v. Federation of 
Pakistan  (PLD 2006 SC 697 ); Federatio n of Pakistan v. 
Haji Muhammad Sadiq  (PLD 2007 SC 133 ); and Iqbal 
Zafar Jhagra v. Federation of Pakistan  (2013 SCMR 
1337 )] 
 
12. The contextual substratum of the Act is characterized by  both procedural 
and substantive provisions . For example,  Section 2  provide s that every cause, 
appeal or matter before the Supreme Court shall be heard and disposed of by 
a Bench constituted by the Committee comprising the Chief Justice of 
Pakistan and the two next most senior Judges, in order of seniority , and the 
decisi ons of the Committee shall be by majority. Whereas Section 3 postulate s 
that any matter invoking exercise of original jurisdiction under clause (3) of 
Article 184 of the Constitution shall be first placed before t he Committee 
constituted under S ection 2 fo r examination , and if the Committee is of the 
view that a question of public importance with reference to enforcement of any 
of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II of the 
Constitution is involved, it shall constitute a Bench comprising  not less than 
three Judges of the Supreme Court which may also include the members of 
the Committee, for adjudication of the matter. While Section 4 provide s that 
where interpretation of the constitutional provision is involved;  the Committee 
shall consti tute a Bench comprising not less than five Judges of the Supreme 
Court. In addition thereto, Section 6 creates a  right to appoint  a counsel of 
choice for filing a review application under Article 188 of the Constitution , and 
Section 7 enumerate s that urgen t applications or applications filed for seeking 
interim relief shall be fixed for hearing within fourteen days from the date of 
its filing. Besides dealing with the aforesaid procedural matters, a substantive 
right of filing an Intra Court Appeal  has also been created under Section 5  of 
the Act .  
 
13. The learned counsel for the petitioners  remained unsuccessful in 
persuading  me as to how the Act infring es or contraven es the fundamental 
rights of any person , or how the same is against the public interest . In order to 
complement and substantiate the plea of ultra vires , it was argued that the Act 
is against the independence of judiciary; poses  an obstacle in the access to 
justice; constitutes dictation to the Supreme Court; clip s off the powers and 
authority of the Chief Justice of Pakistan and is an intrusion in to the internal 
affairs/ management of the Apex Court. I n my view such apprehension s are 
miscon ceived . The petitioners‟ counsel had  further argued that once the 
Parliament is allowed to regulate the Supreme Court ‟s internal working , powers  16 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
and fu nction s, then there is a strong possibility and likelihood  that 
amendments of the same variety  will be made to  further  intrude and encroach 
upon the independence and jurisdiction of this Court. In my approximation 
and farsightedness , if any such amendment is made , or attempted to be made, 
in order to compromise  or impair  the independence of the judiciary , or to 
disrupt or disturb the fair and free stream of administration of justice , or cause 
any hindrance in the access to justice , the Supreme Court, being the custodian 
of the law and the Constitution, is here to deal with the same  and there is no 
cause for concern  in this regard . At this moment, the entire ty of judicial and 
administrative powers remains  vested in the Supreme Court , and the advent of 
the Act neither involves  any outside entity  or any external element  capable of  
disturb ing or interfering with  the internal working of this Court, nor does it  
affect any of the procedural matters or committee decisions  of the Supreme 
Court . The superior C ourts  have time and again pronounced that any law 
which is inconsistent with and in contravention of fundamental rights , or 
which t akes away or abridge s such rights , is void to the extent of such 
inconsistency or contravention. In my perception  (except to  the extent of the  
right of Intra Court Appeal with retrospective effect, which aspect I will deal in 
the succeeding portion of my reaso ning), the Act is neither hit by the doctrine 
of colourable legislation , nor is it ex facie discriminatory or violative of  any 
constitutional provision, and it is well -settled that  mala fides  cannot be 
attributed to the l egislature . In my view,  the procedural stipulations  and the 
conferral of a  right of appeal with prospective effect do not violate  any 
fundamental right , nor do they offend any provision of the Constitution . The 
Parliament has not curtailed the jurisdiction of this Court by dint of colourable 
legislation , rather the jurisdiction of this Court has been enlarged in the larger 
public interest  by means of the Act . As stated previously, i t is the duty of the 
Court to normally lean in favour of the constitutionality of a statute rather than 
destroying it. In the  case of LDA v. Ms. Imrana Tiwana  (supra ) this Court  
further held that the power to strike down or declare  a legislative enactment 
void has to be exercised with a great  deal of care and caution. The c ourts are 
one of the three coordinate institutions of th e State and can only perform this 
solemn obligation in the exercise of their duty to uphold the Constitution. This 
power is exercised not because the judiciary is an institution superior to the 
legislature or the executive , but because it is bound by its o ath to uphold, 
preserve , and protect the Constitution. It must e nforce the Constitution as the 
supreme l aw, but this duty must be performed with due care and caution and 
only whe n there is no other alternative . 
 17 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
3. Retroactive or Ex Post Facto  Right  of Appeal  
14. Now I would like to address Section 5 of the Act which provides a  right of 
filing an Intra Court A ppeal with retrospective effect. As aforementioned, t he 
doctrine of severability permit s the Court to sever the unconstitutional portion 
of a partially unconstitutional statute in order to preserve the operation of any 
uncontested or valid remainder , save for where  the valid portion is so closely 
mixed up with the invalid portion that it c annot be separated without leaving 
an incomplete or motle y remainder, in which case the C ourt can declare the 
entire act void. For the ease of reference , Section 5 of the Act is reproduced as 
under:  
 
5. Appeal --. (1) An appeal shall lie within thirty days 
from an order of a Bench exercising jurisdiction under 
clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution to a larger 
Bench of the Supreme Court and such appeal shall, 
within a period not exceeding fourteen days, be fixed 
for hearing.  
 
(2) The right of appeal under sub -section (1) shall also 
be available to an aggr ieved person against whom an 
order has been made under clause (3) of Article 184 of 
the Constitution, prior to the commencement of this 
Act: 
 
Provided that the appeal under this sub -section shall 
be filed within thirty days of the commencement of 
this Act.  
 
15. Indeed t he finality of judgments ensures the culminat ion or conclusion of 
the judicial process, and the importance of this is aptly articulated in the Latin 
maxim, interest republicae ut sit finis litium , meaning thereby that  it is in the 
interest of  the state that there s hould be an end to litigation . Providing  for an 
appeal with retroactive effect would open  a flood gate  of cases  which  will have 
serious repercussions  on already  decided cases and would amount to a 
reversion to the  status quo ante (the previ ously existing state of affairs),  with no 
end in sight . Though  some persons may feel  aggrieved by the order s or 
judgments of this Court rendered prior to the promulgation of the Act , it is 
equally true that  many persons were found to have benefited from the same , 
and such rights between the litigants or parties , now having been decided one 
way or the other , cannot be re -agitated  at this juncture  and the parties  cannot 
now be repositioned in the state of affairs that existed previously  or before the 
effective date of the Act . In Justice G.P. Singh‟s Principles of Statutory 
Interpretation  (7th ed.), at page 372 to 373 , a statement of the House of Lords in  
the case of  L’office Cherifien des Phosphates v. Yamashita Shinnihon Steamship 
Co. Ltd is quoted in which it was observed that the question of fairness will 
have to be answered by taking into account various factors, viz., value of the 18 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
rights which the statute affects; extent to which that value is diminished or 
extinguished by the suggested retrospective effect of the statute; unfairness of 
adversely affecting the rights; clarity of the language used by the Parliament 
and the circumstan ces in which the legislation was created. All these factors 
must be weighed together to provide a direct answer to the question of whether 
the consequences of reading the statute with the suggested degree of 
retrospectivity is so unfair that the words used  by the Parliament cannot have 
been intended to mean what they might appear to say . The present Act does 
not provide any cut off or predetermined date under Section 5 to trigger the 
right of appeal , except for a vague and indeterminate statement that the right 
of appeal shall also be available to an aggrieved person against whom an order 
has been made under clause (3) of Article 184 of the Constitution, prior to the 
commencement of this Act . During the proceedings , I rep eatedly queried  the 
learned counsel s upporting the Act, as well as the learned Attorney General  for 
Pakistan (“ AGP”), regard ing the legitimacy and wisdom  of providing the right of 
Intra Court Appeal  with retrospective effect , and that too  in such an imprecise 
and perplexing manner , however  they could not satisfy me on this crucial  point  
and failed to persuade me with any convincing argument . To this extent , 
Section 5 is totally uncertain , inarticulate and unintelligible , and fails to 
specify  whether this right accrue s from the coming into fo rce of the 1973  
Constitution , or from the date when the first case was decided by this Court 
under Article 184 (3) of the Constitution , or any other specific date . Such  a 
blanket or unbridled right of appeal will not only create chaos , but also 
necessitate  the reopening of past and closed matters. It is a well settled 
exposition of law that on attainment of finality or conclusiveness, a party  
aggrieved by any such decision  should mull over the remedies available to 
them to assail  the decision  within the fram ework of law and jurisdiction  at that 
relevant time . The doctrine of res judicata  is an integral limb of the principle of 
finality as a matter of public policy , and the main strength of this doctrine is 
that it  endorse s a fair -minded and open -minded admini stration of justice and 
prevent s the abuse of process of the C ourt on issues which have attained 
finality and are con sequently past and closed  matters .  
 
16. The moment  a decision is final, either for the reason that no appeal was 
preferred , or an appeal was filed and subsequently  dismissed by the Court , or 
no right of appeal is provided under the relevant legislation , then neither party 
will b e permitted subsequently  to challenge such decision in order to relaunch 
the matter and argue it  de novo . No doubt prior to this Act, no right of appeal 
was provided , but all those persons aggrieved in the past must have availed the 19 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
right to file a review petition , and if the se review petitions have been decided 
then it is not possible or feasible to provide a right of appeal to them and re-
agitate the matter again . The word “retrospective” , or an antedated , ex post 
facto or retroactive law , denotes that the law has been made effective since 
before the date of its passing . Bennion on Statutory Interpretation  (7th ed.), at 
page 181 states with regard to the retrospectiv e effect of law  that the “principle 
is sometimes expressed in the maxim lex prospicit non respicit  (law looks 
forward not back). As Willes J said in Phillips v . Eyre retrospective legislation is 
“contrary to the general principle that legislation by which the conduct of 
mankind is to be regulated ought, when introduced for the first time, to deal 
with future acts, and ought not to change the character of past transactions 
carried on upon the faith o f the then existing law.” Whereas in Crawford’s 
Statutory Construction , Chapter XXV (at pages 562 -566 & 622),  which is 
germane to Prospective and Retrospective Operation, it is stated, in short,  that 
retroactive legislation is looked upon with disfavour , as a general rule, and 
properly so because of its tendency to be unjust and oppressive. There is a 
presumption that the legislature intended its enactments to be effective only in 
futuro . This is true because of the basic presumption that the legislature  does 
not intend to enact legislation which operates oppressively and unreasonably. 
If perchance any reasonable doubt exists, it should be resolved in favour of 
prospective operation. In other words, before a law will be construed as 
retrospective, its lan guage must imperatively and clearly require such 
construction. In the case of People v Dill ard (298 N.Y.S. 296, 302, 252 Ap. 
Div.125) the Court held that “[i] t is chiefly where the enactment would 
prejudicially affect vested rights, or the legal character of past transactions that 
the rule in question applies. Every statute, it has been said, which takes away 
or impairs vested rights acquired under existing laws, or creates a new 
obligation, or imposes a new duty, or attaches a new disability in respect of 
transactions or considerations already past, must be presumed, out of respect 
to the Legislature, to be intended not to have a retrospective operation.”  The 
provision for extending the right of appeal retroactively d oes not even come 
within the ambit or dominion of curative statute s which are used by  lawmakers 
to recuperate the prior enactment by rectifying any defect or omission. 
According to the Corpus Juris Secundum , Vol. 16 (Constitutional Law), at pages 
1251 -1252,  a statute which merely creates or enlarges a remedy for an existing 
right, although retrospective, does not impair vested rights.  No vested rights 
are impaired by a statute which creates a remedy for an existing right for which 
there has been no remedy. So acts providing a new remedy, or enlarging a 
remedy already existing, or repealing an exemption from liability in a particular 20 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
form of remedy, although made to operate retrospectively, do not, per 
se, impair  vested rights; but the legislature may not, under  the guise of a 
remedial act, provide a particular remedy that will impair property rights 
vested before the passage  of the Act [Ref: judgment authored by me, Controller 
General  of Accounts, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad and others v. Abdul 
Waheed and others  (2023 SCMR 111 )]. 
 
17. In order to determine  whether any beneficial, remedi al or curative 
legislation has  retrospective effect, the litmus test is to explore whether it is 
intended to clear up an ambiguity or oversight in the prevailing or standing 
law, and whether,  in its pith and substance, it corrects or modifies an existing 
law or an error that interferes with the interpret ation  or appl ication of  the 
statute. Without a doubt , beneficial, remedial or curative legislation is meant to  
be clarificatory in nature , but if it h as no such character or essence  it cannot 
be deemed  to be retroactive merely for the reason that it amounts to beneficial 
legislation. The retroactive application of curative legislation can be gauged and 
measured from the plain language and intention of legislature. It is by and 
large passed to supply a conspicuous omission or to elucidate misgivings as to 
the meaning of the previous law . The legal maxim  nova constitutio futuris 
formam imponere debet, non praeteritis  means  a new law has to be prospective 
and not retrospective in its operation. The new law may affect the future but 
not the past. Indeed new laws are interpreted as functional and effective in the 
matter s that arise after the e nactment. Every statute  which  takes hold of or 
prejudices vested rights assimilated under existing laws, or contrives a new 
obligation or enforces a new duty, or characteris es a new disability in respect of 
trans actions already past and closed  is presumed to have no retrospective 
effect. In other words, a statute is not to be applied retrospectively in the 
absence of express enactment or necessary intendment, especially where the 
statute is to affect vested rights, past and closed transactions , or facts or 
events that have already occu rred and, instead of promoting or advancing the 
cause of justice , is creating  consequential impediments  or causing any 
disadvantage to any of the concerned parties . Moreover , the provisions of a 
statute cannot be interpreted in a way that would lead to the devastation  of 
rights and liabilities that have accrued by means of  past and closed 
transactions , therefore the right of Intra Court Appeal  with retrospective effect 
as provided under Sub -Section (2) of Section 5 of the Act is against public 
policy , as well as the doctrine of finality  and immutability of judgment s; hence 
to such extent it is declared ultra vires . 
 21 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
4. Distinction between  Article s 184 and 199 of the Constitution  
18. In the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court as provided under Article 
184, and more particularly  under sub -article (3), it is conve yed that, without 
prejudice to the provisions of Article 199, the Supreme Court shall, if it 
considers that a question of public importance with reference to the 
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II 
is involved , have the power  to make an order of the nature mentioned in the 
said Article. While under Article 199 of the Constitution, t he High Courts may 
pass an order on the application of any aggrieved person and issue such 
directions to any person or authority, including any Government exercising any 
power or performing any function in, or in relation to, any territory within the 
jurisdiction of that Court as may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of 
the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution, 
with the rider that , subject to the Constitution, the right to move a High Court 
for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 
of Part II shall not be abridged. There is a vivid distinction between the two 
afore mentioned  Articles; it is quite obvious from the plain wording of the 
Articles, and the interpretation  thereof,  that th e Supreme Court , if it considers 
that a question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any 
of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II  of the Constitution  
is involved , has the power  to make an order, while the High Court  may pass an 
order on the application of any aggrieved person and issue such directions as 
may be appropriate for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights 
conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II , but the keywords “a question of public 
importance with ref erence to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights 
conferred by Chapter I of Part II ” are noticeably  missing from the jurisdiction of 
the High Court provided under Article  199 of the Constitution. So in all 
fairness, dir ect petitions under Article 184(3) can only be filed if they involv e a 
question of public importance with reference to the enforcement of any of the 
Fundamental Rights. It has been seen  time and again that people , without 
approaching or invoking the jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 199 of 
the Constitution, prefer to appr oach this C ourt directly under Article 184 (3) of 
the Constitution in the sense of concurrent jurisdiction without doing their due 
diligence  regarding whether a ny question of public importance is involved with 
reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights or not , and also 
without being mindful that the aforesaid jurisdiction of this Court is without 
prejudice to the provisions of Article 199 where such relief might have been 
granted by the High C ourts , and in which  scenario the remedy of filing an 22 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
appeal before  this Court under Article 185 of the Constitution would also 
remain intact and available for redress. It is a ground reality and indisputable  
fact that , in the past, the exercise of original  jurisdiction under Article 184 (3) of 
the Constitution was at times misemployed or extended beyond the sphere and 
domain  of original  jurisdiction. At this juncture , I dwell on the judgment of this 
Court rendered in the case of  Independent Newspapers Corpo ration (Pvt.) Ltd. 
and another v. Chairman, Fourth Wage Board and Implementation Tribunal for 
Newspaper Employees , Government of Pakistan, Islamabad  and 2 others  (1993 
SCMR 1533 ) in which it was held that the excessive use of lawful power is in 
itself unla wful. In the past, no right of appeal was provided to an ag grieved 
person except a feeble remedy of filing a review petition , but through the Act, a 
right of filing an Intra Court Appeal has been provided which provision , in my 
view, is in the larger public interest and is also expedient keeping in mind the 
rigors of Article 10 A of the Constitution which is  a paramount feature of  the 
due process of law.  
 
5. Doctrine of Reading Down  
19. In my view, a nother important aspect which needs to be  addressed and  
read down is the provision contained under Section 3 of the Act which  
elucidate s that a ny matter invoking  the exercise of original jurisdiction under  
Article 184 (3) of the Constitution shall be first placed before t he Committee 
constituted under S ection 2 for examination , and if the Committee is of the 
view that a question of public importance with reference to enforcement of any 
of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution 
is involved, it shall c onstitute a Bench comprising not less than three Judges   
of the Supreme Court which may also include the members of the Committee, 
for adjudication of the matter . This is perturbing  for the reason that if the 
Committee administratively decides  not to fix a particular matter before  the 
Court because,  in their point of view, no question of public importance with 
reference to the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights conferred by 
Chapter 1 of Part II of the Constitution is made out , then in that eventua lity 
the matter ends without any further judicial scrutiny or order.   
20. The primary aim  of the Courts must be to pay attention to the objectives  of 
the statute , and then proceed with  an interpretation that lends  support 
thereto; in essence adopting the purposive rule of interpretation.  The rule of 
purposive interpretation of statute s originated  in the 16th Century with the 
decision of  the celebrated Heydon’s Case  ((1584) 76 ER 637 ) which laid  down 
the keystone  of the purposive rule of interpretation , that is, i f the literal 23 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
interpretation of  any provision of law is not acceptable  or leads to absurdity , 
then such provision may be interpreted in line with the object and purpose  
which the legislature had in mind  while enacting  the law. According to Maxwel l 
on the Interpretation of Statutes  (12th ed.), at page 228 , where the language of a 
statute, in its ordinary meaning and grammatical construction, leads to a 
manifest contradiction of the apparent purpose of the enactment, or to some 
inconvenience or absurdity, hardship or injustice, which can hardly have been 
inten ded, a construction may be put upon it which modifies the meaning of the 
words, and even the structure of the sentence. This may be done by departing 
from the rules of grammar, by giving an unusual meaning to particular words, 
or by rejecting them altogeth er, on the ground that the legislature could not 
possibly have intended what its words signify, and that the modifications made 
are mere corrections of careless language and really give the true meaning. 
Where the main object and intention of a statute are  clear, it must not be 
reduced to a nullity by the draftman's unskillfulness  or ignorance of the law, 
except in a case of necessity, or the absolute intractability of the language 
used.  While Bennion on  Statutory Interpretation  (4th ed.), at page 810,  describ es 
that a  purposive construction of an enactment is one which gives effect to the 
legislative purpose by : (a) following the literal meaning of the enactment where 
that meaning is in accordance with the legislative purpose or  
(b) applying a strained meaning where the literal meaning is not in accordance 
with the legislative purpose .  
21. It goes without saying that t he law should not be in a limbo  or an 
indeterminate state. The hallmark  of a good law is that it  ensure s the provision 
of a proper remedy and does not leave litigants stranded with no recourse.  
Obviously, no appeal lie s in Chamber before a single judge in terms of Supreme 
Court Rules , 1980 (“ 1980 Rules ”, or  the “ Rules ”) on the refusal of Committee  
to entertain a matter . Therefor e, in my view, where the C ommittee refuses  to 
entert ain or fix a  case, then in such a situation  the matter should be fixed 
before  the Court for judicial scrutiny  regarding  whether any case is made out 
to exercise the original jurisdiction of this Court under Article 184 (3) of the 
Constitution ; and since  the matter is taken up by the C ommittee on the  
administrative side, therefore , in case of refusal, the matter may be f ixed before 
any available three -member bench , not including  the members of the 
Committee , on the judicial side . The aim and object of the legislature , as 
gleaned  from the provisions of the Act, is to, inter alia , ensure and provide for 
the fixation of cases and constitution of benches through a collegium  in order 
to prevent the individualistic exercise of powers ; but at the same time, if the 24 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
collegium refuses to entertain any matter under Article 184 (3) of the 
Constitution , there is no  further remedy  provided  to challenge the same . As an 
ongoing and continuous sequence of events and process es that occur in 
succession from past through the present , and to the future , judges come and 
go after playing their innings , but this Court has perpetual seal and 
succession , therefore  the law regulating the practice and procedure of this 
Court should be compatible with and suitable for  all time s, unless  the 
Parliament  subsequently repeals or  modifies  the same, or it is struck  down by 
the Court . So in my view, the present 1980  Rules may be amended to 
harmoni ze the provisions of the new Act with the pre -existing  Rules of this 
Court. The golden rule of statutory interpretation  provides  that the words used 
should be interpreted harmoniously and congenially  in line with  the intent ion 
of the legislature  and a ll the provisions should be  read in unison , for the 
reason that the foremost stratagem of this doctrine is to preserve  the effect of 
the statute within the precincts  of law and within the dominion of Constitution , 
provided that the statute is  mute and /or inarticulate  and is capable of  more 
than one interpretation.  
 
6. Change of C ounsel in Review Petition  
22. Under Section 6 of the Act , a right has been accorded to appoint a counsel 
of choice for filing a review petition , which was not earlier permissible . Indeed, 
this Court has the power to review its judgment under Article 188 of the 
Constitution, su bject to the provisions of any act of Parliament and  any rules 
made by this Court. In the same parlance, Order XXVI of the  1980 Rules is 
germane to “Review J urisdiction” whereby , subject to the law and the practice 
of the Court, this Court may review its judgment or order on grounds similar to 
those mentioned in Order XLVII, Rul e 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(“CPC”) and, in a criminal proceeding, on the ground of an error apparent on 
the face of  the record. The prerequisite to  filing a review application is that the 
Advocate signing the application shall specify, in brief, the points upon which 
the prayer for review is based and shall add a certificat e in the form of a 
reasoned opinion that review would be justifiable in that particular case. 
Whereas , under Order XLVII, Rule 1, CPC, an aggrieved person may file an 
application for review of the judgment and order on the ground of discovery of 
new and im portant information or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the 
time when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some 
mistake or error apparent on the face of th e record, or for any other sufficient 25 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
reason.  Where the judgment under review is found to have directed the doing of 
something which is in conflict with the Constitution or law, then it will be the 
duty of the Court to amend such error. If the conclusion is wrong because 
something manifest has been ignored by the Court or the Court has not 
considered an important aspect of the matter, a review petition would lie , but a  
judgment cannot be reviewed merely because a different view could have been 
taken, rathe r a review petition would lie only when there is an alleged error in 
the judgment which is evident and can be established without elaborate 
arguments  and where a glaring omission or patent mistake has crept in earlier 
by judicial fallibility . The Constitut ion does not place any restriction on the 
power of the Supreme Court to review its earlier decisions or even to depart 
from them , nor does the doctrine of stare decisis  come in the way, so long as  
the review is warranted in view of the significant impact on the fundamental 
rights of citizens or in the interest of public good , however  grounds no t urged 
or raised at the time of  hearing the case cannot be allowed to be raised in 
review jurisdiction. No do ubt, the Act extends a  right to appoint a counsel of 
choice , but we cannot lose sight  of the fact  that review may be entreated only 
in instances or occurrences of errors in the judgment or order, floating on the 
surface of the record , with a substantial impact on the final outcome of the lis. 
This does not connote or entail a right of rehearing of the decided case  where  
there is a mindful and thoughtful decision on the point (s) of law , as well as of 
fact. E very judgment articulated by the Courts of law is presumed to be a 
solemn and conclusive determination on all points arising out of the lis. Mere 
irregularities having no significant effect or impact on the outcome would not 
be sufficient to warrant the review of a judgment or order, however, if the 
anomaly or ambiguity is of such a nature so as to transform the course of 
action from being one in the aid of justice to a process of injustice, then 
obviously a review petition may be instituted for redressal to demonstrate the 
error, if f ound floating conspicuously on the surface of the record, but a desire 
of rehearing of the matter cannot constitute a sufficient ground for the grant of 
review which,  by its very nature, cannot be equated with the right or remedy 
of appeal  or rehearing merely on the ground that one party or the other 
conceived himself to be dissati sfied with the decision of the C ourt, nor can a  
judgment or order be reviewed merely because a different view could have been 
taken. So in all fairness, the right of changing or appointing new counsel of 
choice  to file and pursue  the review application/p etition shall not be construed 
as allow ing a  rehearing  of the matter,  and the counsel  so appointed  should not 
attempt to reargue the whole case , or expect to s tart from scratch as an 
opportunity of rehearing to cure or supplant the lacunas , mistakes and/ or 26 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
oversights of the earlier counsel , and a mere repetition  of old and overruled 
arguments through a different counsel  would be insufficient  and impermissible  
in this regard .  
 
[Ref: M/s Habib and Company and others v. Muslim Commercial Bank 
and others  (PLD 2020 SC 227 ); Engineers Study Forum (Regd.) and 
another v. Federation of Pakistan and others  (2016 SCMR 1961 ); 
Government of Punjab and others v. Aamir Zahoor -ul-Haq and others  
(PLD 2016 SC 421 ); Haji Muhammad Boota and others v. Member 
(Revenue) BOR and others  (2010 SCMR 1049 ); Sh. Mehdi Hassan v. 
Province of Punjab thr. Member, BOR and others  (2007 SCMR 755 ); 
Abdul Rauf and others v. Qutab Khan and othe rs (2006 SCMR 1574 ); Lt-
Col. Nawabzada Muhammad Amir Khan v. The Controller of Estate Duty, 
Government of Pakistan  (PLD 1962 SC 335 ); Land Acquisition Officer and 
Assistant Commissioner, Hyderabad v. Gul Muhammad thr. legal heirs  
(PLD 2005 SC 311 ); Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, 
Lahore through Chairman v. Bashir Ahmad Khan  (PLD 1997 SC 280 ); 
Major (Retd.) Barkat Ali and others v. Qaim Din and others  (2006 SCMR 
562); Abdul Hakeem and others v. Khalid Wazir  (2004 SCMR 1770 ); 
Suba thr. legal heirs v. Fatima Bibi thr. legal heirs and others  (1996 
SCMR 158 ); S. Sharif Ahmad Hashmi v. Chairman, Screening Committee, 
Lahore and another  (1978 SCMR 367 ); M/s Sajjad Nabi Dar & Co. v. The 
Commissioner of Income -Tax, Rawalpindi Zone, Rawalpindi  (PLD 197 7 
SC 437 ); M/s M. Y. Malik & Co. and 2 others v. M/s Spendlours 
International  (1995 SCMR 922 ); M. Moosa v. Muhammad and others  
(1975 SCMR 115 ); Engineers Study Forum (Regd.) and another v. 
Federation of Pakistan and others  (2016 SCMR 1961 ); Mirza Bashir 
Ahmad v. Abdul Karim  (1976 SCMR 417 ); Wahajuddin and another v. 
Razia Begum etc.  (1979 SCMR 241 ); Abdul Ghaffar -Abdul Rehman and 
others v. Asghar Ali and others  (PLD 1998 SC 363 ); Irshad Masih and 
others v. Emmanuel Masih and others  (2014 SCMR 1481 ); Justice Qazi 
Faez Isa and others v.  President of Pakistan and others  (PLD 2022 SC 
119); Mukesh v. State (NCT of Delhi)  ((2018) 8 SCC 149 ); Sow Chandra 
Kante and another v. Sheikh Habib  ((1975) 1 SCC 674 ); Kamlesh Verma 
v. Mayawati and others  ((2013) 8 SCC 320 ); Kerala SEB v. Hitech 
Electrothermics & Hydropower Ltd.  ((2005) 6  SCC 651  at p. 656, para 
10), M/s Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. v. Government of Andhra Pradesh 
thr. Deputy Commissioner, Commercial Taxes, Anantapu r (AIR 1964 SC 
1372 ); Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. v. Lt. Governor of Delhi  
((1980) 2 SCR 650 ); Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan  ([1965] 1 S.C.R. 
933, 948 ); G. L. Gupta v. D. N. Mehta  ([1971] 3 S.C.R. 748 -760); O. N. 
Mahindroo v. Distt . Judge Delhi & Anr  ([1971] 2 S.C.R. 11, 27 ); Chandra 
Kanta v. Sheikh Habib  ([1975] 3 S.C.R. 933 ); and Delhi Administration v. 
Gurdip Singh Uban and others  (AIR 2000 SC 3737 ).  
 
 
 
7. Master of the Roster  
23. It was emphatically argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that 
the Chief Justice is the master of the roster , hence there is no need for any 
Committee to constitut e benches of the Supreme Court. Undoubtedly  the Chief 
Justice is the first amongst equals,  or primus inter pares , but by virtue of his 
office, he has to discharge  certain  administrative duties  and powers.  In the 
statement of objects and reasons  it is provided , inter alia , that the constitution 
of benches  has been a subject of discussion at various forums . In the past as 
well some skepticism  and reservations were expressed by certain quarters 
regarding  the individualistic administrative powers of the Chief Justice as 
master of the roster . Consequently,  the Act was promulgated to creat e a 27 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
collegium system so that e very cause, appeal or matter before the Supreme 
Court be heard and disposed of by a Bench constituted by the Committee 
comprising the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the two next most senior Judges 
in ord er of seniority.  Prior to the Act, when there was no collegium  system in 
place , it was obviously  the Chief Justice who was  the master of the roster  and 
who was tasked with constituting  benches and now, after the coming into force 
of the Act, th is role has been assigned to the Committee  which is now , for all 
intents and  purposes,  the master of the roster . Had the Chief Justice not been 
considered the master of the roster  prior to this Act,  there would have been  no 
need to vest these  powers in the Committee ; it is obviously for this  reason that , 
from now onward, the individual powers vesting in  the Chief Justice have been 
neutralize d and conferred  to the Committee  for settling the roster and  
managing the  constituti on of benches. Even in the High Courts, though the  
Chief Justice may be  consult ing some senior members of the administration  
committee , there is no collegium  system under any law or rules and, 
resultantly , the roster of sitting s is issued under the directive of the Chief 
Justice , being the  master of the roster , and it is the Chief Justice  who 
constitutes the routine benches and , if and when require d, special benches  as 
well. To conclude, t he term master of the roster  is not some newfangled or 
unique  turn of phrase,  rather  it was an administrative  assignment  existing 
since  time immemorial  which has now been supplanted by the Act in favour of 
a collegium  system . The role of the 'Chief Justice' as the master of the roster  
has also been a subject of discussion  in the Supreme Court of India. In the 
case of Shanti Bhushan v. Supreme Court of India and o thers  ((2018) 8 SCC 
396), the Supreme Court of India held as under: - 
 
 
 
“12. There is no dispute, as mentioned above, that 'Chief Justice' is the Mas ter of 
Roster and has the authority to allocate the cases to different Benches/Judges of 
the Supreme Court.  The Petitioner has been candid in conceding to this legal 
position. He himself has gone to the extent of stating in the petition that this 
principle that 'Chief J ustice' is the Mas ter of Roster is essential to maintain judicial 
discipline and decorum and also for the proper and efficient functioning of the 
Court.  Notwithstanding this concession, it would be imperative to explain this legal 
position with little elaborations, also by referring to some of the judgments of this 
Court which spell out the scope and ambit of such a power.  
 
13. The Petitioner has himself,  in the petition, referred to a three -Judge Bench in 
State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand and Ors.  [(1998) 1 SCC 1 ] held that the Chief 
Justice of the High Court is the Mas ter of Roster  and he alone has the prerogative 
to constitute the Benches of the Court  and allocate cases to the Benches so 
constituted. The Court stated thus:  
 
59. From the preceding discussion the following broad conclusions 
emerge. This, of course, is not to be treated as a summary of our 
judgment and the conclusions should be read with the text of the 
judgment:  
 
(1) That the administrative control of the High Court vests in the Chief 
Justice alone. On the judicial side, however, he is only the first amongst 
the equals.  28 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
 
(2) That the Chief Justice is the master of the roster. He alone has  the 
prerogative to constitute benches of the court  and allocate cases to the 
benches so constituted.  
 
(3) That the puisne Judges can only do that work as is allotted to them 
by the Chief Justice  or under his directions.  
 
(4) That till any determination ma de by the Chief Justice lasts, no 
Judge who is to sit singly can sit in a Division Bench and no Division 
Bench can be split up by the Judges constituting the bench themselves 
and one or both the Judges constituting such bench sit singly and take 
up any oth er kind of judicial business not otherwise assigned to them 
by or under the directions of the Chief Justice.  
 
(5) That the Chief Justice can take cognizance of an application laid 
before him under Rule 55 (supra) and refer a case to the larger bench 
for its disposal and he can exercise this jurisdiction even in relation to a 
part-heard case.  
 
(6) That the puisne Judges cannot "pick and choose" any case pending 
in the High Court and assign the same to himself or themselves for 
disposal without appropriate or ders of the Chief Justice.  
 
(7) That no Judge or Judges can give directions to the Registry for 
listing any case before him or them which runs counter to the 
directions given by the Chief Justice.  
 
14. The same principle in Prakash Chand's case was applied  as regards the power of 
the 'Chief Justice' and in the matter of Campaign for Judicial Accountability and 
Reforms v. Union of India and Anr.  (2018) 1 SCC 196 ) five Judge Bench held : 
 
6. There can be no doubt that the Chief Justice of India is the first 
amongst the equals, but definitely, he exercises certain administrative 
powers and that is why in Prakash Chand [State of Rajasthan v. 
Prakash Chand, [(1998) 1 SCC 1], it has been clearly s tated that the 
administrative control of the High Court vests in the Chief Justice 
alone.  The same principle must apply proprio vigore  as regards the 
power of the Chief Justice of India. On the judicial side, he is only the 
first amongst the equals. But, a s far as the Roster is concerned, as has 
been stated by the three -Judge Bench in Prakash Chand [State of 
Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand, [(1998) 1 SCC 1], the Chief Justice is the 
Master of the Roster and he alone has the prerogative to constitute the 
Benches of the Court and allocate cases to the Benches so constituted.  
 
        Further, the Constitution Bench held:  
 
7. The aforesaid position though stated as regards the High Court, we 
are absolutely certain that the said principle is applicable to the 
Supreme  Court. We are disposed to think so. Unless such a position is 
clearly stated, there will be utter confusion. Be it noted, this has been 
also the convention of this Court, and the convention has been so 
because of the law. We have to make it clear without any kind of 
hesitation that the convention is followed because of the principles of 
law and because of judicial discipline and decorum. Once the Chief 
Justice is stated to be the Master of the Roster, he alone has the 
prerogative to constitute Benches.  Needless to say, neither a two -Judge 
Bench nor a three -Judge Bench can allocate the matter to themselves 
or direct the composition for constitution of a Bench. To elaborate, 
there cannot be any direction to the Chief Justice of India as to who 
shall be sittin g on the Bench or who shall take up the matter as that 
touches the composition of the Bench. We reiterate such an order 
cannot be passed. It is not countenanced in law and not permissible.  29 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
 
15. There is a reiteration of this very legal position by another three Judge Bench 
judgment of this Court in Asok Pande v. Supreme Court of India through its 
Registrar and Ors.  
 
 
12. Quite apart from the fact that the relief sought is contrary to legal 
and constitutional principle, there is a fundamental fallacy in the 
approach of the Petitioner, which must be set at rest. The Petitioner 
seeks the establishment of a binding precept under which a three judge 
Bench in the Court of the Chief Justice must consist of the Chief 
Justice and his two senior -most colleagues alone while the Constitution 
Bench should consist of five senior -most judges (or, as he suggests, 
three 'senior -most' and two 'junior -most' judges). There is no 
constitutional foundation on the basis of which such a suggestion can 
be accepted. For one thing, as we have noticed earlier, this would 
intrude into the exclusive duty and authority of the Chief Justice to 
constitute benches and to allocate cases to them. Moreover, the 
Petitioner seems to harbour a misconception that certain categories of 
cases or certai n courts must consist only of the senior -most in terms of 
appointment. Every Judge appointed to this Court Under Article 124 of 
the Constitution is invested with the equal duty of adjudicating cases 
which come to the Court and are assigned by the Chief Justice. 
Seniority in terms of appointment has no bearing on which cases a 
Judge should hear. It is a settled position that a judgment delivered by 
a Judge speaks for the court (except in the case of a concurring or 
dissenting opinion).  The Constitution ma kes a stipulation in Article 
124(3) f or the appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court from the 
High Courts, from the Bar and from amongst distinguished jurists. 
Appointment to the Supreme Court is conditioned upon the fulfilment 
of the qualifications pres cribed for the holding of that office Under 
Article 124(3). Once appointed, every Judge of the Court is entitled to 
and in fact, duty bound, to hear such cases as are assigned by the 
Chief Justice. Judges drawn from the High Courts are appointed to this 
Court after long years of service. Members of the Bar who are elevated 
to this Court similarly are possessed of wide and diverse experience 
gathered during the course of the years of practise at the Bar. To 
suggest that any Judge would be more capable of dec iding particular 
cases or that certain categories of cases should be assigned only to the 
senior -most among the Judges of the Supreme Court has no foundation 
in principle or precedent. To hold otherwise would be to cast a 
reflection on the competence and a bility of other judges to deal with all 
cases assigned by the Chief Justice notwithstanding the fact that they 
have fulfilled the qualifications mandated by the Constitution for 
appointment to the office ”. (emphasis supplied)  
 
 
24. I have no reservation in  holding that,  indeed,  prior to the  promulgation of 
the Act , the Chief Justice alone was the master of the roster , and without the 
issuance of the roster  of sitting s or the constitution of  benches  by him , no 
Judge or  bench of Judges could embark on  or assume any j urisdiction  except 
for the cases assigned by the Chief Justice , however  in order to mitigate  and 
clip off the sole discretion of the Chief Justice, the Act was enacted and now, 
for all intent s and purposes, the function s of the master of the roster  which 
vested solely in the Chief Justice  have now been assigned and shifted to the 
collegium comprising the Chief Justice and t he two next most  senior judges of 
this Court  as the master s of the roster  for issuing the roster of sitting s and 
constituti ng benches  after due deliberation .  30 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
8. Effect of Act on Decided Cases  
25. The Act was made effective from 21. 04.2023 , while the aforesaid petitions 
were decided vide our short order dated 11.10.2023 . In the intervening period, 
ad-interim  orders were in field, therefore , in my view , all cases  decided  between 
21.04.2023 and 11.10.2023 are pro tected in view of the dicta laid in the case of 
Malik Asad Ali and others v. Federation of Pakistan thr. Secretary, Law, Justice 
and Parliament Affairs , Islamabad and others  (PLD 1998 SC 161 ) and Sindh 
High Court Bar Association and others v. Federation of Pakistan thr. Secretary , 
Ministry of Law and Justice, Islamabad and others  (PLD 2009 SC 879 ), and 
their conclusiveness  shall not be vitiated  or called in to question on the ground 
that such benches were not constituted  by the Committee  under Section 2 of 
the Act . 
 
9. Hearing by Full Court   
26. During the midst of the argument s, it was further articulated by the 
learned counsel for the petitioners that if the case is heard  by the Full Court , 
and the law is declared  intra vires , then the petitioners  would not be able to file 
an Intra Court Appeal  for challenging  the judgment. In my view, e ven at the 
time w hen the initial  eight -member  bench was constituted to hear the aforesaid 
petitions,  the requisite number of at least nine judges was not available in the 
total strength of this Court to hear  the Intra Court Appeal , if any  filed, against 
the judgment rendered  by the eight -member bench . However , when the present 
Chief  Justice ( Justice  Qazi Faez I sa) assumed office , two practical options were 
available to him:  either  to reduc e the size of the eight -member bench by 
reconstituting a five -member  bench in order to preserve the  right of appeal or, 
alternatively,  to constitute  the Full Court. Again in my view, the honorable  
Chief Justice rightly constituted the Full Court to hear the all such petitions  on 
a priority  basis . Even at the initial  stage of proceedings, the Full Court had 
been fervently requested  by almost all the learned counsel, including the 
learned AGP. One more important aspect  that must be kept in mind  is that the 
matter before the Supreme Court  pertained to the  examin ation  of the vires of 
the law regulating its own practice and procedure, so, in my view , it was 
compos mentis  to constitute  a Full Court for drawing on  the collective wisdom 
of all the judges regarding  the legislative competence and constitutionality  of 
the Act which provides a right of Intra Court Appeal. Conversely, had the Act 
been declared ultra vires  by a majority  of the judges , then how could the Intra 
Court Appeal have been filed by those  aggrieved person s supporting the law 
when the law providing  the right of Intra Court Appeal  was struck down by the 31 
Constitution Petitions No. 6 to 8, 10 to 12, 18 to 20 and 33/2023  
Ref: Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  
 
Court and no longer existed  (leaving only  the remedy of review) ; so, in that 
particular sc enario too, the situation  would have been the same, therefore, 
when any particular lis has been decided by the Full Court with the collective 
wisdom of all the judges with various  notes of assent and dissent , then the 
question regarding the deprivation of the right of Intra Court Appeal does not 
have much significance . Indeed , it was prudent and quite logical to constitu te 
the Full Court to decide the legitimacy and future of the Act in question, rather 
than constituting the bench first with limited number of judges at the original 
side and then a larger bench on the appellate side . In my view, propriety 
demanded that this Court should first resolve the uncertain ty regarding the 
future  of the Supreme Court (Practice and Procedure) Act, 2023  as soon as 
possible , instead of gathering the wisdom and insight of judges in two phases 
in preference to the collective wisdo m rendered by the Full Court . 
 
    
Islamabad  
           Judge  
  