Athar Minallah, J. - The arguments advanced  today by the 
counsel on behalf of the Election Commission  of Pakistan 
(‘Commission’ ) have raised profound questions of public importance , 
having far reaching co nsequences in the context of  fundamental 
rights, particularly the representative character implicit and embedded 
in the scheme of the Constitution . The questions are rooted in the  
legitimacy of the electoral process. The counsel has unequivocally 
argued that one of the major enlisted political part ies was purportedly 
disqualified from the competitive electoral process on the basis of the 
Commission’s interpretation of the judgment of this Court. Prima facie, 
the interpretation was flawed and the judgment could not have been 
construed a s having the effect of disqualifying a major political party 
from the  general elections. The counsel has argued that it was on this 
basis that the Co mmission had declared the candidates nominated by 
Pakistan Tehrik -e-Insaaf (‘PTI’) as independents. This un disputed fact 
is evident from the orders passed by the Commission , which have been 
placed on record. The counsel attempted to sh ift the burden  of 
declaring the c andidates of PTI as independent s on the Returning 
Officers.  The record placed before us  showed , prima facie,  that the 
circumstances  were unusual and  extra ordinary because the 
candidates of the purportedly disqualified enlisted political party were 
desperate ly endeavouring to maintain their status , as far as the voters 
were concerned,  as a politic al entity.  
2. The arguments advanced by the counsel on behalf of the 
Commission ha ve raised grave questions regarding the integrity of the 
electoral process  and the role of a constitutional body  vested with the 
onerous duty of  conduct ing credible and genu ine electoral contest s. 
The exclusion of a major political  party  from the general elections by 
the Commission , on the basis of its flawed interpretation o f the 
judgment of this Court,  definitely  has the  consequence of the  disenfranchisement  of voters and thus deprivation of the reserved 
seats. T he fundamental me chanism for giving effect to the  political  
representation implicitly entrenched in the scheme of the Constitution  
is solely based on ensuring  a genuine and credible electoral process. 
The pivotal factor in determining the electoral process to be genuine 
and credible is solely the public trust in the electoral institution 
entrusted with the constitutional obligation to conduct the elections  i.e 
the Commission . The legit imacy of governance, future poli cies, 
legislation and public trust in the representative institutions 
exclusively depends on the integrity of the electoral process and the 
electoral institutions . The buck stops with the Commission. The onus 
is on the Commission to satisfy this Court that  a major political party 
was justifiably excluded from the political and electoral process and 
that con ditions were not created  for depriving it of the legitimate right  
to claim its share of reserved seats. The failure of the Commission to 
discharge this o nus would definitely raise grave questions regarding  
the fulfilment of the constitutional dut y to conduct elections in 
accordance with the mandate of the Constitution. The matter before us 
has a direct nexus with the purported disqualification of one of th e 
major political part ies from the electoral process on the basis of a 
flawed interpretation of the judgment of this Court.  
3. This Court is the custodian of th e rights of the people and  the 
right to vote  is one of the most important fundamental rights . All other 
rights become illusory and the constitution is gravely violated when 
voters are disenfranchised  because the Commission fails in its duty to 
conduct the elections in accordance with the mandate of the 
Constitution. The Constitution  has vested the exclusive extra ordinary 
jurisdiction under Article 184(3)  in addition to do ing complete justice 
in the exercise of the duty conferred under Article 187 of the 
Constitution. This Court cannot be a slave to  technicalities in a matter of such public importanc e that affects every citizen and the future 
governance of the country. There are petitions pending before this 
Court raising questions regarding the integrity of the electoral process 
during the general elections  and the alleged violations of fundamental 
rights of the voters and political workers. This court cannot turn a 
blind eye by ignoring the grave allegations regarding the integrity of 
the electoral process as doing so would have profound consequences 
regarding the matter in hand . This Court cannot an d must not be seen 
as ignoring the elephant in the room. It cannot be perceived as being 
complicit  in the alleged failures of the Commission to conduct genuine 
and credible elections as mandated under the Constitution. It is the 
onerous duty of this Court to ensure that no voter is disenfranchised 
and the questions regarding integrity of the electoral process  are not 
ignored.  
4. As a member of this Bench  I had, therefore, directed the 
Commission , through the counsel who had appear ed before us , to 
place on record the nature of complaints received prior to, during and 
after the general elections held on February 8, 2024, and to satisfy 
this Court that each political player was dealt with in accordance with 
the command of the Constitution by providing  a level playing field to 
all of them. The question of the reserved seats before us cannot be 
decided in isolation nor on the basis of technicalities and pleadings of 
the parties. The larger issue involves the most fundamental democratic 
and constitutional right of  the real stake holders ; the people of 
Pakistan. They are not before us and , as the highest Court vested with 
jurisdiction s under Articles 184(3) and 187 of the Constitution , the 
approach ought to be inquisitorial. It is reiterated that the buck stops 
with the Commission to satisfy this Court that each political party had 
a level playing field in the electoral process and that no stone was left unturned to discharge the onerous constitutional duties under the 
Constitution.  
5. The Commission is, th erefore, directed to submit its concise 
statement in the light of the above  observations, particularly satisfying 
this Court that  the PTI, as a political party , was excluded from the 
electoral process legitimately and thus it cannot claim any reserved 
seat. It is also for the Commission to satisfy this Court that  a level 
playing field was provided and ensured before, during and after the 
general elections to all the political parties , including PTI. I am also of 
the opinion that the petitions pending before  this Court raising 
questions regarding  the integrity of the election process be fixed and 
heard with the petitions in hand.                     
 
      (Justice Athar Minallah)  