IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
Present : 
Mr. Justice Sh. Azmat Saeed  
Mr. Justice Ijaz ul Ahsan  
Mr. Justice Munib Akhtar  
 
 
CIVIL PETITION  NO.2853  OF 2018  
(On appeal from the judgment dated 
5.7.2018 passed by the Lahore High 
Cour t, Lahore in W.P.No.22 3699/18) 
 
Sardar Confcius Imam Q asrani   …Petitioner (s)  
 
 Vs.  
 
Sardar Mir Badshah Khan Qaisrani 
& another   …Respondent (s)  
   
For the Petitioner (s)  : Mr. M. Raheel Kamran Sheikh, , ASC  
Mr. Azhar Nawaz Chaudhry , AOR 
 
For Respon dents  
 : N.R. 
 
Date of hearing  : 19.07.2018.  
 
 
ORDER  
 
   As per the report, the private respondent has 
not been personally served as he was not available at 
his address though copies of the summons were 
pasted  at his door . There is also a statement that 
perhaps he may ha ve been informed telephonically. 
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the 
private respondent is deliberately avoiding service.  
2.  It is contended by the learned counsel that 
the Respondent is not qualified in view of the Order CP 2853/18  2 
of this Court dated 1 8.07.2013  which constitute s a 
declaration in terms of Article 62(1)(f) of the 
Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, 
1973, hence, the Respondent is not qualified to 
contest the elections. Furthermore, the Respondent 
in pursua nce to the said Ord er was prosecuted and 
convicted and s uch conviction still hold s the field 
though the matter is subjudice before the learned 
High Court as the conviction has neither or could 
have been suspended.  
3.  To consider, inter alia, the aforemen tioned 
questions, leave to appeal is granted. Since 
interpretation of the Constitution may be involved, 
notice under Order XXVII -A of the CPC may be 
issued to the learned Attorney General for Pakistan.  
4.   Needless to say that obviously the result of 
the election would be subject to the outcome of these 
proceedings.  
  
  
JUDGE  
 
 
 
JUDGE  
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
19th July, 2018  
Not Approved For Reporting  
Nisar/*  