IN THE SUPREME COURT OF PAKISTAN  
(APPELLATE JURISDICTION)  
 
 
PRESENT : 
MR. JUSTICE TASSADUQ HUSSAIN JILLANI, HCJ  
MR. JUSTICE KHILJI ARIF HUSSAIN  
MR. JUSTICE SH. AZMAT SAEED  
 
 
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 297 OF 2014  
(On appeal from the judgments dated 3.2.2014 
passed by  the Lahore High Court, Lahore in WP 
No. 31986/2013 etc)  
 
 
Election Commission of Pakistan through its Secretary  
… Appellant  
 
VERSUS  
 
Province of Punjab through its Chief Secretary and others  
… Respondents  
 
 
 
For the Appellant:  Mr. Muhammad Akram Sh, Sr. ASC 
assisted by Mr. Moazzam Habib, Advocate  
Mr. Faraz Raza, Advocate and Mr.  
Mehmood A. Sheikh, AOR  
Mr. Sher Afghan, D.G, ECP  
Mr. Abdur Rehman, Law Officer  
 
For the Respondents:  Mr. Mustafa Ramday, Advocate General  
Ch. Muhammad Hanif Khattana, Addl. AG 
Punjab 
Mr. Razzaq A Mirza, Addl. AG Punjab  
Barrister Waseem Qureshi, Addl. A.G.  
Mr. Muhammad Azhar Siddique, ASC  
Mr. Muhammad Saleem, Asstt. Director,  
Local Government Bhakkar  
Mr. Haq Nawaz, in person  
Mr. Muhammad Khan, Narowal, in person  
Mr. Muhammad Fakhar -uz-Zaman, in  
person  
Mr. Muhammad Sarwar, in person  
 
On Court Call:   Mr. Salman Aslam Butt, Attorney General  
Mr. S.M. Attique Shah, Addl. Attorney  
General  
Mr. Sajid Ilyas Bhatti, Deputy Attorney 
General  
 
Dates of Hearing:   17 to 21 st February  2014 & 3,4, 12,13 &  
19th March, 2014  
 
 Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  2
JUDGMENT  
 
 Tassaduq Hussain Jillani, CJ. -----Through this 
appeal, by leave   of   the Court, the Election Commission of 
Pakistan has challenged a judgment of the Full Bench of the 
Lahore High Court dated 3.2.2014  whereby the learned High Court 
allowed constitution petition  (bearing No. 31986 of 2013)  filed by 
the respondents and held and declared as under: - 
63. For the above reasons we, inter alia, 
unanimously hold as under: - 
 
i. The Ouster Clause  under Section 10A of the 
Punjab L ocal Government Act, 2013 cannot 
impose fetters on the Constitutional 
jurisdiction of this Court or the 
Constitutional role of Election Commission 
of Pakistan and is therefore, read down, to 
this extent.  
 
ii. The administrative branch of this Court 
cannot be directed through a judicial order 
not to entertain and fix cases of any 
particular nature without providing the 
litigant the right to access to justice and the 
right to place the case before a forum 
exercising judicial power.  
 
iii. The view taken by th e learned Single 
Bench in W.P. No. 15033/2013 and by the 
learned Division Benches in ICA Nos. 
346/2013 and 1029/2013 of this Court on 
the ouster clause under Section 10A of the 
Act is against Articles 4, 9 and 10A of the 
Constitution and shall not be treat ed as a 
precedent.  
 
iv. Sections 8 to 10 of the Punjab Local 
Government Act, 2013 and Rules 3 to 8 of 
the Punjab Local Governments 
(Delimitation) Rules, 2013 are inconsistent 
with Article 218(3) read with Article 222(b) 
of the Constitution as they abridge  and 
take away the Constitutional role and 
obligation of ECP besides offending Articles 
3, 4, 9, 14, 17, 19 and 25 of the 
Constitution. As a consequence the 
aforesaid provisions of the Act are declared 
to be unconstitutional and, therefore, struck 
down.  
 Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  3
v. For the reasons given in this judgment, all 
these petitions are allowed and the 
impugned orders of Delimitation Authority 
and the impugned final Notifications issued 
by the Delimitation Officers are set aside.  
 
Direction to ECP  
 
64. It is now settled t hat ECP being a 
Constitutional body has powers under the 
Constitution to issue directions in order to hold 
fair elections (see: Sheikh Rashid Ahmed V. 
Government of Punjab and others  (PLD 2010 SC 
573). This power is not dependent on a sub -
constitutional le gislation. The Constitutional 
dictate is that Election Commission of Pakistan 
shall hold elections to the local governments.  
We, therefore, direct ECP to 
perform its Constitutional role 
without further ado and hold 
elections to the local governments 
in Pun jab forthwith. ECP need not 
to await for the legislative 
amendments to the act in the light 
of this judgment.  
 
65. It is an admitted position that the existing 
National Census in the country was last held in 
the year 1998 and since then an inchoate 
exercis e was held in the year 2008 but the 
Census was not completed. On the other hand 
electoral rolls for the local government elections, 
prepared in the year 2013 are based on the 
census blocks of the incomplete Census of the 
year 2008. Population is a fundamen tal 
parameter for carrying out fair and equitable 
delimitation of the constituencies. This is a 
serious challenge for ECP. We are confident that 
ECP, will steer through it with success, ensuring 
that the elections to the local governments are 
organized and  conducted honestly, justly, fairly 
and in accordance with law.  
 
66. Direction to the Provincial Government.  
The Provincial Government under Article 
140A of the Constitution shall take 
necessary steps for carrying out 
amendments in the Punjab Local Govern ment 
Act, 2013 in the light of the Constitutional 
role and obligations of ECP provided under 
Part VII of the Constitution, as laid down in 
this judgment, as soon as possible, so that 
democracy in the country is further 
strengthened.”  Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  4
 
2. The Government of Pun jab has not challenged the 
impugned judgment and the learned Advocate General, Punjab 
candidly submitted that he had instructions to state that the 
Government would comply with the impugned judgment subject to 
what this court decides. Only Election Commiss ion of Pakistan has 
challenged the impugned judgment.  
3. Learned counsel for the appellant Mr. Muhammad 
Akram Sheikh, Sr. ASC while impugning the judgment of the 
Lahore High Court submitted that right to franchise is a 
fundamental right because the Constituti on of Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan in its very Preamble mandates that the sovereignty over 
the entire universe belongs to ALLAH alone but it is to be exercised 
by the people of Pakistan and “ the State shall exercise its powers 
and authority through the cho sen representative s of the people ”; 
that the representative s can be chosen through elections, 
therefore, the right to vote in an election to chose / represent is a 
fundamental right. Even otherwise, he added that Article 17 & 19 
of the Constitution confers  freedom of speech (Article 19) and 
freedom of association (Article 17(1) and the expression of opinion 
through vote does constitute a right within the meaning of Article 
19 of the Constitution; that the Local Government Act in Punjab is 
flawed because the  Election Commission of Pakistan cannot carry 
out its mandate to hold free and fair election s in terms of Article 
140A and 218 of the Constitution. In this regard, he added that 
three laws have to be brought in conformity with the Constitutional 
command re flected in Articles 140A, 218(3), 219 and 222; that the 
Election Commission is a body created under the Constitution to Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  5
dispense political justice and ensure that chosen representatives 
are elected to position of authority; that Article 140A has two 
dimens ions i.e. in terms of Article 140A(1) mandate is given to the 
Provincial Government to frame laws regarding the local 
government system whereas sub clause (2) of the said Article 
mandates that the elections are to be held by the Election 
Commission. He add ed that in the absence of appropriate laws the 
Election Commission of Pakistan cannot carry out its mandate of 
holding fair elections for the Local Government. He further added 
that in the face of this flawed legal position, this Court can direct 
the Gover nment to initiate appropriate legislation. This according 
to him is in accord with the judgments of this Court reported in 
Government of Baluchistan Vs. Azizullah Memon  (PLD 1993 SC 
341 at page 374 para 17), which reads as follows: - 
“17. In these circumsta nces, as Ordinance 11 of 
1968 is declared to be void being in conflict with 
Articles 9; 25, 175 and 203 of the Constitution, the 
question arises what further relief should be 
granted as in the absence of Ordinance II of 1968 
there should be some valid law to hold the field. It 
has been admitted that District Judges and Civil 
Judges are functioning in every ,district. In cases ' 
of violation of fundamental rights the Superior 
Courts are empowered to issue direction to the 
Federal Government or the Provincial  Governments 
to bring the law in conformity with fundamental 
rights and/or enforce law and issue notification, in 
that regard. The State as defined in Article 7 is 
bound to discharge its Constitutional obligations. 
In case of failure  even the legislature a nd executive 
can be directed to initiate Legislative measures to 
bring law in conformity with the fundamental 
rights. In these circumstances while maintaining 
the impugned judgments, we dismiss the appeals, 
declare Ordinance 11 of 1968 as void being in 
conflict with Articles 9, 25, 175 and 203 of the 
Constitution and direct the appellant — 
(i) to issue necessary notification in terms of 
subsection (2) of section 1 of Ordinance XII of 1972 
for enforcing the aforesaid Ordinance by creating 
posts of and separat ely appointing Judicial 
Magistrates and Executive Magistrates and to Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  6
place Judicial Magistrates under the 
administrative control of the High Court within a 
period of three months;  
(ii) to take necessary steps a& required by the 
Constitution to amend and im plement laws and 
rules relating to Courts, judiciary and its officers 
and lower staff to bring them in conformity with 
Articles 9, 25 175 and 203 of the Constitution 
within a period of six months.”  
He placed on record a handbook on International Electoral 
Standards.  
4. Mr. Azhar Nadeem, learned counsel for the respondent 
in endorsed the arguments of Mr. Makhdoom Ali Khan and Kh. 
Haris Ahmed, Amicus curie  (in Civil Appeal Nos. 38 to 45 of 2014 
filed by Government of Sindh) . He contended that Sections 8, 9 & 
10 of the Punjab Local Government Act are ultra vires  of the 
Constitution.  
5. We have considered the submissions made and have 
gone through the impugned judgment as also the judgment of the 
High Court of Sindh dated 26.12.2013 which we upheld while 
dismissing Ci vil Appeal Nos. 38 to 45 of 2014 & Civil Petition Nos. 
26-K to 34 -K, 163 & 164 of 2014.  
6. The upshot of the submissions made by learned 
counsel for the appellant is that the appellant -Election 
Commission of Pakistan is prepared to carry out its constitution al 
mandate to organize and conduct el ections of the local 
government.  However , in the absence of appropriate law s it cannot 
carry out the delimitation of constituencies of local government. 
Although in the impugned judgment the learned Lahore High 
Court ha s unequivocally directed the Election Commission of 
Pakistan to hold elections, yet the fact remains that it cannot 
conduct elections honestly, justly and fairly (Article 218(3) if the Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  7
delimitation of constituencies is tainted with irregularities and 
does not inspire confidence. That is why in Civil Appeal Nos. 38 to 
45 of 2014, while dismissing the appeals of the Province of Sindh, 
we had inter alia  held that delimitation of constituencies is part of 
the election process and it should be done by the Electi on 
Commission of Pakistan. The Government of Sindh and the Federal 
Government were directed to bring in the requisite legislation to 
enable the Election Commission in this regard. The Punjab Local 
Government Ordinance is pari materia  to the Sindh Local 
Government Ordinance in several ways including the process of 
delimitation. In the said case, one of the three issues framed was 
as follows: - 
“whether the process of delimitation of 
constituencies is part of the election process and 
in view of Article 140A of  the Constitution has to 
be undertaken by the Election Commission of 
Pakistan and not by the Government of Sindh? ” 
 
 
7. The Court while dilating on the issue held as under: - 
 
“55. The process of delimitation of constituencies 
for an election is one of the imp ortant steps to 
organize and conduct elections because it is only 
with reference to a constituency that a candidate 
would exercise his right/option to contest and a 
voter would exercise his right to vote.  
 
56. Although in terms of Article 140A(2) of the 
Constitution, the Election Commission has been 
entrusted with the task of holding elections to the 
local government, but apparently there is no 
specific corresponding provision in the 
Constitution regarding laws relating to 
delimitation of constituencies for  the Local 
Government. Some may argue that this is a 
constitutional void. However, a close reading of 
Article 222(b) would indicate that it does not 
relate to delimitation of constituencies of National 
and Provincial Assemblies alone rather it is open -
ende d and construed harmoniously with the other 
relevant provisions of the Constitution, would 
include the making of appropriate laws by the Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  8
Parliament for delimitation of constituencies for 
the local governments. Law making with regard 
to other steps required  to conduct elections 
“honestly, justly, fairly” are already catered for 
i.e. preparation of electoral rolls (Article 222(c), 
conduct of elections and election petitions (222(d) 
and relating to corrupt practices (212(e).  
 
57. The constitutional command tha t “it shall be 
the duty of the Election Commission to organize 
and conduct the election…..” (Article 218(3) is 
rather comprehensive and encompasses all the 
steps necessary to conduct elections “honestly, 
justly and fairly”. It appears, the Constitution 
makers were aware of the earlier judgments of 
this Court whereby it had been held that the 
election process commences from the issue of 
notification of election schedule Election 
Commission of Pakistan through its Secretary v. 
Javaid Hashmi and others (PLD 19 89 SC 396). 
That is why Article 218(3) has been so worded. 
But facts in the Javaid Hashmi (Supra) were 
distinct and the expression “election” has been 
interpreted in the context of those facts. In the 
said case, the judgment was delivered with 
reference to  Article 225 of the Constitution and 
the Representation of the People Act, 1976. The 
said Article of the Constitution excluded the 
jurisdiction of all courts in so far as the election 
disputes were concerned and the jurisdiction 
instead was conferred on th e Tribunal and the 
appeal lay before the Supreme Court. The 
Constitutional intent in this Article is not to 
distract a candidate from the election process and 
if there is allegation of rigging / complaint, the 
remedy was provided in the shape of a petition  
before the Tribunal, after the election is over.  
 
58. We have considered the argument of 
appellant’s learned counsel that the Majlis -e-
Shoora can make laws only as mandated under 
the Constitution and qua the subjects enumerated 
in Item No. 41 of the Fourt h Schedule Part -I of the 
Constitution, which reads as follows: - 
 
“41. Elections to the office of 
President, to the National Assembly, the 
Senate and the Provincial Assemblies; 
Chief Election Commissioner and 
Election Commissions.”  
 
59. However, the constit utional intent has to be 
gathered from the body of the Constitution as 
well. Article 222 provides that “ subject to the 
Constitution, [Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) may by 
law provide for “(a)…………. (b) the delimitation of Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  9
constituencies by the Election Commi ssion. ” The 
delimitation of constituencies is one of the 
foundational steps towards that end. This has to 
be interpreted in proper perspective so as to 
include law making with reference to Article 
140A(2) of the Constitution. It is significant to note 
that Article 222(b) stipulates that an Act of the 
Federal Legislature shall provide for the 
delimitation of constituencies by Election 
Commission of Pakistan and it does not exclude 
the local government from its ambit.  
 
60. The Constitution of a country is a l iving 
organism and a particular provision, a term or 
word has to be interpreted dynamically and 
purposively with a view to achieve the 
Constitutional intent.  
 
61. In Hanrietta Muir Edwards and others Vs. 
Attorney General for Canada and others  (J.C. 
1929, 1 930 Appeal Cases), the question arose 
whether the expression ‘qualified persons’ used 
in Section 24 of the British North America Act, 
1867 would include a woman because it was not 
gender specific. The Court of Appeal gave a wider 
meaning to the expression “qualified person” and 
held that it would include members of both the 
male and female sex. It observed as follows: - 
 
“A heavy burden lies on an appellant 
who seeks to set aside a unanimous 
judgment of the Supreme Court, and this 
Board will only set aside s uch a decision 
after convincing argument and anxious 
consideration, but having regard: (1) To 
the object of the Act namely, to provide a 
Constitution for Canada, a responsible 
and developing State; (2) that the word 
‘person’ is ambiguous, and may include 
members of either sex; (3) that there are 
sections in the Act above referred to 
which show that in some cases the word 
‘person’ must include females; (4) that in 
some sections the words ‘male persons” 
are expressly used when it is desired to 
confine the mat ter in issue to males; and 
(5) to the provisions of the Interpretation 
Act; their Lordships have come to the 
conclusion that the word “persons” in 
s.24 includes members both of the male 
and female sex, and that, therefore, the 
question propounded by the Go vernor 
General should be answered in the 
affirmative, and that women are eligible 
to be summoned to and become 
members of the Senate of Canada, and 
they will humbly advise His Majesty 
accordingly.”  Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  10
 
62. Since Article 222(b) does not exclude the 
delimitatio n of constituencies for local 
government, and as the body of the Constitution 
specifies the appropriate legislature which should 
pass the law, any reference to the provisions of 
the legislative entries contained in Item 4 of the 
Fourth Schedule are of no c onsequence. There are 
similar provisions in the Constitution qua which 
there is no corresponding entry in the Federal 
Legislative List. For example, Article 6 clearly 
provides that the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) will 
pass the law for high treason. But th ere is no 
corresponding entry in the 4th Schedule 
prescribing the subject of high treason in the 
Federal Legislative List. Article 142(c) could not be 
pressed into service to say that since the 4th 
Schedule is silent, in terms of Article 142 (c), the 
Provi ncial Legislature would legislate in respect of 
high treason. When the main body of the 
Constitution provides for the competent 
legislature it is not necessary to look into the 
legislative list. Under Article 87(2), the Majlis -e-
Shoora (Parliament) may ena ct law for conditions 
of service of secretarial staff, whereas in this 
regard there is no corresponding entry in the 
Federal Legislative List; that Article 237 
empowers the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) to 
make laws for indemnity; again there is no entry 
to that effect in the Federal Legislative List; that 
under Article 253 the Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliament) 
may make laws pertaining to maximum limits as 
to property etc; however, there is no 
corresponding entry in the Federal Legislative 
List; Article 146(2) st ates that the Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) may enact laws to confer powers on 
Provinces or their officers, but there is no entry in 
this regard in the Federal Legislative List; that 
under proviso to clause (2) of Article 212, the 
Majlis -e-Shoora (Parliamen t) may make laws in 
relation to administrative tribunals, however, 
there is no corresponding entry in the Federal 
Legislative List; that even though “electricity” falls 
under entry 4 of the Part II of the Federal 
Legislative List, under Article 157(2)(b) t he 
Provincial Government is empowered to levy tax 
on consumption of electricity within the Province 
and that entry 58 of the Part I of the Federal 
Legislative List, clearly provides that the matters 
which under the Constitution are within the 
legislative c ompetence of Majlis -e-Shoora 
(Parliament) or relate to the Federation, would fall 
under the domain of the Federal Legislature. In 
the instant case, as explained above, under the 
relevant Articles of the Constitution, the subject 
matters of delimitation and  conduct of Local Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  11
Government Elections fall under the domain of 
Parliament/Federal Legislature.  
 
63. Fair elections would mean fair representation 
and delimitation of constituencies is a 
foundational step towards that end. In State of 
Madhya Pradesh & othe rs v. Devilal  (AIR 1986 
SC 434), the Court commenting on the 
significance of this step held:  
 
“The whole purpose of delimitation of 
a block into constituencies under 
sub-s.(1) of s. 106 of the Act is to 
ensure that every citizen should get a 
fair represent ation to the Gram 
Panchayat and in turn to the 
Janapada Panchayat and the Zila 
Panchayat. The result of any election 
under a majority system depends in 
fact not only on the way people vote 
but on the way their votes are 
distributed among the 
constituencies .” (Emphasis is 
supplied).  
 
64. In terms of section 3 of the Sindh Local 
Government Act, the Provincial Government has 
been empowered to delimit the constituencies of 
the Local Government in Sindh. Being one of the 
fundamental steps to hold fair elections,  it has to 
be carried out by a body which is neutral and 
credible. That is why the task of delimitation of 
constituencies for National and Provincial 
Assemblies has been entrusted to the Election 
Commission of Pakistan (Delimitation of 
Constituencies Act 1 974). Now that the task of 
holding elections to local governments has been 
entrusted to Election Commission of Pakistan by 
a constitutional amendment (Article 140A), the 
constitutional provision relating to delimitation of 
constituencies has to be accorded  purposive 
construction. In these circumstances we are 
persuaded to hold that the power of Majlis -e-
Shoora to provide by law for “ the delimitation of 
constituencies by the Election Commission ” would 
include the delimitation of constituencies of local 
gover nment.  
 
---------  
 
79. For what has been discussed above, while 
dismissing the appeals/petitions filed by the 
Government of Sindh, we are persuaded to direct 
the Federal Government to make necessary 
enactments to empower the Election Commission 
of Pakistan  to carry out the delimitation of Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  12
constituencies of local governments. The 
Government of Sindh is also directed to make 
necessary corresponding amendments in the 
Sindh Local Government Act, 2013. ” 
 
8. Following the same view as in Province of Sindh 
through Ch ief Secretary etc v. MQM through its Deputy Convener  
(Civil Appeal Nos. 38 to 45 of 2014 & Civil Petition Nos. 26 -K to 34 -
K, 163 & 164 of 2014 ), referred to above, we partly allow this 
appeal, modify the impugned judgment and direct the Federal 
Government to make necessary enactments to empower the 
Election Commission of Pakistan to carry out the delimitation of 
constituencies of Local Government. The Government of Punjab is 
also directed to make corresponding amendments in the Punjab 
Local Government Act, 2013. The Election Commission shall 
thereafter proceed to carry out the delimitation of constituencies in 
Punjab afresh. These are the detailed reasons for our short order 
dated 19.3.2014 which is reproduced hereinbelow: - 
“We have heard learned counsel for  the 
appellant, for the respondents, learned Advocate 
General Punjab and learned Attorney General for 
Pakistan.  
2. For reasons to be recorded later in the 
detailed judgment, we hold, declare and direct as 
under: - 
 
i) that the power to hold elections of the 
Local Government stand vested in the 
Election Commission of Pakistan in terms 
of Article 140A of the Constitution of 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan. The Election 
Commission of Pakistan has been 
mandated to “organize and conduct the 
election and to make such ar rangements 
as are necessary to ensure that the 
election is conducted honestly, justly, 
fairly and in accordance with law, and 
that corrupt practices are guarded 
against” (Article 218(3) of the 
Constitution);  
ii) that Sections 8 to 10 of the Punjab Local 
Govern ment Act, 2013 and the relevant 
Rules framed there -under are ultra vires of Civil Appeal No. 297 of 2014  13
the Constitution in so far as they empower 
the Provincial Government to carry out the 
delimitation of the constituencies for the 
Local Government;  
iii) that since the delimitation of 
constituencies of the Local Government is 
part of the process of organizing and 
holding elections honestly, justly and 
fairly which is the Constitutional mandate 
of the Election Commission of Pakistan, 
the power to carry out such delimitation 
should vest wi th the Election Commission 
of Pakistan;  
iv) that since the holding of election of Local 
Government has been delayed for more 
than nine years, which is violative of the 
Constitutional command, we are 
persuaded to direct the Governments, 
Federal and Provincial (of Punjab) to carry 
out appropriate amendments / legislation 
to empower the Election Commission of 
Pakistan to initiate and carry out the 
process of delimitation of constituencies for 
the Local Government Elections. This 
exercise should be completed withi n a 
period of five months from today and the 
Election Commission of Pakistan shall 
thereafter take requisite measures to carry 
out the process of delimitation of 
constituencies for the Local Government 
expeditiously so as to complete the same 
within a peri od of 45 days of the 
enactment/amendments in laws in terms 
of this order. The Election Commission of 
Pakistan shall further ensure that the 
announcement of election schedule and 
the process of holding it is complete by or 
before 15th of November, 2014.  
 
The appeal stands disposed of in terms noted 
above. ”  
 
CHIEF JUSTICE  
 
JUDGE  
 
JUDGE  
Islamabad, the  
19th of March, 2014  
Approved For Reporting  
Khurram  