Const . Petition No. 5/2023  
1. Yesterday, on 30.03.2023, during the course of proceedings , 
Justice Amin -ud-din Khan recused himself from the Bench. While 
in Court, I also wanted to express my view, however, the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice and other members of the Bench rose , therefore,  I 
was unable to do so . Subsequently, I remained in my chamber for 
a reasonable time, but received no information from the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice regarding further proceedings into the matter. When I 
reached home  later the same day , I received an Order date d 
30.03.2023 from the Chief Justice for my signatures as a member 
of the Bench.  The relevant portion whereof is reproduced below:  
“Some of us (Umar Ata Bandial, CJ, Ijaz ul 
Ahsan and Munib Akhtar, JJ.) respectfully 
disagree and consider that the hearing an d 
further proceedings in the present petition 
remain unaffected by any observation made 
in the aforesaid Order .” 
2. Admittedly, the Order was not dictated in open Court , instead it 
was dictated in my absence  and without contacting me for 
participation in the deliberations . I felt that the three learned 
members of the Bench, for reasons best known to them, opted not 
to involve me in the consultation.  
3. Besides, t his petition is the outcome of the previous proce edings1 
which were dismissed by two honourable members of the bench 
(Yahya Afr idi and Athar Minallah, JJ. ) through their respective 
short orders ,2 followed by myself and Justice Syed Mansoor Ali 
Shah. In this behalf, we  issued our detailed reasons  on 
27.03.2023 . Right from the first date of hearing  of the present 
matter , I wanted this Bench to resolve the controversy of the Order 
dated 01.03.2023 and its Order of the Court , which has still not 
been issued till date,  as it is of great significance  to the present 
matter. No heed was paid to this issue, despite my raising it 
repeatedly.  The learned Attorney -General, members of the legal 
fraternity, and learned counsel for the political parties also 
requested for resolution of this issue, but received no r esponse 
from the other members of the Bench.  
                                                        
1 Suo Motu Case No. 1 of 2023 and Constitution Petition Nos. 1 and 2 of 2023  
2 Their detailed reasons are awaited  Const . Petition No. 5/2023  
4. Under such circumstances, I do not want my presence on the 
bench to make my brothers uneasy , as such, I do not wish to 
remain on the bench.  There is n o doubt that the present matter is 
of utmost importance and raises serious constitutional issues 
which require  to be interpreted and resolved  on the basis of 
collective wisdom through a Full Court, for which I will always be 
available . Otherwise,  I pray th e Hon’ble Chief Justice and my  two 
learned colleagues , while delivering their judgment, will uphold the 
Constitution and the law.  
 
 
_________________________  
Jamal Khan Mandokhail  